
Treating of a disease resulting from an assemblage of symptoms, some
of which do not appear to have yet engaged the general notice of the
profession, particular care is required whilst endeavouring to mark
its diagnostic characters. It is sufficient, in general, to point out
the characteristic differences which are observable between diseases
in some respects resembling each other. But in this case more is
required: it is necessary to show that it is a disease which does not
accord with any which are marked in the systematic arrangements of
nosologists; and that the name by which it is here distinguished has
been hitherto vaguely applied to diseases very different from each
other, as well as from that to which it is now appropriated.

Palsy, either consequent to compression of the brain, or dependent on
partial exhaustion of the energy of that organ, may, when the palsied
limbs become affected with tremulous motions, be confounded with this
disease. In those cases the abolition or diminution of voluntary
muscular action takes place suddenly, the sense of feeling being
sometimes also impaired. But in this disease, the diminution of the
influence of the will on the muscles comes on with extreme slowness,
is always accompanied, and even preceded, by agitations of the
affected parts, and never by a lessened sense of feeling. The dictates
of the will are even, in the last stages of the disease, conveyed to
the muscles; and the muscles act on this impulse, but their actions
are perverted.

Anomalous cases of convulsive affections have been designated by the
term Shaking Palsy: a term which appears to be improperly applied to
these cases, independent of the want of accordance between them and
that disease which has been here denominated Shaking Palsy. Dr.
Kirkland, in his commentary on Apoplectic and Paralytic Affections,
&c. cites the following case, related by Dr. Charlton, as belonging,
he says, to the class of Shaking Palsies. “Mary Ford, of a sanguineous
and robust constitution, had an involuntary motion of her right arm,
occasioned by a fright, which first brought on convulsion fits, and
most excruciating pain in the stomach, which vanished on a sudden, and
her right arm was instantaneously flung into an involuntary and
perpetual motion, like the swing of a pendulum, raising the hand, at
every vibration higher than her head; but if by any means whatever it
was stopped; the pain in her stomach came on again, and convulsion
fits were the certain consequence, which went off when the vibration
of her hand returned.”

Another case, which the Doctor designates as 'A Shaking Palsy,'
apparently from worms, he describes thus, “A poor boy, about twelve
or thirteen years of age, was seized with a Shaking Palsy. His legs
became useless, and together with his head and hands, were in
continual agitation; after many weeks trial of various remedies, my
assistance was desired.

“His bowels being cleared, I ordered him a grain of Opium a day in the
gum pill; and in three or four days the shaking had nearly left him.”
By pursuing this plan, the medicine proving a vermifuge, he could soon
walk, and was restored to perfect health.

Whether these cases should be classed under Shaking Palsy or not, is
necessary to be here determined; since, if they are properly ranked,
the cases which have been described in the preceding pages, differ so
much from them as certainly to oppose their being classed together:
and the disease, which is the subject of these pages, cannot be
considered as the same with Shaking Palsy, as characterised by those
cases.

The term Shaking Palsy is evidently inapplicable to the first of these
cases, which appears to have belonged more properly to the genus
_Convulsio_, of Cullen, or to _Hieranosos_ of Linnæus and Vogel[10].

    [Footnote 10: Corporis agitatio continua, indolens,
    convulsiva, cum sensibilitate.—_Linn._

    Agitatio corporis vel artuum convulsiva continua, chronica,
    cum integritate sensuum.—_Vogel._

    This genus is resolved by Cullen into that of Convulsio.
    _Synops. Nosol._ 1803.

    Dr. Macbride has given a very interesting and illustrative
    case of this disease.

    “Hieranasos, or Morbus Sacer, so called, as being vulgarly
    supposed to arise from witchcraft, or some extraordinary
    celestial influence, is a distinct genus of disease, though a
    very uncommon one; the author once had an opportunity of
    seeing a case. The patient was a lad about seventeen, who at
    that time had laboured under this extraordinary disease for
    more than twelve years. His body was so distorted, and the
    legs and arms so twisted round it, by the continued
    convulsive working, that no words can give an adequate idea
    of the oddity of his figure; the agitation of the muscles was
    perpetual; but in general he did not complain of pain nor
    sickness; and had his senses perfectly, insomuch that he used
    to assist his mother, who kept a little school, in teaching
    children to read.” _A methodical Introduction to the Theory
    and Practice of Physic. By David Macbride, M.D. p. 559._]

The latter appears to be referable to that class of proteal forms of
disease, generated by a disordered state of primæ viæ, sympathetically
affecting the nervous influence in a distant part of the body.

Unless attention is paid to one circumstance, this disease will be
confounded with those species of passive tremblings to which the term
Shaking Palsies has frequently been applied. These are, _tremor
temulentus_, the trembling consequent to indulgence in the drinking of
spirituous liquors; that which proceeds from the immoderate employment
of tea and coffee; that which appears to be dependent on advanced age;
and all those tremblings which proceed from the various circumstances
which induce a diminution of power in the nervous system. But by
attending to that circumstance alone, which has been already noted as
characteristic of mere tremor, the distinction will readily be made.
If the trembling limb be supported, and none of its muscles be called
into action, the trembling will cease. In the real Shaking Palsy the
reverse of this takes place, the agitation continues in full force
whilst the limb is at rest and unemployed; and even is sometimes
diminished by calling the muscles into employment.




                               CHAP. IV.

          PROXIMATE CAUSE—REMOTE CAUSES—ILLUSTRATIVE CASES.


Before making the attempt to point out the nature and cause of this
disease, it is necessary to plead, that it is made under very
unfavourable circumstances. Unaided by previous inquiries immediately
directed to this disease, and not having had the advantage, in a
single case, of that light which anatomical examination yields,
opinions and not facts can only be offered. Conjecture founded on
analogy, and an attentive consideration of the peculiar symptoms of
the disease, have been the only guides that could be obtained for this
research, the result of which is, as it ought to be, offered with
hesitation.

                       SUPPOSED PROXIMATE CAUSE.

     A diseased state of the _medulla spinalis_, in that part
     which is contained in the canal, formed by the superior
     cervical vertebræ, and extending, as the disease proceeds,
     to the _medulla oblongata_.

By the nature of the symptoms we are taught, that the disease depends
on some irregularity in the direction of the nervous influence; by the
wide range of parts which are affected, that the injury is rather in
the source of this influence than merely in the nerves of the parts;
by the situation of the parts whose actions are impaired, and the
order in which they become affected, that the proximate cause of the
disease is in the superior part of the medulla spinalis; and by the
absence of any injury to the senses and to the intellect, that the
morbid state does not extend to the encephalon.

Uncertainty existing as to the nature of the proximate cause of this
disease, its remote causes must necessarily be referred to with
indecision. Assuming however the state just mentioned as the proximate
cause, it may be concluded that this may be the result of injuries of
the medulla itself, or of the theca helping to form the canal in which
it is inclosed.

The great degree of mobility in that portion of the spine which is
formed by the superior cervical vertebræ, must render it, and the
contained parts, liable to injury from sudden distortions. Hence
therefore may proceed inflammation of quicker or of slower progress,
disease of the vertebræ, derangement of structure in the medulla, or
in its membranes, thickening or even ulceration of the theca, effusion
of fluids, &c.

But in no case which has been noticed, has the patient recollected
receiving any injury of this kind, or any fixed pain in early life in
these parts, which might have led to the opinion that the foundation
for this malady had been thus laid. On the subject indeed of remote
causes, no satisfactory accounts has yet been obtained from any of the
sufferers. Whilst one has attributed this affliction to indulgence in
spirituous liquors, and another to long lying on the damp ground; the
others have been unable to suggest any circumstance whatever, which,
in their opinion, could be considered as having given origin, or
disposed, to the calamity under which they suffered.

Cases illustrative of the nature and cause of this malady are very
rare. In the following case symptoms very similar are observable, so
far as affecting the lower extremities. That the medulla spinalis was
here affected, and in its lower part, is not to be doubted: but this,
unfortunately, was never ascertained by examination. It must be
however remarked, that this case differed from those which have been
given of this disease, in the suddenness with which the symptoms
appeared.

_A. B._ aged twenty-six years, during a course of mercury for a
venereal affection, was exposed to severely inclement weather, for
several hours, and the next morning, complained of extreme pain in the
back, and of total inability to employ voluntarily the muscles of the
lower extremities, which were continually agitated with severe
convulsive motions. The physician who attended him employed those
means which seemed best calculated to relieve him; but with no
beneficial effect. The lower extremities were perpetually agitated
with strong palpitatory motions, and, frequently, three or four times
in a minute, suddenly raised with great vehemence two or three feet
from the ground, either in a forward or oblique direction, striking
one limb against the other, or against the chairs, tables, or any
substance which stood in the way. To check these inordinate motions,
no means were in the least effectual, except striking the thighs
forcibly during the more violent convulsions. No advantage was derived
from all the means which were employed during upwards of twelvemonths.
Full ten years after this period, the unhappy subject of this malady
was casually met in the street, shifting himself along, seated in a
chair; the convulsive motions having ceased, and the limbs having
become totally inert, and insensible to any impulse of the will.

It must be acknowledged, that in the well-known cases, described by
Mr. Potts, of that kind of Palsy of the lower limbs which is
frequently found to accompany a curvature of the spine, and in which a
carious state of the vertebræ is found to exist, no instructive
analogy is discoverable; slight convulsive motions may indeed happen
in the disease proceeding from curvature of the spine; but palpitating
motions of the limbs, such as belong to the disease here described, do
not appear to have been hitherto noticed.

Whilst striving to determine the nature and origin of this disease, it
becomes necessary to give the following particulars of an interesting
case of Palsy occasioned by a fall, attended with uncommon symptoms,
related by Dr. Maty, in the third volume of the Medical Observations
and Inquiries. The subject of this case, the Count de Lordat, had the
misfortune to be overturned from a pretty high and steep bank. His
head pitched against the top of the coach, and was bent from left to
right; his left shoulder, arm, and especially his hand, were
considerably bruised. At first he felt a good deal of pain along the
left side of his neck, but neither then, nor at any other time, had he
any faintings, vomitings, or giddiness.—On the sixth day he was let
blood, on account of the pain in his shoulder and the contusion of his
hand, which were then the only symptoms he complained of, and of
which he soon found himself relieved.—Towards the beginning of the
following winter, he began to find _a small impediment in uttering
some words, and his left arm appeared weaker_. In the following
spring, having suffered considerably from the severities of the winter
campaign, he found _the difficulty in speaking, and in moving his left
arm, considerably increased_.—On employing the thermal waters of
Bourbonne, his speech become freer, but, on his return to Paris, the
Palsy was increased, and the arm somewhat wasted.—In the beginning of
the next spring he went to Balaruc; when he became affected with
_involuntary convulsive motions all over the body_. The left arm
withered more and more, _a spitting began_, and now it was _with
difficulty that he uttered a few words_. Frictions and sinapisms were
successively tried, and an issue, made by a caustic, was kept open for
some time without any effect; but no mention is made of what part the
issue was established in.

Soon after this, and three years and a half after the fall, Doctor
Maty first saw the patient, and gives the following description of
his situation. “A more melancholy object I never beheld. The patient,
naturally a handsome, middle-sized, sanguine man, of a cheerful
disposition, and an active mind, appeared much emaciated, stooping,
and dejected. _He still walked alone with a cane, from one room to the
other, but with great difficulty, and in a tottering manner_; his left
hand and arm were much reduced, and would hardly perform any motion;
_the right was somewhat benumbed, and he could scarcely lift it up to
his head; his saliva was continually trickling out of his mouth, and
he had neither the power of retaining it, nor of spitting it out
freely_. What words he still could utter were monosyllables, and these
came out, after much struggle, in a violent expiration, and with such
a low voice and indistinct articulation, as hardly to be understood
but by those who were constantly with him. He fetched his breath
rather hard; his pulse was low, but neither accelerated nor
intermitting. He took very little nourishment, could chew and swallow
no solids, and even found great pain in getting down liquids. Milk was
almost his only food; his body was rather loose, his urine natural,
his sleep good, his senses, and the powers of his mind, unimpaired; he
was attentive to, and sensible of every thing which was said in
conversation, and shewed himself very desirous of joining in it; but
was continually checked by the impediment in his speech, and the
difficulty which his hearers were put to. Happily for him he was able
to read, and as capable as ever of writing, as he shewed me, by
putting into my hands an account of his present situation, drawn up by
himself: and I am informed that he spent his time to the very last, in
writing upon some of the most abstruse subjects.”

This gentleman died about four years after the accident, when the body
was examined by Dr. Bellett and Mons. Sorbier, who made the following
report:

“We first examined the muscles of the tongue, which were found
extenuated and of a loose texture. We observed no signs of compression
in the lingual and brachial nerves, as high as their exit from the
basis of the cranium and the vertebræ of the neck; but they appeared
to us more compact than they commonly are, being nearly tendinous. The
dura mater was in a sound state, but the pia mater was full of blood
and lymph; on it several hydatids, and towards the falx some marks of
suppuration were observed. The ventricles were filled with water, and
the plexus choroides was considerably enlarged, and stuffed with
grumous blood. The cortical surface of the brain appeared much browner
than usual, but neither the medullary part nor cerebellum were
impaired. We chiefly took notice of the Medulla Oblongata, this was
greatly enlarged, surpassing the usual size by more than one third. It
was likewise more compact. The membranes, which, in their
continuation, inclose the spinal marrow, were so tough that we found
great difficulty in cutting through them, and we observed this to be
the cause of the tendinous texture of the cervical nerves. The marrow
itself had acquired such solidity as to elude the pressure of our
fingers, it resisted as a callous body, and could not be bruised. This
hardness was observed all along the vertebræ of the neck, but lessened
by degrees, and was not near so considerable in the vertebræ of the
thorax. Though the patient was but nine and thirty years old, the
cartilages of the sternum were ossified, and required as much labour
to cut them asunder as the ribs; like these they were spungy, but
somewhat whiter. The lungs and heart were sound. At the bottom of the
stomach appeared an inflammation, which increased as it extended to
the intestines. The ileum looked of that dark and livid hue, which is
observed in membranous parts tending to mortification. The colon was
not above an inch in diameter, the rectum was smaller still, but both
appeared sound.—From these appearances, we were at no loss to fix the
cause of this gradual palsy in the alteration of the medulla spinalis
and oblongata.”

Dr. Bellett offers the following explanation of these changes. “I
conceive, that, by this accident, the head being violently bent to the
right, the nervous membranes on the left were excessively stretched
and irritated; that this cause extended by degrees to the spinal
marrow, which being thereby compressed, brought on the paralytic
symptoms, not only of the left arm, but at last in some measure also
of the right. This induration seems to have been occasioned by the
constant afflux of the nutritive juices, which were stopt at that
place, and deprived of their most liquid parts; the grosser ones being
unable to spread in the boney cavity, by which they were confined,
could only acquire a greater solidity, and change a soft body into a
hard and nearly osseous mass. This likewise accounts for the increase
of the medulla oblongata, which being loaded with more juices than it
could send off, swelled in the same manner as the branches of trees,
which will grow of a monstrous size, when the sap that runs into them
is stopt in its progress. The medulla oblongata not growing so hard as
the spinalis, was doubtless owing to its not being confined in an
osseous theca, but surrounded with soft parts, which allowed it room
to spread. The obstruction from the bulk of this substance must have
affected the brain, and probably induced the thickening of the pia
mater, the hydatids, and the beginning of suppuration, whereas the
dura mater, being of a harder texture, was not injured[11].”

    [Footnote 11: Medical Observations and Inquiries, Vol. III.
    p. 257.]

In some of the symptoms which appeared in this case, an agreement is
observable between it and those cases which are mentioned in the
beginning of these pages. The weakened state of both arms; the power
first lessening in one arm, and then in a similar manner in the other
arm; the affection of the speech; the difficulty in chewing and in
swallowing; as well as of retaining, or freely discharging, the
spittle; the convulsive motions of the body; and the unimpaired state
of the intellects; constitute such a degree of accordance as, although
it may not mark an identity of disease, serves at least to show that
nearly the same parts were the seat of the disease in both instances.
Thus we attain something like confirmation of the supposed proximate
cause, and of one of the assumed occasional causes.

Whilst conjecturing as to the cause of this disease, the following
collected observations on the effects of injury to the medulla
spinalis, by Sir Everard Home, become particularly deserving of
attention. It thence appears, that none of the characteristic symptoms
of this malady are produced by compression, laceration, or complete
division of the medulla spinalis.

“Pressure upon the medulla spinalis of the neck, by coagulated blood,
produced paralytic affections of the arms and legs; all the functions
of the internal organs were carried on for thirty-five days, but the
urine and stools passed involuntarily[12].

    [Footnote 12: A coagulum of blood, the thickness of a
    crown-piece, was found lying upon the external surface of the
    dura-matral covering of the medulla spinalis, extending from
    the fourth vertebra colli to the second vertebra dorsi. The
    medulla spinalis itself was uninjured.]

“Blood extravasated in the central part of the medulla, in the neck,
was attended with paralytic affection of the legs, but not of the
arms[13].

    [Footnote 13: The sixth and seventh vertebra colli were
    dislocated, the medulla spinalis, externally, was uninjured;
    but in the centre of its substance, just at that part, there
    was a coagulum of blood nearly two inches in length.]

“In a case where the substance of the medulla was lacerated in the
neck, there was a paralysis in all the parts below the laceration, the
lining of the œsophagus was so sensible, that solids could not be
swallowed, on account of the pain they occasioned[14].

    [Footnote 14: The seventh vertebra colli was fractured, and
    the medulla spinalis passing through it, was lacerated and
    compressed.]

“When the medulla of the back was completely divided, there was
momentary loss of sight, loss of memory for fifteen minutes, and
permanent insensibility in all the lower parts of the body. The skin
above the division of the spinal marrow perspired, that below did not.
The wounded spinal marrow appeared to be extremely sensible[15].”
_Philosophical Transactions_, 1816, p. 485.

    [Footnote 15: The spinal marrow, within the canal of the
    sixth vertebra dorsi, was completely destroyed by a musket
    ball. The person lived four days.]

In two of the cases already noticed, symptoms of rheumatism had
previously existed; and in Case IV. the right arm, in which the
palpitation began, was said to have been very violently affected with
rheumatic pain to the fingers ends. The consideration of this case, in
which the palpitation had been preceded, at a considerable distance of
time, by this painful affection of the arm, led to the supposition
that this latter circumstance might be the cause of the palpitations,
and the other subsequent symptoms of this disease. This supposition
naturally occasioned the attention to be eagerly fixed on the
following case; and of course influenced the mode of treatment which
was adopted.

_A. B._ subject to rheumatic affection of the deltoid muscle, had felt
the usual inconveniences from it for two or three days; but at night
found the pain had extended down the arm, along the inside of the
fore-arm, and on the sides of the fingers, in which a continual
tingling was felt. The pain, without being extremely intense, was such
as effectually to prevent sleep: and seemed to follow the course of
the brachial nerve. Whilst ascertaining the propriety of this
conclusion, the pain was found to ramify, as it were, on the fore and
back part of the chest; and was slightly augmented by drawing a deep
breath.

These circumstances suggested the probability of slight inflammation,
or increased determination to the origin of the nerves of these parts,
and to the neighbouring medulla. On this ground, blood was taken from
the back part of the neck, by cupping; hot fomentations were applied
for about the space of an hour, when the upper part of the back of the
neck was covered with a blister, perspiration was freely induced by
two or three small doses of antimonials, and the following morning the
bowels were evacuated by an appropriate dose of calomel. On the
following day the pains were much diminished, and in the course of
four or five days were quite removed. The arm and hand felt now more
than ordinarily heavy, and were evidently much weakened: aching, and
feeling extremely wearied after the least exertion. The strength of
the arm was not completely recovered at the end of more than
twelvemonths; and, after more than twice that time, exertion would
excite the feeling of painful weariness, but no palpitation or other
unpleasant symptom has occurred during the five or six years which
have since passed.

The commencement, progress, and termination of this attack; with the
success attending the mode of treatment, and the symptoms which
followed, seem to lead to the conjecture, that the proximate cause of
the disease, in this case, existed in the medulla spinalis, and that
it might, if neglected, have gradually resolved itself into that
disease which is the object of our present inquiry.

Some few months after the occurrence of the preceding case, the writer
of these lines was called to a female about forty years of age,
complaining of great pain in both the arms, extending from the
shoulder to the finger ends. She stated, that she was attacked in the
same manner as is described in the preceding case, about nine months
before; that the complaint was considered as rheumatism, and was not
benefited by any of the medicines which had been employed; but that
after three or four weeks it gradually amended, leaving both the arms
and hands in a very weakened and trembling state. From this state they
were now somewhat recovered; but she was extremely anxious, fearing
that if the present attack should not be soon checked, she might
entirely lose the use of her hands and arms.

Instructed by the preceding case, similar means were here recommended.
Leeches, stimulating fomentations, and a blister, which was made for
sometime to yield a purulent discharge, were applied over the cervical
vertebræ; and in the course of a very few days the pain was entirely
removed. It is regretted that no farther information, as to the
progress of this case, could be obtained.

On meeting with these two cases, it was thought that it might not be
improbable that attacks of this kind, considered at the time merely as
rheumatic affections, might lay the foundation of this lamentable
disease, which might manifest itself at some distant period, when the
circumstance in which it had originated, had, perhaps, almost escaped
the memory. Indeed when it is considered that neither in the ordinary
cases of Palsy of the lower extremities, proceeding from diseased
spine, nor in cases of injured medulla from fractured vertebræ, any of
the peculiar symptoms of this disease are observable, we necessarily
doubt as to the probability of its being the direct effect of any
sudden injury. But taking all circumstances into due consideration,
particularly the very gradual manner in which the disease commences,
and proceeds in its attacks; as well as the inability to ascribe its
origin to any more obvious cause, we are led to seek for it in some
slow morbid change in the structure of the medulla, or its investing
membranes, or theca, occasioned by simple inflammation, or rheumatic
or scrophulous affection.

It must be too obvious that the evidence adduced as to the nature of
the proximate and occasional causes of this disease, is by no means
conclusive. A reference to the test therefore which will be yielded by
an examination of some of the more prominent symptoms, especially as
to their agreement with the supposed proximate cause, is more
particularly demanded. Satisfied as to the importance of this part of
the present undertaking, no apology is offered for the extent to which
the examination is carried on.

If the palpitation and the attendant weakness of the limbs, &c. be
considered as to the order in which the several parts are attacked, it
is believed, that some confirmation will be obtained of the opinion
which has been just offered, respecting the cause, or at least the
seat, of that change which may be considered as the proximate cause of
this disease.

One of the arms, in all the cases which have been here mentioned, has
been the part in which these symptoms have been first noticed; the
legs, head, and trunk have then become gradually affected, and lastly,
the muscles of the mouth and fauces have yielded to the morbid
influence.

The arms, the parts first manifesting disordered action, of course
direct us, whilst searching for the cause of these changes, to the
brachial nerves. But finding the mischief extending to other parts,
not supplied with these, but with other nerves derived from nearly the
same part of the medulla spinalis, we are of course led to consider
that portion of the medulla spinalis itself, from which these nerves
are derived, as the part in which those changes have taken place,
which constitute the proximate cause of this disease.

From the subsequent affection of the lower extremities, and from the
failure of power in the muscles of the trunk, such a change in the
substance of the medulla spinalis may be inferred, as shall have
considerably interrupted, and interfered with, the extension of the
nervous influence to those parts, whose nerves are derived from any
portion of the medulla below the part which has undergone the diseased
change.

The difficulty in supporting the trunk erect, as well as the
propensity to the adopting of a hurried pace, is also referable to
such a diminution of the nervous power in the extensor muscles of the
head and trunk, as prevents them from performing the offices of
maintaining the head and body in an erect position.

From the impediment to speech, the difficulty in mastication and
swallowing, the inability to retain, or freely to eject, the Saliva,
may with propriety be inferred an extension of the morbid change
upwards through the medulla spinalis to the medulla oblongata,
necessarily impairing the powers of the several nerves derived from
that portion into which the morbid change may have reached. In the
late occurrence of this set of symptoms, and the extension upwards of
the diseased state, a very close agreement is observable between this
disease and that which has been already shown, proved fatal to the
Count de Lordat. But in this case, the disease doubtlessly became
differently modified, and its symptoms considerably accelerated, in
consequence of the magnitude of the injury by which the disease was
induced.




                               CHAP. V.

             CONSIDERATIONS RESPECTING THE MEANS OF CURE.


The inquiries made in the preceding pages yield, it is to be much
regretted, but little more than evidence of inference: nothing direct
and satisfactory has been obtained. All that has been ventured to
assume here, has been that the disease depends on a disordered state
of that part of the medulla which is contained in the cervical
vertebræ. But of what nature that morbid change is; and whether
originating in the medulla itself, in its membranes, or in the
containing theca, is, at present, the subject of doubt and conjecture.
But although, at present, uninformed as to the precise nature of the
disease, still it ought not to be considered as one against which
there exists no countervailing remedy.

On the contrary, there appears to be sufficient reason for hoping that
some remedial process may ere long be discovered, by which, at least,
the progress of the disease may be stopped. It seldom happens that
the agitation extends beyond the arms within the first two years;
which period, therefore, if we were disposed to divide the disease
into stages, might be said to comprise the first stage. In this
period, it is very probable, that remedial means might be employed
with success: and even, if unfortunately deferred to a later period,
they might then arrest the farther progress of the disease, although
the removing of the effects already produced, might be hardly to be
expected.

From a review of the changes which had taken place in the case of
Count de Lordat, it seems as if we were able to trace the order and
mode in which the morbid changes may proceed in this disease. From any
occasional cause, the thecal ligament, the membranes, or the medulla
itself, may pass into the state of simple excitement or irritation,
which may be gradually succeeded by such a local afflux and
determination of blood into the minute vessels, as may terminate in
actual but slow inflammation. The result of this would be a
thickening of the theca, or membranes, and perhaps an increase in the
volume of the medulla itself, which would gradually occasion such a
degree of pressure against the sides of the unyielding canal, as must
eventually intercept the influence of the brain upon the inferior
portion of the medullary column, and upon the parts on which the
nerves of this portion are disposed.

From this review, and assuming that the morbid changes in this disease
may not be widely dissimilar from those which occurred in the case of
Count de Lordat, the chance of relief from the proposed mode of
treatment may appear to be sufficient to warrant its trial.

In such a case then, at whatever period of the disease it might be
proposed to attempt the cure, blood should be first taken from the
upper part of the neck, unless contra-i(n)dicated by any particul(ar)
circumstance. After which vesicatories should be applied to the (sa)me
part, and a purulent discharge obtained by appropriate use of the
Sabine Liniment; having recourse to the application of a fresh
blister, when from the diminution of the discharging surface, pus is
not secreted in a sufficient quantity. Should the blisters be found
too inconvenient, or a sufficient quantity of discharge not be
obtained thereby, an issue of at least an inch and a half in length
might be established on each side of the vertebral columna, in its
superior part. These, it is presumed, would be best formed with
caustic, and kept open with any proper substance[16].

    [Footnote 16: Cork, which has been hitherto neglected,
    appears to be very appropriate to this purpose. It possesses
    lightness, softness, elasticity and sufficient firmness; and
    is also capable of being readily fashioned to any convenient
    form. The form which it seems would be best adapted to the
    part, is that of an almond, or of the variety of bean called
    scarlet bean; but at least an inch and a half in length.]

Could it have been imagined that such considerable benefit: indeed,
that such astonishing cures, could have been effected by issues in
cases of Palsy of the lower extremities from diseased spine? although
satisfied with ascribing those cases to scrofulous action, we are in
fact as little informed respecting the nature of the affection,
inducing the carious state of the vertebræ, as we are respecting the
peculiar change of structure which takes place in this disease.
Equally uninformed are we also as to the peculiar kind of morbid
action, which takes place in the ligaments of the joints; as well as
that which takes place in different instances of deep seated pains and
affections of the parts contained in the head, thorax, and abdomen,
and in all which cases the inducing of a purulent discharge in their
neighbourhood is so frequently productive of a cure. Experiment has
not indeed been yet employed to prove, but analogy certainly warrants
the hope, that similar advantages might be derived from the use of the
means enumerated, in the present disease. It is obvious, that the
chance of obtaining relief will depend in a great measure on the
period at which the means are employed. As in every other disease, so
here, the earlier the remedies are resorted to, the greater will be
the probability of success. But in this disease there is one
circumstance which demands particular attention; the long period to
which it may be extended. One of its peculiar symptoms, Scelotyrbe
festinans, may not occur until the disease has existed ten or twelve
years, or more; hence, when looking for the period, within which our
hopes of remedial aid is to be limited; we may, guided by the slow
progress of the malady, extend it to a great length, when compared
with that within which we should be obliged to confine ourselves in
most other diseases.

But it is much to be apprehended, as in many other cases, that the
resolution of the patients will seldom be sufficient to enable them to
persevere through the length of time which the proposed process will
necessarily require. As slow as is the progress of the disease, so
slow in all probability must be the period of the return to health. In
most cases, especially in those in which the disease has been allowed
to exist long unopposed, it may be found that all that art is capable
of accomplishing, is that of checking its further progress. Nor will
this be regarded as a trifle, when, by reference to the history of the
disease, is seen the train of harassing evils which would be thus
avoided.

But it seems as if there existed reason for hoping for more. For
supposing change of structure to have taken place, it is extremely
probable that this change may be merely increase in mass or volume by
interstitial addition, the consequence of increased action in the
minute vessels of the part. In that case, should the instituting of a
purulent discharge, in a neighbouring part, act in the manner which we
would presume it may—should it by keeping up a constant discharge,
not merely alter the determination, but diminish the inordinate action
of the vessels in the diseased part; and at the same time excite the
absorbents to such increased action as may remove the added matter;
there will exist strong ground for hope, that a happy, though slow
restoration to health, may be obtained.

Until we are better informed respecting the nature of this disease,
the employment of internal medicines is scarcely warrantable; unless
analogy should point out some remedy the trial of which rational hope
might authorize. Particular circumstances indeed must arise in
different cases, in which the aid of medicine may be demanded: and the
intelligent will never fail to avail themselves of any opportunity of
making trial of the influence of mercury, which has in so many
instances, manifested its power in correcting derangement of
structure.

The weakened powers of the muscles in the affected parts is so
prominent a symptom, as to be very liable to mislead the inattentive,
who may regard the disease as a mere consequence of constitutional
debility. If this notion be pursued, and tonic medicines, and highly
nutritious diet be directed, no benefit is likely to be thus obtained;
since the disease depends not on general weakness, but merely on the
interruption of the flow of the nervous influence to the affected
parts.

It is indeed much to be regretted that this malady is generally
regarded by the sufferers in this point of view, so discouraging to
the employment of remedial means. Seldom occurring before the age of
fifty, and frequently yielding but little inconvenience for several
months, it is generally considered as the irremediable diminution of
the nervous influence, naturally resulting from declining life; and
remedies therefore are seldom sought for.

Although unable to trace the connection by which a disordered state of
the stomach and bowels may induce a morbid action in a part of the
medulla spinalis, yet taught by the instruction of Mr. Abernethy,
little hesitation need be employed before we determine on the
probability of such occurrence. The power, possessed by sympathy, of
inducing such disordered action in a distant part, and the probability
of such disordered action producing derangement of structure, can
hardly be denied. The following Case seems to prove, at least, that
the mysterious sympathetic influence which so closely simulates the
forms of other diseases, may induce such symptoms as would seem to
menace the formation of a disease not unlike to that which we have
been here treating of.

_A. B._ A man, 54 years of age, of temperate habits and regular state
of bowels, became gradually affected with slight numbness and
prickling, with a feeling of weakness in both arms, accompanied by a
sense of fulness about the shoulders, as if produced by the pressure
of a strong ligature; and at times a slight trembling of the hands.
During the night, the fullness, numbness, and prickling were much
increased. The appetite had been diminished for several weeks; and the
abdomen, on being examined, felt as though containing considerable
accumulation.

Before adopting any other measures, and as there appeared to be no
marks of vascular fulness, it was determined to empty the bowels. This
was done effectually by moderate doses of calomel, with the occasional
help of Epsom salts; and in about ten days, by these means alone, the
complaints were entirely removed.

Before concluding these pages, it may be proper to observe once more,
that an important object proposed to be obtained by them is, the
leading of the attention of those who humanely employ anatomical
examination in detecting the causes and nature of diseases,
particularly to this malady. By their benevolent labours its real
nature may be ascertained, and appropriate modes of relief, or even of
cure, pointed out.

To such researches the healing art is already much indebted for the
enlargement of its powers of lessening the evils of suffering
humanity. Little is the public aware of the obligations it owes to
those who, led by professional ardour, and the dictates of duty, have
devoted themselves to these pursuits, under circumstances most
unpleasant and forbidding. Every person of consideration and feeling,
may judge of the advantages yielded by the philanthropic exertions of
a HOWARD; but how few can estimate the benefits bestowed on mankind,
by the labours of a MORGAGNI, HUNTER, or BAILLIE.

