

The Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, from its inception almost 
5 years ago, has continually given painstaking attention to the task of 
defending this Nation's atomic enterprise against Soviet agents. 
Since mid-1946, when the law creating the joint committee and the 
Atomic Energy Commission was enacted, American espionage de- 
fenses, so far as is known, have not been breached. The Federal Bureau 
of Investigation and other interested agencies have reported no success- 
ful act of atomic espioaiage committed against the United States from 
mid-1946 onward. 

Before that time, however, Soviet agents did successfully penetrate 
the joint American-British-Canadian atomic projects. After mid- 
1916, moreover, further security breaches have occurred in the British 
program, through Dr. Klaus Fuchs and through the disappearance of 
Dr. Bruno Pontecorvo. 

The individuals who had access to classified atomic information and 
who are definitely known to have conveyed such information to the 
Soviet I'nion while employed on the project are three in number. 
To list them in the estimated order of their importance, they are: 
(1) Dr. Klaus Fuchs, the German-born British scientist who worked 
both upon the key Oak Ridge, Tenn., process and upon weapons at the 
Los Alamos, N. Mex., laboratory during World War II ; (2) Dr. Allan. 
Nunn May, the British scientist, who was arrested and convicted in 
connection with the Canadian spy exposes of 1946; and (3) David 
Greenglass, an American citizen, who, as an Army technical sergeant^ 
performed weapons work at Los Alamos during World War II. 

A special situation is presented by Dr. Bruno Pontecorvo, the 
ItTalian-born British scientist, who worked at Canadian atomic energy 
centers and visited American laboratories during World War 11. In 
October 1950 he fled eastward and disappeared behind the iron curtain, 
Pontecorvo may not have compromised information prior to his flight. 
But, for reasons developed later in this study, it must be taken for 
granted that every scrap of information known to Pontecorvo is today 
known to the Soviet Union. Thus the consequences are the same 
whether or not he did in fact serve as a Soviet agent while working in 
the west. Pontecorvo is therefore grouped with Fuchs, May, and 
Greenglass as a betrayer of atomic secrets. In terms of his contribu- 
tion to the Soviet project, he is estimated to rank behind Fuchs but 
ahead of May and Greenglass. 

Part I of this study seeks to develop factual, authentic information 
about the four known betrayers who themselves had access to atomic 
data. Also included in part I is material relating to Harry Gold, who 
served as an espionage courier and relayed information from both 
Fuchs and Greenglass to Soviet officials. Part I is entitled "Fuchs, 
Pontecorvo, May, Greenglass, and Gold." 

Part II of the present report, in contrast to the proven cases which 
mainly comprise part I, deals only with allegations not tested in a 

m 



IV FOREWORD 

court of law. These allegations all pertain to persons whose atomic 
spying or service in Russia's behalf are alleged to have occurred dur- 
ing World War II. Several of the individuals concerned are cur- 
rently being prosecuted for perjury or contempt of Congress. The 
various allegations center particularly upon acts of espionage said to 
have been committed by Dr. Clarence Hiskey and Dr. Joseph Wein- 
berg, two wartime members of the American atomic enterprise, and 
upon a Communist cell said to have been active in the wartime 
Berkeley Radiation Laboratory. 

For the sake of clarity and completeness this report contains a part 
III relating to individuals who committed serious security breaches 
but who were not Soviet agents and whose actions did not assist the 
Hussian atomic project. A leading example is the case of Dr. San- 
ford Simons. After working at Los Alamos during World War II 
he departed with a small sample of plutonium as a souvenir. Part III 
is entitled "Nonespionage Cases." 

The purpose of the present study, prepared and compiled by the 
joint committee staff at the request of the chairman, is to gather in 
one place the salient facts about the various individuals within the 
categories above outlined. It is hoped that the study will assist com- 
mittee members in assessing the atomic-espionage damage inflicted 
upon the United States. 

All statements have been meticulously screened so as to include 
unclassified and publishable information only. 





F 








o 


o 
<-> 


^ 


J= 




0) 


XI 


o 


d; 




O 


* 


■^ 




c 


^ 




c 
o 




<u 


(A 


£Z 
















O 




o 






3 




D 






11 




TJ 








<u 


O 


«3- 


n» 


C 






^ 


c 








(71 












(]> 










1- 


3 
T) 


(rt 


o 
E 

<u 

c 


fO 


■n 


O 


u 
o 

o 


01 


tr 

D 


in 

fO 
CM 


c 
o 


3 


o 


z> 


Q. 


3 


c 



i-^o 




LU 

I 




Birmingham University. 
Here, in 1942, Fuchs 
first became connected 
witti atomic reseorcti. 




The Cavendish Loboro- 
lory, Combridge. Here 
May performed atomic 
research in 1942. 



Harwell, the major 
British atomic research 
laboratory. Here Fuchs 
worked from 1946 to 
1949 ond Pontecorvo 
from 1949 to 1950. 



f 



Poris, Fronce. Here 
Pontecorvo worked with 
Joliot-Curie on atomic 
problems from 1938 to 
1941. 





Helsinki, Finland. 
Pontecorvo and family 
were lost seen here in 
October 1950. 



Fuchs was born in Ger- 
many and studied phy- 
sics ot Kiel University, 
fleeing to Britain in 1933. 



GER r^ A N Y 



^.v 



ITALY 




Pontecorvo was born 
in Italy, studied phy- 
sics in Rome, ond per- 
formed atomic research 
during the early I930's. 




■v^ ^^xJ^ 




THE GEOGRAPHICAL FOCAL POINTS 
OF ESPIONAGE 



The Library o< Congrest 

LfQXlotxrt ncfc<«nci 5«'v>c« 

HoOtftL Bosi«ti,3 21-51 

No 696 



CONTENTS 



PART I 
FUCHS, PONTECORVO, MAY, GREENGLASS, AND GOLD 

Page 

1. A synopsis of the known facts : 1 

{a) Klaus Fuchs 1 

(6) Bruno Pontecorvo 1 

{g) Allan Nunn May 2 

{d) David Greenglass 3 

(e) Harry Gold 3 

2. The Nature of the Information Betrayed 5 

3. Comment on Security Defenses, Espionage Techniques, and 

Motives 8 

4. The Fuchs case — details 13 

5. The Pontecorvo case — details 38 

6. The May case— details 49 

7. The Greenglass case — details 60 

8. The Gold case— details 145 

PART II 
CHARGES NOT PROVEN IN A COURT OF LAW 

1. Charges concerning Arthur Adams, Clarence Hiskey, John 

Chapin, and others 163 

2. Charges concerning Martin David Kamen 171 

3. Charges concerning Steve Nelson, Joseph Weinberg, and 

others . 172 

4. Testimony given by David Hawkins 183 

5. Allegations concerning Wartime Exports 184 

PART III 
NONESPIONAGE CASES 

1. The case of the Plutonium Souvenir 193 

2. The Missing Briefcase 194 

3. The Souvenir Photos 195 

4. The Falsified Security Questionnaire 196 

EC 



iiiii^l^ir^,:;.^:;., PART I 

FUCHS, PONTECORVO, MAY, GREENGLASS, AND GOLD ' 
1. A Synopsis of the Known Facts 

(a) Klaus Fuchs 

Dr. Fuchs was a member of the British atomic-energy mission 
which came to the United States during World War II, in accordance 
with the 1943 Quebec agreement between President Roosevelt, Prime 
Minister Churchill of the United Kingdom, and Prime Minister King 
of Canada. The British certified to the Manhattan Engineer Dis- 
trict, which then had responsibility for American atomic develop- 
ment, that Fuchs could be trusted ; and this certification was accepted 
without further inquiry. 

During 1944 Fuchs lived in New York and worked at Columbia 
University, participating intimately in efforts to develop the gaseous 
diffusion U-235 separation process — a process now embodied in the 
K-25-27-29-31 plant complex at Oak Ridge, Tenn., and to be embodied 
in the major new plant complex under construction at Paducah, Ky, 
He was one of three Britishers who had complete access to all phases 
of the Columbia University work. It is little appreciated that Fuchs 
is not only the great betrayer of weapons data but also the great 
betrayer of the theory underlying the only Oak Ridge production 
method in use today. 

In August 1944 Fuchs moved to Los Alamos with other members 
of the British mission and worked there until June 1946. He took 
part in the making of the earliest atomic bombs ; he w^as privy to ideas 
and plans for improved atomic weapons, and he possessed insight 
into the thinking of the period as regards the hydrogen bomb. Fuchs 
returned to England in mid-1946 and soon became Chief of the Theo- 
retical Physics Division at Harwell, Britain's principal atomic- 
research laboratory. 

Some 3 years later American security authorities advised Britain 
of a lead developed in the United States, and this brought about 
Fuchs' arrest, conviction, and imprisonment in early 1950. He had 
shipped to Russia the most sensitive information, including exten- 
sive quantitative data in written form, regarding the Oak Ridge gase- 
ous diffusion process, the weapons work at Los Alamos, British activi- 
ties at Harwell, and other projects located in the United States, 
Canada, and the United Kingdom. 

(h) Brwno Pontecorvo 

The reactor of most advanced design and performance operating in 
North America is still the Canadian NRX heavy- water pile at Chalk 
River, Ontario, and Dr. Pontecorvo contributed to the nuclear aspects 
of this device. In addition, he had knowledge of nuclear problems 



2 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

involved in building the plutonium-production piles at Hanford, 
Wash. Pontecorvo is considered by some of his scientific associates 
to be more outstanding as a physicist than Klaus Fuchs. 

An Italian by birth, Pontecorvo studied at Rome and Paris and, 
when Nazi Gerinany invaded France in 1940, escaped through. Spain 
to the United States. For a time he was employed by an American 
oil firm, and then, in early 1943, he joined the Anglo-Canadian atomic 
energy team at McGill University, Montreal. The next year he moved 
to Chalk River, Ontario, and — during the same year — engaged in 
classified discussions at the Chicago Metallurgical Laboratory. Later 
the main emphasis in Pontecorvo's efforts shifted from reactors to 
cosmic-ray research, although he continued to enjoy access to secret 
atomic energy data. Also his more recent studies included work upon 
tritium, a substance intimately related to the hydrogen bomb. Pon- 
tecorvo remained at Chalk River through 1948, the year in which he 
was naturalized as a British citizen. Thereupon he became a senior 
principal scientific officer at the Harwell Laboratory in England. 
Pontecorvo, his wife, and three children disappeared behind the 
Soviet iron curtain, fleeing via Sweden and Finland, during Septem- 
ber 1950. 

While Pontecorvo had no direct contact with weapons work, it is 
possible to speculate that he may have betrayed reactor data from 
1943 onward — supplementing the bomb details and the U-235 process- 
ing information divulged by Fuchs and thereby furnishing Russia 
with a particularly well-rounded picture. In any event, as of Sep- 
tember 1950, the Soviets acquired in Pontecorvo not only a human 
storehouse of knowledge about the Anglo-American-Canadian atomic 
projects but also a first-rate scientific brain. 

(c) Allan Nunn May 

: Shortly before World War II ended, Dr. May, a natural-born Brit- 
ish scientist, met a Russian military officer in Montreal, Canada, and 
gave him laboratory samples of U-235 and U-233. This dramatic 
betrayal attracted wide attention in the press when May was arrested 
in early 1946, but still more helpfvd to Russia, no doubt, was the in- 
formation which he also compromised. He worked closely with the 
wartime Metallurgical Laboratory at Chicago, visiting there on three 
occasions; and as a result, he understood a number of the problems 
overcome in constructing the Hanford, Wash., plutonium piles. jSIay, 
in addition, was familiar with the Canadian wartime atomic energy 
effort; and he knew miscellaneous facts about Oak Ridge, Tenn., and 
Los Alamos, N. Mex. He confessed to writing an over-all report on 
atomic energy as known to him and transmitting it to the Soviets. 

A nuclear physicist of considerable ability. May joined the British 
atomic project during the spring of 1942. He worked first at the 
Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, England, and then, in January 
1943, joined the Anglo-Canadian research team at McGill University, 
Montreal. In Canada he became a senior member of the nuclear phys- 
ics division and remained mitil September 1945. Thereafter, until 
his arrest, May was a lecturer on physics at Kings College, London. 

Igor Gouzenko, the Russian cipher clerk at the Soviet Embassy in 
Ottawa, Canada, helped bring about the arrest when he defected to 
the Canadian authorities in late 1945, taking with him papers which 
led to the exposure of widespread espionage activity. The wartime 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE Q 

Canadian spy ring is primarily associated, in many minds, witli 
divnlgement of atomic secrets ; but Allan Nunn May is the only mem- 
ber of the ring who gave Kussia information in this category. He 
was 34 years old when arrested and had become a Communist before 
the war. May is now serving a 10-year sentence in Wakefield Prison, 
Yorkshire, England. 

(d) David Greenglass 

Of the four betrayers who themselves had access to secret atomic 
information, only David Greenglass is American-born ; only he is an 
American citizen; and he also stands alone as the only nonscientist 
in the group. 

According to his own testimony in open court, Greenglass was 
assigned to the Los Alamos, N. Mex., weapons laboratory in the sum- 
mer of 1944 and there worked as a machinist upon high-explosive lens 
molds (a crucial nonnuclear phase of the atomic bomb). He gave 
Harry Gold (who was also a courier for Fuchs) sketches and detailed 
written descriptions of this work, as well as a list of scientific per- 
sonnel associated with Los Alamos and a further list of Los Alamos 
individuals whom he thought might be willing to serve as Russian 
agents. In addition, Greenglass testified that he conveyed to Russia 
a diagram of the atomic bomb, along with a detailed explanation and 
related materials in writing. 

Greenglass grew up on the lower East Side of New York City, 
attending the Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute and Pratt Institute. 
In 1938, at the age of 16, he joined the Young Connuunist League. 
At Los Alamos, as an Army technical sergeant, he eventually became 
foreman of a machine shop concerned with preparing weapon appa- 
ratus. Greenglass' testimony indicates that he was able to secure 
information far beyond the scope of his assigned duties. 

He was arrested in June 1950 as the result of information supplied 
by Harry Gold and others, and he pleaded guilty to the charges 
against him. Although his espionage activities had terminated by 
1946, when he left the Army, the case is significant because Greenglass 
was in a position to furnish Russia with mechanical details of bomb 
gadgetry and weaponeering that might have supplemented the data 
divulged by a theoretical physicist such as Klaus Fuchs. 

(e) Harry Gold 

Since the American population still contains several tens of thou- 
sands of Communists, according to official estimates, it is not surpris- 
ing that Russia found means of conveying atomic secrets from Los 
Alamos, N. Mex., to her own consulate in New York City— once she 
had induced Fuchs and Greenglass, who worked behind the guarded 
Los Alamos gates, to provide these secrets in the first instance. The 
contact men, the couriers, the go-betweens, the spy recruiters, and 
Russian officials in New York — such individuals have played a lesser 
role than a Fuchs or a Greenglass, though an indispensable one from 
the Soviet viewpoint. 

(1) Harry Gold met Fuchs in Boston, New York, Santa Fe, and 
elsewhere, and received both oral information and packets of papers 
for delivery to Russian officials. In addition. Gold served in the same 
capacity for Greenglass — and also for others who transmitted data 
having no relation to atomic energy. Arrested in May 1950, after 



4 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE, 

Fuchs gave FBI agents his description, Gold plead guilty and was 
sentenced to 30 years' imprisonment. 

(2) Julius Rosenberg and his wife, Ethel, who were convicted 
on March 29, 1951, in New York City, of conspiring with Gold and 
others to procure national defense secrets for Russia. This couple 
engaged in widespread espionage activities, although none relate di- 
rectly to atomic energy except as they focus through Greenglass, who 
is Ethel Rosenberg's brother. Greenglass testified that the Rosenbergs 
helped induce him to betray Los Alamos secrets. 

(3) Ruth Greenglass, wife of David Greenglass, was named as a 
co-conspirator in the indictment against the Rosenbergs but has not 
herself been prosecuted. She testified to having helped her husband 
compromise Los Alamos information. 

(4) Anatoli Yakovlev : This individual was formerly a Russian vice 
consul in New York. From 1944 to 1946 he supervised Harry Gold, 
receiving from the latter written and oral information furnished by 
Fuchs, Greenglass, and others. 

(5) Semen M. Semenov : As a Russian official of the Amtorg Trad- 
ing Corp., Soviet purchasing agency with American headquarters in 
New York City, Semenov directed Harry Gold's activities as an 
espionage courier from 1940 to 1944. 

(6) Other individuals connected or allegedly connected with the 
same espionage network include Abraham Brothman and Miriam 
Moskowitz, convicted of perbuading Harry Gold to give false testi- 
mony before a grand jury; Alfred Dean Slack, convicted of convey- 
ing to Gold secrets concerning a new type explosive; Morton Sobell, 
accused of betraying radar and electronics data; and William Perl, 
an expert on aerodynamics charged with perjury. 



2. The Nature of the Information Betrayed 

The extent of the espionage damage known to have been inflicted 
upon the atomic energy position of the United States is indisputably 
severe. 

The Nation's three most important installations in this field are 
Hanford (phitoninm), Oak Kidge (U-235), and Los Alamos 
(weapons). From Klaus Fuchs the Soviets learned critical informa- 
tion involved in two of these installations, Oak Ridge and Los Alamos; 
and David Greenglass supplied additional weapons data. Allan Nunn 
May and Bruno Pontecorvo were in a position to betray essential 
secrets about Hanford. The central atomic energy installation in 
Canada is Chalk River, and the main British research laboratory is 
Harwell. May and Pontecorvo each had extensive knowledge as to 
both. Moreover, all the four Soviet helpers—possibly excepting 
Greenglass — had opportunity to give Russia significant data concern- 
ing a number of added atomic energy facilities and processes in the 
United States, Britain, and Canada. 

Whereas our own wartime Los Alamos laboratory grappled with a 
series of abstruse and exquisite weapons problems, finally arriving at 
practical solutions after great expenditures of effort, money, and tech- 
nical talent, the fruits of this struggle were largely available to the 
Soviets at an early stage of their rival enterprise. ISluch the same may 
be said of the Oak Ridge, Hanford, and Chalk River projects. 
Whereas the wartime atomic partners, America, Britain, and Canada, 
overcame immense obstacles to construct reactors and to produce 
precious fissionable materials, a major share of their experience — 
thanks to the spies — was at hand for Russia to exploit without the 
independent exertion on her part otherwise necessary. Our own 
country, striking into the unknown, felt compelled to build three 
separate plants for U-235 production, each based upon a different 
process. One of these, the gaseous diffusion method, proved to be far 
superior and since the war has been used almost exclusively. It is the 
same method to which Klaus Fuchs had access during the wartime 
research and development phase. Here again the Soviets, from an 
early point in their effort, could avoid making many of the mistakes 
and following many of the costly false leads that inevitably attended 
the pioneering days of the American program. The same point may 
be made as regards the heavy water reactor at Chalk River, Canada. 
This is all apart from Fuchs' knowledge of American plans for post- 
war development both as to atomic weapons and as to the hydrogen 
homb. 

Thus the conclusion seems reasonable that the combined activities 
of Fuchs, Pontecorvo, Greenglass, and May have advanced the Soviet 
atomic energy program by 18 months as a minimum. In other words, 
if war should come, Russia's ability to mount an atomic offensive 
against the West will be greatly increased by reason of these four men. 
It is hardly an exaggeration to say that Fuchs alone has influenced 
the safety of more people and accomplished greater damage than any 

5 



6 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

other spy not only in the history of the United States but in the history 
of nations. This is not to imply that Russia could never have broken 
the American atomic monopoly through her own unaided labors. But 
if, for example, the United States had known early in World War II 
what Russia learned by the end of 1945 through espionage, it appears 
likely that our own project would today be at least 18 months ahead 
of its actual level of attainment. 

The relative importance of the four betrayers is a matter of judg- 
ment and, in part, speculation. It seems crystal clear that Fuchs 
was the most damaging because no information surrounding the war- 
time Los Alamos weapons center and, likewise, no information involv- 
ing what is noAv the sole Oak Ridge production process were withheld 
from him ; and the evidence is plain that he effectively placed in Soviet 
hands the data at his command. Pontecorvo, May, and Greenglass 
all rank well below Fuclis in importance, and how they rank among 
one another is particularly speculative. It may be pointed out, how- 
ever, that Pontecorvo is considered by some to be an even abler scientist 
than Fuchs and further that Pontecorvo successfully fled the West 
and is working behind the iron curtain today. Moreover, he has 
devoted himself to atomic energy problems since 1934, and the clas- 
sified data known to him is fresh and recent. For these reasons Pon- 
tecorvo may be plausibly rated as the second deadliest betrayer, though 
considerably less deadly than Fuchs. 

This rating of Pontecorvo is supported by the logic that the Soviets, 
in order to achieve the atomic-bomb stockpile now at their disposal, 
w^ere required to solve two broad problems: (1) Quantity production 
of fissionable material, and (2) design and assembly of practical 
weapons. Fuchs contributed to the solution of both problems; but 
as to the first — production of fissionable materials — his own special 
knowledge focused particularly upon U-235 rather than jDlutonium. 
Therefore, unless Russia could locate an informant who would pro- 
vide detailed information about nuclear reactors (the devices which 
produce plutonium), her range of understanding would contain a 
broad gap until such time as Soviet scientists filled it through inde- 
pendent effort. Pontecorvo may perhaps have served as an informant 
in this area, from 1943 onward. Certain it is that Russia today 
possesses nuclear reactors. But whether or not Pontecorvo in fact 
betrayed secrets before disappearing behind the iron curtain late last 
year, his recollection of those secrets is now available to Russia and 
his unusual scientific mind is also available for Soviet reactor 
development. 

The question of whether Dr. Allan Nunn May or David Greenglass 
ranks as the next deadliest atomic spy depends partly upon an inter- 
pretation of May's own confession. On the one hand, he admitted 
giving Russia a written report on atomic energy as known to him ; and, 
on the other hand, he claimed that this information was mostly of a 
kind published soon thereafter or about to be published. It so happens 
that the data to which May had access far exceeds the scope of any 
material in the public domain even today, 6 years later. Therefore, 
as to the one statement or the other in his confession, INIay lied. Since 
he was a fervent Communist, since Canada's Royal Commission con- 
sidered the case to be serious in its consequences, and since May himself 
had so little repented at the time of his confession that he refused to 
identify a Soviet accomplice, it would be prudent to assume he told 
Russia everything or nearly everything of importance that he knew. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE / 

Such an assumption ties in with the fact that May stole specimens of 
U-235 and U-233, probably from our own Chicago laboratory, and 
handed them to his Soviet contact man— a deed suggesting extreme 
devotion to Russia's interest. 

David Greenglass was a 23-year-old machinist, with no real scien- 
tific training, during the. period of his main espionage activity at Los 
Alamos. The diagrams and written explanation of the Nagasaki-type 
atomic bomb that he gave to courier Harry Gold have a theatrical 
quality and, at first glance, may seem the most damaging single act 
committed by any of the main betrayers. But, on one occasion, 
Greenglass met with a Russian official in New York and was asked to 
supply a mathematical formula concerning high-explosive lenses used 
in the^Nagasaki-type weapon. Not being a scientist, Greenglass lacked 
capacity to furnish this information— although, in all probability, 
Klaus Fuchs could have and did furnish it thereafter. By the same 
token, the bomb sketches and explanations that Greenglass— as a vir- 
tual layman— could prepare must have counted for little compared 
with the quantitative data and the authoritative scientific commentary 
upon atomic weai^ons that Fuchs transmitted. 

When Harry Gold had once traveled West and received papers from 
both Fuchs and Greenglass on the one trip, his Russian superior 
ordered him to repeat the journey for purposes of again contacting 
F'uchs. Gold suggested that he also contact Greenglass, as before, and 
the Russian superior rejected this suggestion as not being worth 
while — an episode implying that after the Soviets had gained experi- 
ence in what Greenglass was capable of telling them, they lost some of 
their interest. A like inference may be drawn from the proposals 
made to Greenglass, after the war, that he become a science student and 
thereby better equip himself to serve as a Soviet agent. 

Greenglass' value to Russia in generally corroborating Fuchs' state- 
ments and perhaps in supplying miscellaneous information which 
Fuchs omitted is not to be discounted. It is even possible moreover, 
that (jreenglass — in the narrow but important field of his own work 
upon high explosive lens molds — was able to convey practical data 
and know-how beyond Fuchs' understanding. Yet, everything con- 
sidered, Greenglass appears to have been the least effective of the four 
spies, ranking behind Allan Nunn May in this regard. Had there been 
no Klaus Fuchs, Greenglass would take on far greater importance. 
Needless to say, this evaluation does not detract one iota from the 
horror of this man's crimes nor lessen his legal and moral guilt. 

In writing of the 1945 Potsdam conference, former Secretary of 
State James F. Byrnes describes how Stalin reacted when President 
Truman told him about the atomic bomb, as follows : 

At the close of the meeting of the Big Three on the afternoon of July 24 
[1945], the President walked around the large circular table to talk to Stalin. 
After a brief conversation the President rejoined me and we rode back to the 
"Little White House" together. He said he had told Stalin that, after long 
experimentation, we had developed a new bomb far more destructive than any 
other known bomb, and that we planned to use it very soon unless Japan sur- 
rendered. Stalin's only reply was to say that he was glad to hear of the bomb 
and he hoped we would use it. I was surprised at Stalin's lack of interest. I 
concluded that he had not grasped the importance of the discovery. I thought 
that the following day he wonld ask for more information about it. He did not. 
Later I concluded that, because the Russians kept secret their developments in 
military weapons, they thought it improper to ask us about ours. (Reprinted 
by permission from Speaking Frankly by James F. Byrnes, 1947.) 

81095 — 51 2 



3. Comment on Security Defenses, Espionage Techniques, and 

Motives 

(a) Security defenses 

The British Government was aware, in 1941, that Gestapo reports 
had named Khaus Fuchs as a German Communist, but had no way 
of checking the accuracy of this charge. Fuchs was sympathetic to 
communism from early "college days in Germany, and several of his 
relatives were either members .of the party or fellow travelers. Ac- 
cording to Fuchs' confession, he associated mainly with Marxians for 
6 years in England before the war. The pro-Soviet pressures operat- 
ing upon Bruno Pontecorvo are evidenced by the fact that at least 
one brother and one sister have been lifelong Communists, and a 
cousin is today a Communist member of the Italian Parliament. 
I'ontecorvo worked for 3 years in Paris under Frederic Joliot-Curie, 
himself a notorious Communist long surrounded by many Communist 
associates. A\nien Pontecorvo visited the Chicago "ISIet Lab*' in 19M, 
he had not yet acquired British citizenship. Allan Nunn May had 
been a devoted, though secret, prewar Connuunist in England and 
was a member of the Canadian Association of Scientific Workers, an 
organization infiltrated by Communists and having a Connnnnist as 
its president. David Greeuglass j oined the Young Communist League 
in New York at the age of 16, and associated extensively with Com- 
munists until the time he entered the Army and was assigned to Los 
Alamos. 

Why, then, were these four men — now known to be betrayers 
granted access to atomic energy information ? 

The answer centers partly upon the fact that the FBI had no re- 
sponsibility for security investigations during the wartime period. 
Not until 1947, when the present law controlling atomic energy was 
enacted, did the FBI become responsible for investigating project 
personnel. Previously the Army Manhattan Engineer District had 
full charge of atomic development and handled security matters ex- 
clusively through its own officials. 

Another obvious reason why the four spies gained access lay in the 
fact that Russia was an ally of the United States during World War 
II. Although the Manhattan District attempted to exclude Soviet 
agents from the ranks of its employees, a gi-eat part of the effort was 
also devoted to excluding agents of Germany, Italy, and Japan. 

In addition, the Quebec Agreement of 1943 stipulated generally that 
the United States, Britain, and Canada would collaborate as partners 
in the field of atomic energy. Methods of security clearance were 
omitted from the agreement, being worked out by the operating 
agencies concerned. The Manhattan District, having received written 
assurances from Britain that Fuchs, Pontecorvo, and May were loyal 
and trustworthy, did not make inquiries — because the United King- 
dom is a sovereign nation — regarding the evidence and the security 

8 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 9 

procedure that supported such assurances. Fuchs and Pontecorvo, 
moreover, could not be comprehensively investigated because each had 
passed most of his life in an enemy country — Germany and Italy, 
respectively. Pontecorvo spent 1941 and 1942 in the United States 
rand may have revealed his true status through Communist activity 
■during these years, but the FBI was excluded from responsibility for 
checking upon such possible activity. 

Today it is often asserted that, during the war, atomic energy was 
perfectly concealed from the American people but that it was well- 
inown to Joseph Stalin. This characterization is unfair in the sense 
that atomic energy was not only hidden from the American people but, 
in large degree, from the Axis Powers as well. The necessity of at- 
tempting to keep Germany and Japan totally in the dark meant that 
security efforts had to be so used as to shroud all information and to 
keep each project employee, however little he knew, from alerting the 
Axis. The mere fact that an atomic project existed was secret. As 
a result, security efforts were widely dispersed and could not be ade- 
quately concentrated upon screening the small numbers of people who 
would gain extensive knowledge and who could most assist Russia if 
so inclined. 

Not to be overlooked, either, were the extreme conditions of urgency 
which underlay the wartime project. Tens of thousands of persons 
had to be employed in short order, and the job could not wait until 
exhaustive security procedures had been fully carried out. Our own 
■qualified scientists are almost unanimous in believing, too, that only 
the participation of their British and Canadian colleagues made pos- 
sible the achievement of the atomic bomb within the time available 
and that, without such participation, the success of the project would 
have been materially delayed. The sheer stresses and strains and 
urgencies of a war situation involving a three-nation atomic partner- 
ship probably constitute the greatest single factor accounting for the 
security lapses that gave entrance to Fuchs, Pontecorvo, May, and 
Greenglass. 

(b) Espionage techniques 

On the order of 200,000 people took part in the wartime American- 
British-Canadian atomic efforts, but only a few hundred — a fraction 
of 1 percent — were in a position to give Russia sweeping data of 
vital significance. This was due partly to a security compartmenta- 
tion system whereby the individual received only such information 
as he needed to do his job. A large share of the two-hundred- 
Ihousand-odd wartime project members were not aware that their 
work related to atomic bombs. Moreover, the average employee 
could not have substantially helped Russia, no matter how disloyal 
to the United States he may have been, simply because his brain 
lacked the technical education to understand and convey the main 
secrets at stake. Soviet espionage, to be successful on a major scale, 
required three conditions: (1) A trained scientist or specialist, (2) 
having critical access to information about the American-British- 
-Canadian project, and (3) willing to sacrifice his own country in 
behalf of Russia. 



Jo SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

These conditions were all met in the cases of Fuchs, Pontecorvo^ 
May, and Greenglass. Each man was among the few hundred — the 
fraction of 1 percent — possessing the mental equipment and holding 
the key positions which alone made possible, if combined with dis- 
loyalty, the betraying of essential secrets. 

In at least two" of these cases, it appears to be no coincidence that 
the very men now proven to have been spies were also among the 
few who, by reason of their training and duties, could best serve- 
Kussia as spies. Fuchs, as soon as he discovered the nature of the^ 
wartime work assigned him, personally took the initiative in con- 
tacting a Soviet agent and arranging to funnel information toward 
Kussia. But Allan Nunn May was sought out by Eussian military- 
officers operating from the Soviet Embassy at Ottawa, Canada. They 
knew that May was both an ardent Communist and a key atomic 
scientist before establishing liaison with him. Greenglass worked 
upon a phase of the atomic bomb — the actual gadget itself — without 
realizing what it was until his wife told him. She had been informed 
by American operatives under the control of the Russian New York 
consulate as part of a successful scheme to recruit her husband into 
the espionage network. These operatives themselves chose Green- 
glass for their purpose, seeing that he had past Communist connec- 
tions. The circumstances of Pontecorvo's flight to Russia from 
England via Sweden and Finland strongly indicate that the trip 
was prearranged, perhaps at the instigation of Soviet agents. In 
other words, the Russian intelligence system, so far as known, Feems 
to have slighted the ordinary atomic employee who possessed little 
information and to have settled upon relatively few insiders, some of 
whom could and did deliver data of priceless value. 

The fact that three of the four spies are physicists does not indicate 
that men of science, as a group, are more vulnerable to comnmnism 
than other groups. It suggests, instead, that physicists alone 
fully understood many of the secrets which counted most and that 
physicists therefore attracted the concentrated attention of Soviet 
intelligence directors. 

Some moral, however, may be drawn from the fact that both Fuchs 
and Pontecorvo had established reputations for their scrupulous 
obedience of formal security regulations, for the care which they 
seemed to exercise in guarding their language when noncleared persons 
were present, and in similar matters. Likewise, each man avoided 
conversations about politics, although not to the point of being con- 
spicuous. Neither is known to have received any Communist litera- 
ture such as the Daily Worker. Greenglass testified to the precau- 
tions which all Soviet agents took in shunning any appearance of 
dislo5^alt3\ Personal friends and associates of the three scientist 
spies were shocked and incredulous when the true facts became known. 
It may also be worth noting that the drastic espionage damage was 
not effected by men who broke into atomic energy centers through 
force and violence. The history of the espionage cases again demon- 
strates the oft-repeated maxim that personnel security is primary 
and that other forms of security such as physical barriers and docu- 
ments control, however important, are secondarj^ 

It is an interesting sidelight that May and Pontecorvo knew one 
another at Montreal, Canada, and Fuchs and Pontecorvo were 
acquaintances at Harwell, England. However, in all probability. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 11 

3lone of these three men had knowledge that the others were also 
■spies. The evidence shows that Russia maintained severe compart- 
.mentation within its espionage apparatus, at least so far as major 
sources of information were concerned. 

Fuchs, May, Greenglass, and— presumably— Pontecorvo all received 

money from the Soviet Union. But the sums involved were relatively 

-small and did not constitute an^mportant inducement to the four spies 

(except that in Greenglass' case money may have been a distinct fac- 

i:or). It was the standard Russian technique to force token cash 

amounts upon espionage agents, for purposes of further corrupting 

them, helping to assure that they could be blackmailed in the future, 

if necessary, and signifying their complete subservience to the Soviet 

Union. Fuchs repeatedly accepted small bills "for expenses" and at 

•one point received $400 ; AHan Nunn May was made to take $500 ; and 

Oreenglass willingly took a total of $850— $150 on the first occasion 

he transmitted secret information. Shortly before his arrest last year, 

-Greenglass was given $5,000 along with detailed instructions to flee 

the United States and go to Russia via Mexico. 

.(c) Motives 

As the Canadian Royal Commission commented in 1946, "Member- 
ship in Communist organizations or a sympathy toward Communist 
ideologies was the primary force" which caused the spies to disregard 
their solemn oaths, to violate the trust reposed in them, and to under- 
take espionage for Soviet Russia. Each of the atomic agents, before 
"World War II began, before he gained access to secret information, 
and as a young man, had been conditioned to what the royal com- 
mission calls "an atmosphere and an ethic of conspiracy." As a secret 
participant in Communist activities, he had been gradually brought 
to a state of mind where the dictates of honor, duty, loyalty, and 
integrity could be overcome. There are also traces of evidence, 
especially in May's case, that the spy helped justify his crimes to 
himself by reasoning thus : Russia is an ally and therefore deserves 
;all possible help; the divulgement of information to the Soviets is 
in the tradition of free interchange of ideas among scientists ; atomic 
■data might promote industrial progress in a comparatively backward 
nation like the Soviet Union ; and so forth. Greenglass may possibly 
liave been influenced by similar thoughts. In other words, the spies — 
during their formative years — had been pulled into a Communist 
apparatus which systematically destroyed their sense of moral values 
and substituted the facile capacity for rationalization found in the 
•€ode of totalitarian dictatorship. 

Just as adherents of such a code sometimes tend to be arrogant and 
humorless, so there may also have been a powerful element of ego 
.gratification in the actions of the atomic spies. Allan Nunn May has 
been described as "a bald, mousy little man" and Klaus Fuchs as 
"slight, shy, retiring, and very studious." Both were bachelors with 
few friends and scant interests outside science and communism. Such 
individuals can perhaps be imagined as relishing the secret knowledge 
that they, despite the seemingly prosaic pattern of their lives, were 
actually trafhcking in information which affected the destiny of na- 
tions. David Greenglass, for his part, smiled while testifying about 
Tthe atomic bomb before a crowded courtroom in New York, and he 



12 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

seemed to enjoy discussing his own insight into weapons data which 
others present regarded as mysterious and lying at the heart of Ameri- 
can security. Bruno Pontecorvo, on the other hand, is recalled as a 
likeable extrovert, fond of telling jokes and socially inclined. 

Dr. James Conant, president of Harvard University, has furnished 
another clue (although in a different context) that may help explain 
the conduct of the spies. In his book, Science and Common Sense, 
he writes : 

Would it be too much to say that in the natural sciences today the given 
sociological environment has made it very easy for even an emotionally unstable 
person to be exact and impartial in his laboratory? The traditions he inherits, 
his instruments, the lilgh degree of specialization, the crowd of witnesses that 
surrounds him, so to speak (if he publishes his results) — these all exert pres- 
sures that make impartiality on matters of his science almost automatic. Let 
him deviate from the rigorous role of impartial experimenter or observer at his 
peril ; he knows all too well what a fool So-and-So made of himself by blindly 
sticking to a set of observations or a theory now clearly recognized as in error. 
But once he leaves the laboratory behind him he can indulge his fancy all he 
pleases and perhaps with all the less restraint because he is now free from the 
imposed discipline of his calling. One would not be surprised, therefore, if, as 
regards matters beyond their professional competence, laboratory workers were 
a little less impartial and self -restrained than other men, though my own observa- 
tions lead me to conclude that as human beings scientific investigators are statis- 
tically distributed over the whole spectrum of human folly and wisdom much 
as other men. (Reprinted by permission of the Yale University Press, New 
Haven, CJonn.) 

The two most important betrayers, Fuchs and Pontecorvo, labored 
under especially powerful emotional pressure to use naive and irra- 
tional standards when thinking about politics; for both had per- 
sonally suffered under fascism and both were refugees from that form 
of dictatorship. It is also noteworthy that both were born and reared 
on the Continent of Europe, the one in Germany and the other in 
Italy. All the four spies are alike in that their educational back- 
grounds reflect an unusual lack of contact with the liberal arts 
disciplines. 

There may possibly be still another partial explanation for the 
warped mentalities of the spies ; namely, an almost diseased yearning 
to remold the world after the image of their own work in physical 
science. The study of subatomic particles, the behavior of neutrons^ 
the nature of fission — an attack upon these problems, however diffi- 
cult, might seem orderly and rationally satisfying compared with 
the intangible complexities of moral and political issues. To an im- 
mature mind such as Fuchs' communism may have had special appeal 
because of a seeming resemblance between the regulated order it would 
impose upon society and regularities in his own laboratory research. 

In any event, it is evident that a lack of moral standards, combined 
with an overweening and childlike arrogance — all induced by ex- 
posure to Communist recruiting techniques during early manhood — • 
characterizes the atomic spy. 



4. The Fuchs Case — Details 

In early 1947, a disturbing headline on the front page of the New 
York Times foreshadowed the breaking of the Fuchs case. "Our 
Atom Secrets Tapped by Soviet, Baruch Believes," this headline 
began. Excerpts from the accompanying story, dated February 3, 

1947, are as follows : 

(By Anthony Leviero) 

Washington, February 3 — Bernard M. Baruch was reliably reported tonight 
to have told the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy that Russia 
evidently had tapped United States atomic-bomb secrets. 

Clear indications of a penetration of some phases of the world's greatest 
secret, it was said, were unwittingly betrayed by Soviet delegates to the United 
Nations. 

In endless discussions within the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission, 
in which the subject of international control was argued in the greatest detail, 
the Russians were said to have used phrases and asked questions that could 
have been based only on inside information, classified secret. 

Mr. Baruch was chief of the United States delegation that implemented 
American control policy in the United Nations Commission. He testified on 
security in a closed session after the committee had heard him in an open 
hearing. The committee is considering the appointment of David E. Lilienthal 
and of his four associates on the United States Atomic Energy Commission. 

Presumably the contact reaching beyond the security screen involved not only 
someone employed by Russia but others sympathetic with its aims * * * 

Some Members of Congress linked the reported Soviet success in getting atomic 
secrets with the Russian spy system broken up in Canada last year. It was 
recalled that Allan Nunn May, British physicist and convicted spy, had obtained 
"general knowledge of the construction of the atomic bomb." * * * 

Three years after this article appeared, Klaus Fuchs was arrested 
in England, and the reason for Mr. Baruch's fears became clean 
Everyone who had concerned himself with the atomic affairs of the 
United States immediately experienced a deep and abiding sense 
of shock. Typical was the reaction of William L. Laurence, science 
writer for the New York Times. Eecalling one of his own wartime 
visits to Los Alamos, N. Mex., he wrote : 

And there in our midst stood Klaus Fuchs. There he was, this spy, standing 
right in the center of what we believed at the time to be the world's greatest 
secret. As he confessed 5 years later, he betrayed to the Soviet the most intimate 
details he learned — as a member of the innermost of inner circles — not only 
about the A-bomb, but about the H-bomb as well. 

He was a trusted member of the theoretical division, the sanctum sanctorunx 
of Los Alamos. This select group, behind doubly and triply locked doors, dis- 
cussed in whispers their ideas about the "superdooper." His associates at Los 
Alamos today sadly admit that Fuchs made it possible for Russia to develop her 
A-bomb at least a year ahead of time. It is my conviction the information made 
it possible for the Russians to attain their goal at least 3 and possibly as much as 
10 years earlier. 

News of Fuchs' arrest disrupted a meeting of the American Physi- 
cal Society underway in New York at the time, and several of the 

13 



14 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

scientists present described the case as "an incredible shock." Dr. J. 
Robert Oppenheimer, wartime Director of the Los Alamos Laboratory, 
said, "We were not a very happy group of people." Later he indicated 
that Fiichs' espionage work might w^ell have advanced the Russian 
project by as much as 1 year. Dr. Hans Bethe, a distinguished nuclear 
physicist and an expert on problems connected with the hydrogen 
bomb, headed the Theoretical Physics Division at wartime Los 
Alamos ; and in that capacity, he was Fuchs' immediate superior. Ex- 
cerpts from an interview with Dr. Bethe, in the February 5, 1950, 
Washington Star, read as follows: 

Dr. Bethe said lie was one of the few people Dr. Fuchs associated with at Los 
Alamos. 

"We were very friendly together," he recalled, "but I didn't know anything 
about his real opinions. 

"If he was a spy, he played his role absolutely perfectly." 

The physicist recalled that when the Los Alamos scientists talked about the 
international exchange of scientific information, "Fuchs was not prominent in 
urging it, nor was he reluctant about it. He was like one of the rest of us. 
He didn't attract any attention." 

F*uchs was one of the members of the atomic team of British scientists who 
worked with the Americans at Los Alamos. He worked under Dr. Bethe in 
the Theoretical Physics Division. "He made an extremely great contribution," 
said Dr. Bethe. "He was one of the most valuable men in my division. One 
of the best theoretical physicists we had." Dr. Bethe said Fuchs "knew every- 
thing we did." Fuchs did not work on the H-bomb which was then being 
considered, "but he could read any of the documents ; he knew the principles," 
said the American scientist. 

"Everybody liked him," Dr. Bethe emphasied, "Everybody thought of him 
just as a quiet, industrious young man who would do everything he could to 
help our project." 

"Fuchs was and is a bachelor. At Los Alamos he was neither aggressively 
social nor a hermit. He would visit at the homes of his fellow scientists on 
an average of twice a week." 

The Wliite House press secretary announced that President Truman 
had known about the Fuchs case before it reached the public but that 
he had not been informed at the time of deciding, a few days earlier, 
to order an intensified hydrogen program. According to another an- 
noimcement, the case was discussed at a Cabinet meeting. The Joint 
Committee on Atomic Energy immediately held four executive ses- 
sions, to canvass Fuchs' activities as then known and heard the testi- 
mony of the Atomic Energy Commissioners; Gen. Leslie R. Groves, 
commanding officer of the wartime Manhattan project; and J. Edgar 
Hoover, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. During 
this period Senator McMahon, in addition to expressing his own con- 
cern about Fuchs, made public an unclassified paragraph taken from 
a top-secret letter written by Dr. Oppenheimer before the case broke. 
Herein the former Los Alamos Scientific Director states : 

* * * it will be clear that members of the United Kingdom mission at Los 
Alamos played an integral part and a very important and responsible part in 
the actual wartime development of atomic weapons. It needs to be emphasized 
that even in those areas of laboratory work in which the mission played no 
direct part it, nevertheless, had complete access to all information and all 
reports. 

On the day of Fuchs' arrest, February 3, 1950, General Groves had 
issued a similar statement: 

Dr. Fuchs was at Los Alamos as a member of the British mission which 
worked at Los Alamos during the development of the atomic bomb. He was 
not the head of the mission nor was he one of the top members, but he was in 
the next rank. He had an important and responsible position. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE, 15 

In this position, he was necessarily afforded access to a great deal of in- 
formation, both as to our development and as to future possibilities and proposed 
developments. Like all other members of the British mission, his responsibility, 
discretion, and loyalty were vouched for by his Government. 

General Groves, like Dr. Oppenheimer, has estimated that Fuchs alone 
mav have set ahead the Soviet project by 1 year. 

The Atomic Energ:y Commission in its statement (also issued on 
February 3, 1950) mentions two facets of the case not emphasized else- 
where — Fnchs' work upon the Oak Ridge gaseous diffusion process 
during late 1943 and 1944 and his visit to the United States in 1947. 
This statement reads: 

Dr. Karl Fuchs was a member of the British Atomic Energy Commission sent 
to this country during the war. He was engaged in project work from December 
1943 until June 1946. He was first engaged in the early work done on the 
gaseous diffusion process in New York City. 

In December 1944 he went to Los Alamos with the British scientific team 
assigned to weapons worlv and in this position had access to a wide area of the 
most vital weapons information. 

Dr. Fuchs returned to England in June 1946, and has not been employed in the 
United States Atomic Energy project since that time. 

In November 1947 he visited the United States as a member of the British 
delegation to participate in discussions on the use of the declassification guide, 
which had been developed during 1945 and 1946 and has been used by Canada 
and the United Kingdom since April 1946. 

The declassification conference, announced November 14, 1947, was limited 
to fields of information shared by the three countries, as a result of their com- 
bined wartime efforts in the development of atomic energy. The conference was 
arranged to insure uniform application of declassification policy by the three 
governments. 

In addition to the declassification conference in Washington, Dr. Fuchs was 
permitted to visit the Argonne National Laboratory at Chicago for discussions 
limited to nonsecret scientific material. 

Tass, the official Soviet news agency, broadcast a dispatch denying 
that Fuchs was known to the Russian Government and declaring that 
the charges against Fuchs were a "rank invention." 

Fuchs' confession. — ^When Fuchs confessed to espionage shortly 
after his arrest and before trial, a transcript was taken. He read the 
transcript when it had been typed, made corrections, and signed his 
name. Likewise, Dr. INIichael Perrin, Deputy Controller, Depart- 
ment of Atomic Energy, Ministry of Supply, interviewed Fuchs re- 
garding the nature of the technical information which he conveyed to 
Russia; and Fuchs' revelations on this score were then carefully 
organized and presented in written form. Copies of both documents — - 
the confession and the interview — were made available by the British 
to the ITnited States Government; and the complete texts were read, 
in executive session, to the Joint Connnittee on Atomic Energy. 

During this committee meeting, it was suggested that each docu- 
ment be made public in toto, so that the people of the free world might 
know the full extent of the espionage which Soviet Russia had suc- 
cessfully accomplished through Fuchs. The suggestion has not yet 
been followed, however. Although the technical data about atomic 
energy set forth in the two documents assuredly reached Russia, there 
is no proof positive — so the argument runs — that every last shred of 
the information was effectively and accurately delivered or that all 
of it has been completely put to use by Soviet authorities. Thus, the 
argument continues, if the confession and interview were to be pub- 
lished, Russia might conceivably gain a few added details which her 
agents who contacted Fuchs had garbled, or which the Soviets had 



16 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

somehow neglected to exploit, or which Fuchs himself thought he 
had given but which actually he overlooked giving. Also involved is 
the possibility, however remote, that Fuchs might have deliberately 
"overconfessed," claiming to have betrayed secrets which actually he 
did not betray — all in hopes that such secrets would be published and 
thereby reach Russia via the daily newspapers. For these and related 
reasons, the confession and interview are still considered as secret. 
At some future time, the full contents will be declassified, along with 
additional papers concerning the case ; and such writings will then at 
least rival the 1946 report of the Canadian Eoyal Commission as a 
documented study in Communist espionage. One excerpt from the 
Fuchs confession, however, is today in the public domain ; for it was 
read to the British court which tried Fuchs on February 10, 1950. 
This excerpt is as follows : 

After my release [from internment] I was asked to help Prof. R. E. Peierls in 
Birmingham on some war work. I accepted it without knowing at tirst what 
the work was but I doubt whether it would have made any difference to- my subse- 
quent action if I had. 

When I learned about the purpose of the work I decided to inform Russia 
and I established contact through a member of the Communist Party. Since 
that time I have had continual contacts with persons completely unknown to me, 
except that they'would give information to the Russians. At this time I had 
•complete confidence in Russian policy and I had no hesitation in giving all the 
information I had. 

I believed the western allies deliberately allowed Germany and Russia to fight 
each other to death. I tried to concentrate on giving information on the result 
of my own work. In the course of this work I began naturally to form bonds 
of personal friendship and I had to conceal from them my own thoughts. 

I used my Marxian philosophy to conceal my thoughts in two separate com- 
partments. One side was the man I wanted to be. I could be free and easy and 
happy with other people without fear of disclosing myself because I knew the 
other compartment would step in if I reached the danger point. It appeared to 
me at the time I had become a free man because I succeeded in the other com- 
partment in establishing myself completely independent of the surrounding forces 
of society. Looking back on it now the best way is to call it a controled schizo- 
phrenia. In the postwar period I had doubts about Russian policy, but eventually 
I came to th» point when I knew I disapproved of many actions of the Russians. 
I still believed Russia would build a new world and that I would take part in it. 
During this time I was not sure I could give all the information I had, however. 
It became more and more evident that the time when Russia would spread in- 
fluence all over Europe was far away. I had to decide whether I could continue 
to hand over information without being sure I was doing right. 

I decided I could not do so. I did not go to one rendezvous because I was ill 
at the time and I decided not to go to the following one. 

Shortly afterward my father told me he might be going to the eastern zone 
of Germany. He disapproved of many things in Eastern Europe and had always 
done so, and he knew that when he went there he would stay there. I could not 
bring myself to stop my father from going there. However, it made me face at 
least some of the facts about myself. I suppose I did not have the courage 
to fight it out myself, and therefore took it out of my hands by informing the 
authorities that my father was going to the eastern zone. 

A few months passed and I become more and more convinced that I had to 
leave Harwell. I was then confronted with the fact that there was evidence 
I had given away information in New York. I at first denied the allegations 
made against me. I decided I would have to leave Harwell, but it became 
clear that in leaving Harwell in these circumstances I would deal a great blow 
to Harwell and all the work I had loved and also leave suspicions against 
friends whom I had loved and people who thought I was their friend. 

I had to I'ealize that the controlled mechanism had warned me of danger to 
myself, I realized that the combination of the three ideas which made me what 
I was was wrong. I realized that every single one was wrong and that there) 
were certain standards of moral behavior that are in you and which you cannot 
disregard. I find that I myself was made by circumstances. I know that I 
cannot go back on that and I know that all I can do now is to try and repair 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 17 

the damage I have done. The first thing is to make sure that Harwell will 

suffer as little as possible. ^ ,. , , -^r, , t ^ ^ 

Before I joined the project most of the English people with whom I liad 
made contact were left-wing and affected by a similar philosophy. Since com- 
ing to Harwell I have met English people of all kinds and I have come to see 
in many of them a deep-rooted firmness which enables them to live a decent life. 

Family hackground.—Fnchs' 76-year-old father, Emil Fuchs, is 
today a professor of theology at Leipzig in the Soviet zone of Ger- 
many. He moved there from Frankfurt, in the American zone, 2 
weeks before his son's arrest. Well known as a religious pacifist, he 
has written a number of books, including two postwar volumes entitled 
"Leonhard Raga, a Prophet of Our Time'' and "Christianity and 
Socialism." The elder Fuchs visited the United States in 1949, mak- 
ing a lecture tour under Quaker auspices. Following the arrest, Pro- 
fessor Fuchs was contacted by telephone and expressed amazement 
at the charges against his son. The father is quoted as saying : 

If he [the son] did it, it was not because of money but only because of his 
idealism and regard for communism. 

Fuchs, senior, further said : 

My son is like a child in everything outside his work— an absolutely childlike, 
good, helpful person, as all his friends can testify, an honest man through and 
through. 

The elder Fuchs also predicted that east-west tension "may relax 
before long" and stated that, while he himself is without political 
affiliations, he has "respect for the Soviet experiment in building a new 
social system." 

Rebecca West, a frequent British writer upon the subjects of espio- 
nage and treason, has this comment : 

To understand Dr. Fuchs we must note that this is no case of the godless 
scientist cradled in materialism. Klaus Emil Fachs came from a pious home. 
His father, Emil Fuchs, was a preacher well known in Germany since the be- 
ginning of the century ; first as a Lutheran pastor and then as a Quaker. He 
was a true mystic, illumined by the love of God, and his courage in earthly affairs 
was superb. He was the first pastor to join the Social Democratic Party, and 
between the wars he was well known as a speaker for a group known as the 
Religious Socialist. He defied the Hohenzollern rale and defied Hitler. He 
was also a loving husband who made a delightful home for his sons tuid daughters. 
But in the opinion of some of those who liked him best he was not very intelligent, 
and his wirtings show that he was intensely egotistical and self-satisfied. His 
virtues are so great that it would be foolish to mention his failings, were it not 
that they have a bearing on his son's career. 

Another writer, Kurt Singer, also observes that Fuchs' father "hated 
war * * *, standing in the shadow of Tolstoy and Gandhi." Mr. 
Singer adds : 

His father's house had emphasized values of brotherhood, duty, international- 
ism, peace, religion, but there was little flexibility or humor in the teaching. 
Life was gray, grim, earnest, boring, and there was no time for carefree joy or 
laughter. 

Klaus Fuchs was the youngest child of the family. His mother, 
who died in 1931, had relatives afflicted with insanity. One sister, 
Elizabeth aged 40, today lives in Cambridge, Mass., with her American 
husband. A brother, George Karl, aged 41, lives in Davos, Switzer- 
land. Another sister, an artist, committed suicide before the war, 
jumping under a subway train in Berlin after an unsuccessful attempt 
to flee Germany and reach Czechoslovakia. All members of the fam- 
ily were persecuted by the Nazis, and the father spent 9 months in a 
German concentration camp. 



18 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Fuchs^ early yeafs. — Klaus Fuchs was born in 1911. Mr. Kurt 
Singer describes Fiiclis' youth as follows : 

The boy Klaus in the provincial town of Russelsheim, near Franlvfurt, was 
strictly forbidden to join the cheering of the soldiers off for the front. Little- 
Klaus began life as the outsider, the observer, the nay-sayer. He had no close 
boyhood friends and except for his three elder brothers and sisters he lived 
in virtual isolation, shielded from the contagion of hysterical patriotism and: 
living in an aseptic world of his lather's making. * * * 

The first war was followed by the annihilating inflation, and the roots of 
nazism flourished in the economic swamp which Germany had become. Even 
in the primary school, politics was an urgent reality, and the pacifist's son Klaus 
was the butt of soldiers' sons, who made fun of the timid, studious boy. The 
troubles of Germany turned his father inward to reflection and religious experi- 
ence. He became a Quaker in 1025. Klaus found no comfort there. Instead, 
it was clear to him that the boys who fought back and did not fear the violent 
little nationalists were the Reds, the Communists. 

Later, at Kiel University, when the Nazis were already a major political force,. 
Klaus joined the Young Communist League. Against his father's Quakerism 
he embraced the doctrine of the class struggle. But he was never a great reader 
of Marxist literature. His field was science and, like so many brilliant mathe- 
maticians and physicists, the experimental and analytical techniques he used so 
scrupulou.sly in the lecture halls and laboratories, he abandoned completely when 
confronted with political argument. He accepted all the worn cliches of Com- 
munist propaganda. Russia was the worker's fatherland; all weapons were 
permissible in the class struggle ; the Communists were fighting for a classless 
society; there was no such thing as absolute truth or objective science; art and 
science were class weapons ; the artist and scientist who believed in communism 
were in uniform and must take part in the world struggle. * * * 

His father urged Klaus to escape from Germany so that he might continue 
his studies abroad, but Klaus remained working in the Communist undergroimd 
movement. It was not activity that appealed to him. The disorganized life, 
being hunted from pillar to post, the need to abandon organized studies, did not 
suit the young student-scientist. 

After a short while he crossed the frontier into France and from there he 
came to Britain. He went to Bristol University, where he si>ecialized in math- 
ematics and physics, and was awarded a doctorate in philosophy. His lodgings 
in Hampton Roads, Redland. Bristol, were the typical student's retreat, untidy, 
strewn with papers and hooks. It was a simple life and a happy one, on the 
whole. Too happy, pe. haps, for Klaus to justify his conscience, for his father 
was in Germany where he had chosen to stay, although American Quakers had 
offered him a chance to get out. Emil Fuchs had replied to them that his place 
was in Germany in the fight against Hitler. Where, then, was the place of his 
son, Klaus? - 

Somehow the student had to justify to his father that his departure from 
Germany was not a flight from fear, but a tactical withdrawal to a place from 
which he could renew his role in the struggle. For the first time he was living 
in conditions of freedom and reasonable stability. Politics in Britain did not 
have the violence or the upsets that he had known in Germany. His fellow 
students were not consumed by bitterness nor deeply involved in doctrinal 
del)ate. Klaus, quiet and sensitive, emotional to an etxent which his poker-faced 
appearance belied, was attractive to certain types of girls. 

Lonely and abstracted, he aroused the maternal impulse, and during his years 
in Britain he was never without female friends who admired and fussed about 
him. At the .same time his studious, ingrown personality did not make him an 
exciting friend ; his conversation did not often go beyond scientific .small talk 
and university gossip. To his friends, Klaus was frankly a bore, but a nice bore. 

Then his field of research widened. In 1938 he went to Edinburgh University, 
where he took his degree as doctor of science. His original researches in atomic 
and nuclear physics were placing him in the forefront of the younger scientists, 
and he published papers in the Proceedings of the Royal Society. The refugee- 
immigrant was making a name for himself in scientific circles. 

Rebecca West depicts Fuchs' early years in this fashion : 

He studied at Leipzig University, and then, when his father was made professor 
of religious science at a teachers' training college in Kiel, moved to the univer- 
sity there. At both places he was deeply involved in the useless and silly and 
violent political activities by which German undergraduates did so much to 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 19 

•destroy the coherence of their own country and the peace of the world. College 
is a grand place for political discussions and a terrible place for political action. 
IVhen college students go in for deeds, not words, cold-blooded adults get hold of 
Tthem and without mercy use them as cat's-paws. 

In Germany at that time the Communists were indulging in a campaign against 
the Social Democratic Party, although they should for obvious reasons have 
joined with the Social Democrats and the various schools of liberals in an 
unbroken popular front against the Nazis. Their secret reason for this was a 
tragic and ridiculous miscalculation ; they wanted Hitler to come to power, in 
the mistaken belief that the Nazi regime would collapse immediately and leave 
•Germany ripe for capture by communism. But they put up a noisy and hypo- 
critical pretense that they were attacking the Social Democratic Party not 
because it was doing too much against the Nazis to suit them but too little. 

Klaus Emil was completely taken in by this fraud, and very active under its 
influence. The political follies committed in the dying Weimar Republic are 
-as unpalatable as yesterday's melted ice cream, but Klaus Emil's career must 
he followed because it led him and us to our present situation. He ran about 
with the high-speed inconsistency characteristic of German political life. He 
joined the students' section of the Social Democratic Party, but left it because 
the party supported a policy of naval rearmament, and he had been brought 
up to be a pacitist. But very soon afterward he joined a society with a mixed 
membership of Social Democrats and liberals, which was in fact a semimilitary 
organization with a taste for street fighting. 

Then he moved to Kiel and went back to the Social Democratic Party, but 
^presently left it again and offered himself as a speaker to the Communist Party 
without joining the party, and at the same time became a member of an organiza- 
tion, much frowned upon by the Social Democrats, in which rebel members of 
their party joined with Communists in the dangerous game of fraternizing with 
those students belonging to the Nazi Party whom they thought "sincere" and 
possible converts. 

This was a nasty organization in which everybody was trying to double-cross 
■everybody else. Then, when the Communists had so greatly weakened the Social 
Democratic Party that it could do nothing to fight the Nazis, Klaus Emil left it 
in disgust at the impotence and joined the Communist Party. The record reads 
like a receipe for mincemeat, but produced nothing wholesome. 

When Hitler came into power in 1933 Klaus Emil was engaged in a complicated 
and futile campus intrigue, in which he showed a great deal of courage, particu- 
larly considering that he was of feeble physique, but little sense and even less 
fastidiousness. When he was in the train on his way to Berlin to attend a secret 
■conference of anti-Nazi students he read of the burning of the Reichstag, saw 
that the hunt of the Communists had begun, took the hammer and sickle badge 
out of his coat, and went into hiding. 

He was presently drawn into the oijerations of a mechanism which was one 
of the most brilliant achievements the Communist Party has to its name. After 
they had helped the Nazis get into power, they worked to get control of the 
organizations set up to care for the refugees from Nazi tyranny in all the coun- 
tries to which they fled. They then saw to it that the Communist refugees 
xeceived preferential treatments, that the non-Communist refugees were exposed 
to Communist propaganda and learned to look on Communists as their bene- 
factors, and that the Communists and non-Communists refugees alike served the 
ends of the Communist Party. 

All this they did with a pickpocket ingenuity, covering up their activities from 
the observation of the non-Communist members of these organizations, who were 
merely furnishing the bulk of the money and the personal service. Klaus Emil 
was told by his party that he must go abroad and finish his studies, because 
when the Nazis had been thrown out the Communists would need members with 
high technical qualifications to build up Soviet Germany ; and he was first sent to 
France and then to England, where he was befriended by the Society for the 
Protection of Science and Leax'ning, a body consisting almost entirely of non- 
'Communists. 

Here, it may also be recalled, Fuchs stated in his confession that, 
before he joined the atomic project, "most of the English people with 
whom I had made contact were left-wing and affected by a similar 
philosophy." This remarks appears to mean that many or most of 
Fuchs' prewar friends in England were, like himself, Commmiists. 



20 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Flicks inte7mment. — In 1940, after World War II had commenced, 
Fuchs was interned as an enemy alien of German nationality, along 
with hundreds of others. He was first sent to the Isle of Man in the 
Irish Sea and later to a detention camp in Canada. The reason for 
internino; nearly all enemy aliens at this time was the crisis produced 
by the German invasion of the Low Countries and France. The 
British Government evidently felt it had best detain the aliens to be 
on the safe side and then release the trustworth}' ones as soon as 
screening could be accomplished. The British Enemy Aliens Tribu- 
nal examined Fuchs in 1941 and released him from detention, although 
the British Government knew that Gestapo reports, which could not 
be verified, had named Fuchs as a member of the Communist Party. 
Sir Hartley Shawcross, Attorney General of Great Britain and Fuchs' 
prosecutor, made this statement at the trial : 

The investigations which were undertaken at that time [1940-41] had not 
shown that lie [Fuchs] had any association whatever with British members 
of the Communist Party, and the investigations all tended to show that he was 
quite immersed in his academic studies and his work as a research worker, and 
was taking no active role in politics. 

Mr. Kurt Singer gives the following version of the 1940-41 period : 

On September 1, 1939, Hitler invaded Poland and the war was on. Klaus 
Fuchs suddenly found that he was, finally, regarded as a German enemy alien. 
A few months later, despite his feelings against Hitler, his antipathy to national- 
ism, his years in British universities, he was told to pack a bag and get ready for 
internment. To him, British tolerance was a sham, as his Communist friends 
had told him. In the show-dowp. the British ruling classes were ruthless, heart- 
less, barefisted — Fascist. The effect of internment on Klaus, the trip as an 
internee in the North Atlantic through waters infested by submarines, was to 
revive the Communist allegiance which had Ijecome quiescent. It also added 
the excitement of martyrdom to his essentially adolescent nature. 

In his Nissen hut, in the Canadian camp, it was not difficult for Klaus to 
imagine that "fate" had pointed out to him the error of his backsliding Ways. 
It is certain that he emerged from internment with his Communist faith renewed. 
Separated from his friends in Britain, surrounded by many of his countrymen 
who were grieved that though anti-Nazi they were treated as enemies. Klaus 
looked again toward the distant, greener fields of the Soviet paradise. 

When he was able to resume his work, his old convictions were firmly fixed. In 
1941, he was released from internment to continue his work, research which was 
'to help in the development of the atom bomb. Although it was known that he 
was communistically inclined, so high was his qualification that he was allowed 
into the most secret consultations. Security officers, after careful screening, had 
reported that there was no danger he would become a foreign agent. 

Meanwhile, British Military Intelligence was I'eceiving reports of an extensive 
German plan to build a new weapon, an atom bomb, which would be decisive in 
the war. 

In occupied Norway, secret underground agents reported the construction of 
strange, heavy-water plants, where hundreds of German scientists had been put 
on special duty. Britisli-Xorwegian commando teams went into action to cause 
as much physical destruction as possible for tlie new German production centers. 

At the same time, a meeting was called in London to lay the plans for an 
answer to German atomic research. To this, the deepest secret of the war, 
Klaus Fuchs, the Conuuunist, was given access. The Communist, now ready to 
conduct espionage for Russia, was given material. to work with. At his trial, 
Mr. Curtis-Bennett, his defense attorney, said: "Anybody who had read any- 
thing about Marxist tlieory must know that a man who is a Communist, whether 
in Germany or Timbuctuo, will react in exactly the same way. When he gets 
information, he will automatically and unhappily put liis allegiance to the Com- 
munist idea first." 

Amazing enough, although it was on record at the Home Oflice that he 
was a member of the German Communist Party, a year after being released from 
interment, Klaus Fuchs was naturalized as a Briton. The superb resistance of 
tiie Red Army to the German invaders, the atmosphere of allied amity, all made " 
it easy for Fuchs to submerge the vestiges which remained of his Biitish 
'"conversion" while accepting its citizenship. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 21 

His work with Prof. Rudolph Peierls, one of the outstaudiug atomic research 
scientists, during 1941, showed that he was clearly a genius in his field, "more a 
candidate for a Nobel peace prize or membership of the Koyal Society," as Mr. 
Curtis-Bennett said at his trial, than a likely traitor. Fuchs lived happily with 
I'rofessor Peierls and his family in a large, detached house in Birmingham. 
The young scientists was a favorite with the children. 

Dr. Klaus Fuchs was now close to the pinnacle of the atomic pyramid : the 
abstruse and most vital theoretical side of the bomb. The information which he 
acquired in this position, as well as his own brilliant discoveries, meant years 
of toil to a nation still young in atomic problems like- Russia. * * * 

Rebecca West adds this : 

It must be en'phasized that at no time did Klaus Emil have grounds for com- 
plaint against Great Britain. lie never found it niggardly, or on tlie side of 
reaction. He was sent to Bristol University, where he got his doctorate of pfiilos- 
ophy in mathematics and physics, and then to Edinburgh University, where he 
got his doctorate of science, and was given a Carnegie research fellowship. When 
war broke out between Great Britain and Germany the aliens tribunal, before 
which he appeared to show cause why he should not be interned, accepted his 
membership in the Communist Party as proof that he was anti-Nazi. 

It is true that in 1940, when the Germans invaded the Low Countries and 
France, he was interned and taken to Canada. But this was the treatment 
which was applied both to refugees who were thought especially suspicious and 
those who were thought specially meritorious, and in his case it was certainly 
a proof that the authorities believed him worthy of being saved from a possible 
German invasion of Britain. 

In 1942 he was allowed to return to Great Britain, where a position was wait- 
ing for him at Glasgow University. Soon afterward he was asked by Professor 
Peierls, a very eminent German-born refugee physicist, to come to Birmingham 
University to help him in some war work. This proved to be atomic research. 
In June of that year he signed the usual security undertaking, and applied for 
.naturalization as a British subject a month later, taking the oath of allegiance 
to the king in due course, while at the same time he made arrangements to 
hand over all particulars of the research to couriers who he knew would deliver 
them to the Soviet authorities. 

Fuchs'' work 07i the gaseous diffusion process. — When Fuchs first 
undertook atomic research in 1942 at Birmingham University, Eng- 
land, he found himself working upon the gaseous diffusion process 
which later evolved into the great Oak Ridge, Tenn., prochiction 
plants. He immediately contacted a Communist acquaintance, who 
])ut him in touch with Soviet intelligence. The acquaintance, accord- 
ing to Sir Hartley Shawcross, Fuchs' prosecutor, was a foreign Com- 
munist "not recognized by the British authorities as a person who 
would be a Connnunist.'' In Britain, from 1942 to December 1943, 
Fuchs met with Russian agents at intervals of 2 or 3 months and 
.transmitted documents, simultaneously receiving instructions for 
future meetings. AX first he merely conveyed papers prepared by 
himself, but soon began to divulge all the information in his pos- 
session. The same contact procedure was followed in the United 
States from December 1943 to August 1944 while Fuchs lived in New 
York City and worked at Columbia University, although the meet- 
ings became somewhat less frequent. 

The famous Smyth report (Atomic Energy for ISIilitary Purposes, 
by Henry D. Smyth) makes known that the scientists working upon 
the gaseous diffusion process at Columbia Universit}^, during the time 
Fuchs participated there, were divided into two groups. One oper- 
ated directly under the Manhattan District and, supervised by Nobel 
prize-winner Harold Urey, was known as the SAM unit. Tiie other 
group was connected with Kellex Corp., which had contracted to 
undertake studies in the gaseous diffusion field. Fuchs was intimately 
connected with both groups. Of the two letters reprinted below, one 



22 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE. 

was written by a scientist who played a prominent and distinguished 
role in the SAM group and the other by a scientist who played a like 
role in the Kellex group. The letters follow : 

The H. K. Ferguson Co., Inc., 
New York 6, N. Y., March 19, 1951. 
Hon. Brien McMahon, 

Chairman, JohU Committee on Atomic Energy, Congress of the United States, 
Washington, D. C. 

Dear Sir : Mr. William L. Borden, executive director of the staff of the Joint 
Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy has requested that I write a letter 
to you giving an estimate of the knowledge of the gaseous diffusion project 
acquired by Klaus Fuchs, with particular emphasis on the period 1943-44 when 
he was a frequent official visitor to the SAM Laboratories at Columbia Uni- 
versity. Recognizing the importance of this infomation to tlie joint committee, 
I am pleased to accede to this request. My recollection of this period is naturally 
somewhat imperfect, but I believe I can reconstitute the situation with a fair 
•degree of accuracy. 

I should like to emphasize that although Fuchs became cognizant of a great 
many details of the gaseous diffusion project as developed in this country by 
the SAM Columbia group, the Kellex Corp., and many others, there is absolutely 
no question of impropriety in the disclosure of information by the many Amer- 
icans involved. Fuchs was a fully accredited member of a British mission, 
whose assignment was to assist the American scientists and engineers working 
on the various phases of the atom bomb project. The mission was part of the 
wartime British-American cooperation on the atom bomb, the history of which 
is doubtless familiar to you. In every case discussions with the British mis- 
sion were held within restricted areas, admission to whicli required the presenta- 
tion of a visitor pass issued by the security division of the Manhattan District, 
which specified the people to be contacted, the topics of conversation, and limited 
the visit to specific dates. 

Prior to Fuchs' arrival in this country, toward the end of 1943, he was chief 
theoretical aide to Professor Peierls, of Birmingham, who was one of the lead- 
ing spirits in the entire British Tuballoy project and also an ardent advocate of 
the gaseous diffusion process. Fuclis' name appeared on theoretical papers on 
the gaseous diffusion process to my certain knowledge in 1942, and I believe as 
early as 1941. Because of visits to this country of Peierls and others in early 
1942, when the relative merits of the Birmingham and Columbia versions of the 
diffusion process were discussed at length, and the established (though ineffi- 
cient) channels of Anglo-American interchange of technical information, it is 
■clear that before Fuchs' arrival he had good knowledge of the American plans 
for the gaseous diffusion plant. It is important to bear in mind that because 
of Fuchs' grasp of the theoretical principles involved, which interrelate the 
process variables so that the choice of a few determines the remainder within 
narrow limits, he would be able to reconstitute our whole program from only 
scattered pieces of information. Thus even before his arrival in New York when 
he obtained full and detailed information, he could have transmitted a very 
;good outline of the American gaseous diffusion project. 

Another point, which may be of some interest, is that compartmentation of 
information, which in this country isolated workers in tlie individual projects 
(Plutonium project, calutron project, gaseous diffusion project, atomic weapons 
project, etc., etc.) from knowledge of other projects, was not followed in Britain. 
The British theoretical physicists in particular worked on all phases of the 
project. By the end of 1943, Fuchs undoubtedly had an over-all picture of the 
Manhattan District operations comparable to that of the most responsible mem- 
l)ers of the American project. 

During 1943 Fuchs (in England) worked on the theory of the control of the 
igaseous diffusion plant. He was principally interested in two questions. The 
first was how the fiow of gaseous uranium hexafluoride in the plant could be 
made to conform on the average to process specifications ; the second was the 
■effect on the plant production of fluctuations in the flow about the average flow 
Tate. He made substantial contributions on both problems. Toward the end 
of 1943, the question of the proper method of control of the gaseous diffusion 
plant was being actively discussed. Work on the control problem was being 
•carried out by the SAM Theoretical Division (under my direction) and by a 
section of the Kellex Corp. (under Manson Benedict) . The future operating com- 
pany. Carbide & Carbon Chemicals Corp. was also interested. Fuchs arrived in 
New York — I believe it was on December 7 — and a series of meetings were set 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 23 

up, to be held alternatively at the Kellex Corp. offices in the Woolworth Building 
and at the SAM Laboratories in the Nash Building, wherein the two American 
groups and the British (Peierls and Fuchs) would compare results. 

After several meetings in December a division of work was adopted, Fuchs' 
part of which was to calculate numerically for the plant being actually designed, 
the effects of fluctuations on production rate. All phases of the control problem 
depend on the intimate details of plant construction, and in the course of his 
assigned task Fuchs obtained from the Kellex Corp. complete knowledge of the 
process design of the K-25 plant. 

It does not necessarily follow from, his assignment that he would be familiar 
also with the mechanical design of K-25 or with the method of fabrication of 
the diffusion barrier. However, he was present at meetings. where both these 
items and, in addition, schedules for barrier production, equipment delivery, 
and plant construction were discussed. For example, on December 22 he was 
present at a meeting at Kellex presided over by General Groves, attended also 
by Conant, Tolman, Colonel (now General) Nichols, a Columbia contingent 
headed by Urey, a Kellex contingent headed by Keith, Felbeck (Carbon & Car- 
bide) ; and a British contingent consisting (besides Fuchs) of Akers, Simon, 
Curtin, I'eierls, and Pfeils. The entire question of the feasibility of the K-25 
program was reviewed at this meeting — going down the line of pumps, valves, 
control, barriers, and so forth. At another meeting on December 28, Peierls 
and Fuchs conferred with SAM representatives on diffuser designs. On Decem- 
ber 29 he attended a meeting at Kellex on the mechanical design of diffusers. 
On January 5, 1944, another meeting was held at Kellex largely on barriers, again 
with Groves as chairman, Conant, representatives from Columbia and Kellex, 
and a British contingent. I believe Fuchs was present : The minutes of the 
meeting will confirm this. At this meeting the status of bari-ier materials was 
reviewed with special reference to meeting plant schedules. 

Fuchs continued active work on the control of the K-25 plant through January, 
February, and March of 1944. For example, on March 31, 1944, he reported 
at SAM on the results of his calculations. During this period much disctission 
of barriers took place, both theoretical and practical, and Fuchs must have 
known of the major polic.v decisions made at that time, particularly as the 
physical pi-operties of the barrier entered into his calculations. 

On May 1, 1944, I left SAM to accept another position and consequently have 
no knowledge of Fuchs' activities on the gaseous diffusion project after that 
date. However, between December 1943, when he arrived and at least until 
April 1944, he was a frequent visitor at both Kellex and SAM Laboratories, 
and participated in discussions covering a wide range of practical and theoretical 
problems. My knowledge and conviction is that during this period he had 
intimate and detailed knowledge of all phases of the design of the K-25 plant, 
including methods of fabricating the barrier, the assembly of the difCuser, and 
the planned production rate. 

Looking back on this period in the light of recent disclosures of Fuchs' 
activities as a Russian agent, he possessed to an unusual degree the attributes 
of an efficient spy : Knowledge of the general scope of the work, access to 
detailed information, and an appreciation of its significance. In my opinion 
his contribution to Soviet progress in the production of atomic weapons, and 
the corresponding damage to the security of the United States and to world 
peace, was enoromus ; one would have to search diligently in the records of 
treason to find a case with more far-reaching and permanent effects. 

Compared to these consequences, Fuchs' betrayal of the personal integrity 
of scientists is of minor importance. Nevertheless, it is a blow which ail 
scientists bittei-ly resent. For this, and many other reasons, distasteful as 
it may be to rake over this sordid affair, you may be assured of my cooperation 
in your investigation. 

Very truly yours, 

Karl Cohen, 
Director, Atomic Energy Division. 



Hydrocarbon Research, Inc.. 
New York €, N. Y., March 19, 1951. 
Hon. Brien McMahon, 

United States Senate, Washington, D. C. 
Dear Sir : I am happy to comply with the request of Mr. William L. Borden 
that I send you a brief, unclassified account of the extent of knowledge regarding 
the K-25 gaseous diffusion plant for concentrating U-235 obtained by Dr. Klaus 
81095 — 51 3 



24 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Fuchs during the period in which he assisted the Kellex Corp., the designers of 
this plant. 

I was employed by the Kellex Corp. from 1943 to 1946 as head of the process 
development division. I was present at a number of the meetings and conferences 
authorized by the Manhattan District which were attended by Dr. Fuchs and 
other British scientists. My impression of the extent of Dr. Fuchs' knowledge 
regarding the diffusion plant is based on my recollection of the topics discussed 
at these meetings and of the contents of reports prepared by Dr. Fuchs. 

Prior to his visit to this country in 1943, Dr. Fuchs was a member of the 
group of British scientists and engineers who had been designing a diffusion 
plant for construction in England. During this work in England Dr. Fuchs 
made important contributions to the theory of the diffusion process. He wrote 
a number of excellent reiwrts which were of value to us at Kellex ; one report 
on the theory of the control of a diffusion cascade was outstanding for its 
originality and usefulness. 

In 1943 the British decided not to build a diffusion plant of their own. 
The leading engineers and scientists who had been working on the British plant, 
including Dr. Fuchs, were sent to the United States to be of assistance in the 
design of the American diffusion plant. 

In December 1943, at the request of the Manhattan District, a series of 
meetings were held at the offices of the Kellex Corp. with the British group, 
including Dr. Fuchs, to acquaint them with the general features of the American 
diffusion plant and to obtain the advice, suggestions, and criticism of the British 
group. Another purpose of these meetings was to determine in what way the 
British could be of more specific assistance in the design of the plant. 

It became apparent that the British workers could be of little help in the 
mechanical engineering of the plant, because the plans for the American plant 
were so different from those the British had intended to use. On the other 
hand, it was clear that the British workers could be of assistance in 
examining theoretical problems connected with the diffusion plant, because these 
were substantially the same in the British and American plants. 

Consequently, a group of three British physicists, Dr. R. E. Peierls, Dr. Fuchs, 
and Mr. Skyrme, remained in New York to collaborate with the staff of the 
Kellex Corp. and the SAM laboratories in investigating theoretical design prob- 
lems. For a short time this group was headed by Dr. Peierls, but when Dr. 
Peierls left New York, Dr. Fuchs took charge of the work. Dr, Fuchs remained 
during December 1943 and the early part of 1944. 

The main problems investigated by the British gi'oup were — 

(1) The control of the American diffusion plant. 

(2) The efficiency of alternative arrangements of diffusion stages for sepa- 
rating iiranium isotopes. 

(3) The amount of separating efficiency lost when air leaked into the diffusion 
plant. 

(4) The amount of separating efficiency lost when flow through the plant was 
disturbed at periodic intervals. 

None of these investigations was vital to the success of the plant, but it was 
helpful to have this work done by the British group. 

To do this work, the British group, and Dr. Fuchs, needed to have specific 
knowledge of the size and number of stages in the K-25 plant, the temperatures 
and pressures at which the stages operated, and the purity and amount of U-235 
which the plant was being designed to produce. In addition, the general meet- 
ings Dr. Fuchs attended when he first came to the country undoubtedly ac- 
quainted him with the types of diffusion barrier which were being developed, and 
with the types of mechanical equipment, such as pumps, seals, valves and coolers, 
which were to be used in the plant. 

Dr. Fuchs' contact with the diffusion process ended long before the plant went 
into operation in 1945, so that it is unlikely that he knew the U-235 production 
rate of the actual plant, and he may not have known which of the various types 
of barriers under development were actually used. Nevertheless, the compre- 
hensive knowledge of the development status of the diffusion process early in 
1944 which Dr. Fuchs acquired through these contacts with the Kellex Corp., 
all duly authorized by the Manhattan District, must have been of great value to 
him in his treasonable enterprise. Although Fuchs did not have detailed plans 
and specifications of the plant, he was in possession of information which, if 
transmitted to the Russians, would have saved them years of development effort. 
Very truly yours, 

Manson Benedict. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 25 

Los Alamos 

The extremely sensitive data to which Fuchs had access at Los 
Alamos, from August 1944 until June 1946, was highlighted in every 
statement made about him at the time of his arrest. To cite a further 
example, Senator McMahon said : 

there can be no doubt * * * as to the general extent of Fuchs' information 
and knowledge both as to atomic weapons and so-called hydrogen bombs. 

One wife of a Los Alamos scientist is quoted as recalling Fuchs 
thus: "A very quiet, rather sweet, reticent little guy." Another 
describes him as "a mild, unobtrusive, pleasant little man who never 
talked politics." Along with British friends he made one trip to 
Mexico. Harry Gold served as espionage courier for Fuchs dur- 
ing most of the Los Alamos period, contacting him two or three 
times at Santa Fe, N. M. ; but during February 1945, Fuchs met 
once with a Russian official in Boston. Many of the atomic scientists 
were accompanied by security officers wherever they went, for pur- 
poses of assuring their safety. Fuchs did not happen to be among 
those so protected. 

After returning to England in mid-1946, he became head of the 
Theoretical Physics Division at Harwell Laboratory and continued 
passing information to Soviet agents. Harry Gold has testified to 
the arrangements made for Fuchs' first meeting in Britain. De- 
scribing a conversation with Yakovlev, his Russian superior in New 
York, Gold said : 

The final item I reported to Yakovlev were the details of an arrangement 
which Fuchs and I had arrived at, which arrangement concerned the means 
by which someone would get in touch with Fuchs when he returned to England. 
The exact details were these : Beginning on the first Saturday of every month 
after it had been determined that Fuchs had returned to England, at a stop on 
the British subway, underground in London called Paddington Crescent, pos- 
sibly Teddington Crescent, 8 p. m., Fuchs was to be on the street at the under- 
ground stop, the street level. He was to be carrying five books bound with 
strings and supported by two fingers of one hand ; he was to be carrying two 
books in another hand. His contact, whoever that would be, was to be carry- 
ing a copy of a Bennett Cerf book, Stop Me If You Have Heard This. 

Referring to the same conversation with Yakovlev, Harry Gold also 
testified as follows: 

I reported to Yakovlev that Fuchs had told me about being present at the first 
atomic explosion at Alamogordo, N. Mex. Fuchs had said that the flash had 
been visible some 200 miles away. I told Yakovlev that Fuchs was very 
worried about one matter : This concerned the fact that the British had gotten 
to Kiel, Germany, ahead of the Nazis — ahead of the Russians, and Fuchs was 
very worried, very much concerned over whether the British Intelligence might 
not discover the Gestapo dossier upon him. I told Yakovlev that Fuchs had 
said that he, Fuchs that is, had been the leader of the student group, the German 
student group at the University of Kiel and had fought the Nazis, Nazi storm 
troopers in the streets of Kiel. Fuchs had said that there was a very complete 
dossier by the Gestapo upon him and he was greatly troubled by the fact that 
should the British Intelligence come upon it they would become aware of his 
very strong Communist background and ties. 

Speaking of Fuchs' departure from the United States and his work 
at Harwell, Kurt Singer comments : 

In 1946, Dr. Klaus Fuchs returned to Britain, carrying the prestige of his 
considerable achievement in the atomic project. He was given the high post of 
head of the theoretical physics division of the Atomic Energy Establishment at 
Harwell. He was a scientist's scientist, devoted to the welfare of his colleagues, 
a steady contributor to the Proceedings of the Physical Society and of the 
Royal Society. He apportioned jobs, passed on the qualifications of applicants. 



26 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

selected people for promotion. As chairman of the StafE Association Committee 
at Harwell, he presided over matters affecting personnel with a fine impar- 
tiality, liked by his employers and associates. * * * 

He participated in Harwell's social life, a little stuffily, unbending, awkwardly, 
but tlien genius has its mannerisms. It is nonsense to assume that his un- 
marked, repressed personality was a pose to assist his espionage. It was, how- 
ever, a very useful weapon in the Soviet network. Fuchs, lonely, engrossed, 
inhibited, was actually alive only to a very small circle of intimates, who accepted 
the "flatness" as the hallmark of so many great scientists. 

19Ji!r visit 

Fuchs visited America in 19iT to attend a declassification confer- 
ence as between the United States, Britain, and Canada. This con- 
ference related to information held in common by the three countries 
as a result of their wartime collaboration. The question before the 
conference was what security classification should be assigned such 
commonly held information and whether or not any of it could prop- 
erly be made public. Dr. Eobert F. Bacher, a leading physicist at 
wartime Los Alamos, later one of the original Atomic Energy Com- 
missioners, and now chairman of the physics department of the Cali- 
fornia Institute of Technology, wrote the following letter in regard 
to Fuchs and the 1947 declassification conference : 

February 11, 1950. 
Senator Brien McMahon, 

Chairman, Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, 

Senate Office Building, Washington, D. C. 

Dear Senator McMahon : As you have requested through Mr. Willam Borden, 
I am writing you to give you a brief summary of the joint declassification meetings 
which were held with representatives of the United Kingdom and Canada in 
Washington in November 1947 and to give you my recollection of tlie participation 
in those meetings of Dr. Klaus Fuchs who was one of the United Kingdom 
representatives. 

Since I have no records available to me in Pasadena, I have refreshed my mem- 
ory somewhat by talking on the telephone with representatives of the Atomic 
Energy Commission Secretariat who referred to minutes of these meetings. Due 
to the nature of the material, it was possible to refresh my memory only in part 
on the telephone. I found, however, that I seem to recall the meetings rather 
well and the following information is the best of my recollection of these 
meetings. 

The classification conferences were held in Washington on Friday, November 
14, 1947, and Saturday and Sunday, November 15 and 16. I attended these 
meetings as a guest in order that I might be able to assure the other members 
of the Commission directly that the terms of reference were carefully followed. 
I do not believe that I stayed through each of the meetings but according to 
the minutes and also according to my recollection I attended at least a part of 
each session. 

The purpose of these declassification conferences was to discuss the interpre- 
tation of the declassification guide which all parties were trying to follow. It 
had become apparent that different interpretations of the guide might be made 
and it was essential to have a uniform interpretation if security of classified 
information was to be achieved. At the first meeting Dr. Warren Johnson, of 
the University of Chicago, acted as chairman and I gave a brief word of welcome 
and said what we hoped could be achieved along the lines of uniform classi- 
cation policy as stated above. 

On Friday, November 14, and Saturday, November 15, the discussions were 
mostly on general questions. On Sunday, November 16, meetings were held of 
two subcommittees. One of these subcommittees discussed questions of classi- 
fication pertaining to weapons and associated work at Los Alamos. Since it was 
the policy in these discussions as stated in the terms of reference that "no 
classified information not already known to all parties concerned would be dis- 
cussed," talks on weapons were attended only by representatives of the United 
Kingdom and the United States. To the best of my recollection. I attended this 
session in full. During the general sessions on November 14 and 15 as well 
as during the subcommittee sessions on November 16, I believe that the terms 
of reference were carefully followed. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 27 

To the best of my recollection, Dr. Fuchs was present at the subcommittee 
meeting at which topics associated with Los Alamos were discussed. I am quite 
sure, however, that no information was discussed which was not known to him 
already from his work at Los Alamos. In fact, the nature of these discussions 
was so general and so much concerned with the interpretation of words and 
phrases, that the informational content was negligibly small compared to that 
which any worker would have assimilated in a short period at Los Alamos. 

I have refreshed my memory on the above subcommittee meeting by learning 
as well as I could over the telephone the specific topics which were discussed. 
The nature of these specific topics confirms my recollection and also the state- 
ments made above. 

It is my opinion that the agreement achieved in the discussion of the declassi- 
fication guide and its intepretation, added materially to the security of informa- 
tion which we were trying to keep classified. Furthermore, I believe that these 
objectives were achieved strictly within the bounds of the terms of reference of 
those talks, which called for no discussion of information which had previously 
not been available to the parties concerned. 

I hope that this brief summary may be of use to you. If I may help you 
further in any way, I shall be very happy to do so. 
Sincerely yours, 

Robert F. Bacher. 

"\Miile in the United States during 1947, Fuclis also paid a visit 
to the Argonne National Laboratory (successor to the Chicago "Met 
Lab'- ) . The eminent scientific director of that laboratory, Dr. Walter 
H. Zinn, describes this visit in the following letter : 

Argonne National Laboratory, 

Chicago, III., February 6, 1950. 
Hon. Brien McMahon, 

Chainnan. Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, 
Senate Office Building, Washington, D. C. 

Dear Senator McMahon : In reply to the request made to me by Mr. Borden 
I am setting forth herein the details of Dr. K. Fuchs' visit to the Argonne 
National Laboratory in 1947. The visitor's pass at the laboratory shows that 
this gentleman arrived at the pass desk at 2 : 50 p. m., November 28, 1947, and 
departed from the same point at 4 p. m. The total duration of his visit therefore 
was 1 hour and 10 minutes. 

In accordance with established procedure, access to the laboratory was not 
given to this visitor without previous permission and instruction by the Se- 
curity Department of the Chicago oflice of the AEC. This was done by the 
transmittal to the director of the laboratory of three teletypes from AEC 
Washington to AEC Chicago concerning this visit. Two excerpts, as follows, 
from these teletypes give their essential content : 

"Skinner and Fuchs are cleared to discuss unclassified and declassified aspects 
of neutron spectroscopy. No access to restricted data is to be afforded." 

"Drs. H. W. B. Skinner and Fuchs, British scientists, who will visit your area 
are cleared to inspect the crystal spectrometer and mechanical velocity selector." 

Again, in accordance with established procedure, I took the necessary steps to 
insure that the visit of Dr. Fuchs was concerned only with unclassified or de- 
classified matters. This meant that he was conducted by a member of the 
security guard force from the pass gate to the director's ofls'ce and that his pass 
was countersigned by the director or other officer of the laboratory who would 
have knowledge of the basis on which the visit was arranged. For this particu- 
lar visit in November 1947 I cannot remember whether or not I personally con- 
ducted the visitor to the instruments which he had been cleared to see or 
whether or not this was delegated to a member of the scientific staff. I counter- 
signed his i>ass. Tlie presumption is fairly strong that I personally conducted 
him since these instruments had been constructed and used by me and the group 
working with me. 

The crystal spectrometer referred to was completely described in the Physical 
Review, volume 71, page 752, June 1, 1947, in an article by W. H. Zinn. The 
mechanical velocity selector was described completely in an article in the 
Physical Review, volume 72, page 585, October 1, 1947, by T. Brill and H. V. 
Lichtenberger. 



28 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

It is quite likely that upon arriving at the place where these instruments 
were in use, the scientists working on them participated in the conversation 
concerning these devices. Inquiry so far has not revealed who these scientists 
may have been, but it is also quite possible that this would be a difficult matter 
to determine since these instruments have been used from time to time by a 
consideralile number of persons, some of whom are no longer at the laboratory. 
In any case, I am positive that precautions were taken to guarantee that the visit 
concerned only the unclassified matters for which clearance had been granted 
from Washington. 
Yours truly, 

"W. H. ZiNN, Director. 

About the time of Fuclis' 1947 visit to the United States, he began 
to entertain doubts about the wisdom of Russia's policy. Shortly 
before his arrest he used sickness as an excuse to miss one scheduled 
appointment with a Soviet contact man, and he may also have held 
back some information which, except for these doubts, he would have 
transmitted. Kurt Singer comments : 

At the peak of his career. Dr. Fuchs examined his course and decided that 
there was the possibility of a doubt creeping into his faith in communism : the sin 
of pride before the party in the Communist book of rules and regulations. 

As a pledge of his subservience, Fuchs accepted a few hundred pounds pay- 
ment from the Soviet agent. There had never been a road back for Fuchs ; this 
was his way of demonstrating that he did not want one. 

The fact is, however, that at this same time the first real doubts were creeping 
into his mind. He confessed later : "In the postwar period I began to have 
doubts about the Russian policy. During this time I was not sure I could go on 
giving information I had." 

The arrest 

Prime Minister Attlee has summarized the circumstances under 
which Fuchs came to be arrested. On March 6, 1950, he advised the 
British House of Commons that in the fall of 1949 a "tip" was received 
from the United States authorities and that an investigation disclosed 
Fuchs' true role as a spy. The Prime Minister's entire statement on 
this occasion is as follows: 

I want to say one word about a matter which has caused a good deal of writing 
in the press, and that is the Fuchs case. It is a most deplorable and unfortunate 
incident. Here we had a refugee from Nazi tyranny, hospitably entertained, 
who was secretly working against the safety of this countiy. I say "secretly" 
because there is a great deal of loose talk in the press suggesting inefficiency on 
the part of the security services. I entirely deny that. Not long after this 
man came into this country — that was in 1933 — it was said that he was a Com- 
munist. The source of that information was the Gestapo. At that time the 
Gestapo accused everybody of being a Communist. Wlien the matter was looked 
into there was no support for it whatever. And from that time onward there 
yvas no support. A proper watch was kept at intervals. He was a brilliant 
scientist. He was taken on in 1941 for special work by the ministi'y of aircraft 
production. He was transferred to the department of scientific and industrial re- 
search. He went to America. He came back to Harwell. On all those occasions 
all the proper inquiries were made and there was nothing to be brought against 
him. His intimate friends never had any suspicion. The universities for which 
he worked had the highest opinion of his work and of his character. 

In the autumn of last year information came from the United States suggesting 
there had been some leakage while the British mission, of which Fuchs was a 
member, was in the United States. This information did not point to any indi- 
vidual. The security services got to work with great energy and were, as> the 
House knows, successful. I take full responsibility for tlie efficiency of the 
security services and I am satisfied that, unless we had here the kind of secret 
police they have in totalitarian countries, and employed their methods, which 
are reprobated rightly by everyone in this country, there was no means by which 
WG could have found out about this man. 

I do not think there is anything that can cast the slightest slur on the security 
services ; indeed, I tliink they acted promptly and effectively as soon as there was 
any line which they could follow. I say that because it is very easy when a thing 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 29 

like this occurs — it was an appalling thing to have hapi)ened — to make assertions. 
I do not think that any blame for what occurred attaches either to the Govern- 
ment of the right hon. Gentleman opposite or to this Government or to any of 
the oflficials. I think we had here quite an extraordinary and exceptional case. 
I mention that because of the attacks that have been made. 

Three months before the arrest Fuchs was promoted to a higher 
position at Harwell Laboratory in order to prevent him from sus- 
pecting that he might be under investigation. He was named one 
of the 25 senior scientific officers, whereas previously he had been a 
deputy officer. His promotion involved a salary increase from $4,480 
to $5,040 per year. During this period he lived on the Harwell site 
itself in a small prefabricated house. 

Both shortly before and after the arrest British security officials 
conferred with Fuchs. At first admitting nothing, he suddenly 
decided to tell everything. Rebecca West has discussed the statement 
he prepared, as follows : 

Some measure of his oddity is given by the opening of the statement he made 
to the security officers on his detention. He began by giving them the date of 
liis birth and assuring them that he had had "a very liappy cliildhood." Now, 
British policemen seem much milder than American policemen and are certainly 
more stolid. But it is unlikely that they looked at Dr. Fuchs in a manner sug- 
gesting that it would take a weight off their mind if they could learn that he had 
not been unhappy when he was a small boy. It is unlikely, too, that most people, 
charged with a crime involving long-standing and heartless fraud and certain to 
cause hideous consequences, would fail to recognize that society might liave 
other anxieties which it would like to settle first. This is a strange bird * * *_ 

Here was one of the most gifted scientists of our time, with power to be part 
creator of lethal weapons transcending all tlie previous malice of mankind, and 
to be as dangerous in liis work as a single-handed traitor, because of his rare and 
exalted gifts. And his statement reads like the ramblings of an exceptionally 
silly boy of 16. 

He was 38 years old. He was suspected of an appalling crime. He began by 
assuring the special brancli officers of the happiness of his childhood, and went 
on to relate how brave he had been when he was a boy. It appeared that there 
was once a celebration at his school on the anniversary of the foundation of the 
Weimar republic ; and as a protest many of the pupils arrived wearing the 
imperial badge, so he had put on the republican badge, and the other children 
had torn it off. 

He recalled that ; and he recalled, in the minutest detail, all his foolish and 
futile political activities at his universities. And in the course of this merciless 
recapitulation, which must have made the security officers groan aloud, he 
betrayed an unusual degree of political ignorance. 

Every student of contemporary history knows that Communist strategy in 
Germany during the early thirties aimed at splitting the Popular Front and 
letting Hitler in so that he could be got out again by a revolution which the 
Communists would turn to their profit. Indeed, it is so well known that it would 
be virtually impossible for a non-Communist to write of those times without 
taking it as established historical fact, or for a Communist to write of them 
without attempting to disprove that assumption. But it is plain that Klaus Emil 
had never even heard of this interpretation of the events in which he took part. 
He wrote of them as naively as if he were still 20 and they had never been 
discussed. 

Some of these tedious fatuities of his youth he recounted to the security 
officers for the sake of their moral, rather than their political, implications : 
and that, too was a curious self-betrayal. Throughout the statement Klaus Emil 
expressed himself with extreme egotism and vanity. Even if we take into 
account the strong strain of self-satisfaction running through his father's writ- 
ings, and remember also that he had spent all of his childhood in minor 
industrial towns where his father was the unchallenged intellectual and moral 
leader, his sense of being an elect being must be pronounced extraordinary, 
particularly iu a man of 38. 

But it worried him, when what he had been doing was brought out into the 
open and he had to discuss it, that such a perfect character as his own should 
have been capable of practicing the continued deception, which, as he admits 



30 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Avith an air of being fair-minded, had been a part of his treachery. He ex- 
plained to the security officers at enormous length that this was all due to a 
mildly dirty trick he had played on some Nazi students during his campus 
intrigue in 1933. He had, not given them fair warning that he was going to 
publish an attack on them for a course of action which, had they received such 
a warning, they might have abandoned. He had omitted to resolve tliis point 
in his mind, he said, and so he had set up a mental process whicli he described 
as "controlled schizophrenia." It was, in fact, plain lying and cheating, but 
these were too realistic terms to be used in the "Cloud-Cuckoo-Land" where he 
had made his home. 

There was no limit to his sense that power should be his. At one point in his 
statement he rebuked the British authorities for not letting the internees in the 
Canadian camp read newspapers. He ignored the practical reason for this, 
which was the difficulty of keeping discipline and protecting the non-Nazi inter- 
nees from the Nazi internees, had the news continued to be bad over any 
length of time. Gravely he complained tliat it had prevented him from learning 
the truth about the real character of the British ; and it is implied that had he 
known more about them he might liave spared them, might not have aided their 
enemies to drop A-bombs on them. Not for a moment did it cross liis mind that 
perhaps it was not for him to smite them or to spare tliem. 

The trial 

A hearing was held, on February 10, 1950, at Bow Street Court, 
London, and the following is a summary that appeared in next day's 
New York Times : 

[New York Times, Saturday, February 11, 1950] 
Testimony at Fuchs' Hearing in London 

London, February 10. — Following is a detailed record of the testimony of three 
witnesses — Wing Commander Henry Arnold, retired security officer at the 
Ministry of Supply's atomic plant at Harwell ; William J. Scardon, Harwell 
security officer ; and Michael Perrin, atomic scientist — at today's hearing in the 
case against Dr. Klaus Fuchs : 

Commander Arnold, the first witness against Dr. Fuchs, said he had "impressed 
security regulations on Dr. Fuchs" and that he thought at one time that Dr. Fuchs 
was "an exceptionally securit.y-conscious person." 

T. Christmas Humphreys, the prosecutor, opened his interrogation of Com- 
mander Arnold by asking him point-blank : 

"Did you ask Dr. Fuchs if he had disposed of information to Russia?" 

"Yes," Commander Arnold replied. 

"Did he tell you the technical information he disclosed?" 

"In a broad sense," Commander Arnold replied. 

"Was it technical information of the greatest value to Russia? 

"Definitely." * * * 

Then Magistrate Sir Laurence Dunne broke in to say that this information 
was so secret that "it will not be taken up at this point." He added that the 
director of the Harwell atomic-reseai-ch laboratory would be called to give testi- 
mony "on that point." 

guided by conscience 

During examination of Mr. Scardon, who said he had had a great many inter- 
views with Dr. Fuchs, the following exchanges occurred with the prosecutor : 

"Did the conversaticm touch upon his oath of allegiance?" 

"Yes." 

"What did he say al)0ut it?" 

"He said he regarded his oath of allegiance, taken upon naturalization in 1942,. 
as a serious matter, but he claimed the freedom to act in accordance with his 
conscience should circumstances arise in this country comparable to those which 
existed in Germany in 19o2. 

"He said he would feel free to act on the loyalty which he owed to humanity 
generally." 

"At a later stage did you make it clear that you suspected him of passing in- 
formation to the Soviet authorities?" 

"Yes." 

"What was his first reaction?" 

"He seemed surprised and said, 'I don't think so.' " 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 31 

"Did you make it clear to him tliat you were in possession of precise information 
on this matter?" 

"Yes." 

"What did he say?" 

"He again replied, 'I do not thinl? so.' I told him that that was an ambiguous 
reply and he said, 'I do not understand. Perhaps you will tell me what the 
evidence is. I have not done any such thing.' " 

"Did that remain his attitude for some time?" 

"Yes." 

"On the grounds of his father's presence in Leipzig?" 

"That is so." 

"On January 24 did you see Dr. Fuchs at his own request at his private address 
in Harwell?" 

"Ye.s." 

"What did you say to him?" 

"I said, 'you aslied to see me and here I am.' He replied, 'Yes, it is rather up 
to me now.' " 

"Did he once again tell you the story of his life but with no admission of these 
offenses?" 

"Yes." 

"What seemed to be his mental condition?" 

"He was under considerable mental stress." 

"What did you say to him?". 

'•I suggested that he should unburden his mind and clear his conscience by 
telling me the full story. It seemed to me that whereas he had told a long story 
providing a motive for his acts he had told me nothing about the acts themselves." 

"What did he say to that?" 

DECIDES TO SPEAK OUT 

"He said, "I will never be persuaded by you to tallv.' There was then an inter- 
val for lunch and after lunch Dr. Fuchs said to me suddenly and voluntarily that 
he had decided it would be in the best interests to answer questions. He added 
that he had a clear conscience at present, but was very worried about the effect 
of his behavior upon the friendships which he had contracted at Hai-well." 

"Will you summarize what he said in answer to your questions?" 

'•He said he was engaged in espionage from the middle of 1942 until about a 
year ago. Tliere was a continuous passing of information relating to atomic 
energy at irregular l)ut frequent meetings. This illegal association commenced 
on his own initiative, and no approach had been made to him. He himself spoke 
to an intermediary who arranged the first rendezvous. 

"Did he himself say something about the continuation of his work at Harwell 
or his possible resignation?" 

'"Yes ; he said that since he was under suspicion he might, upon reflection, 
think it impossible to continue to work at Harwell and that if he came to that 
conclusion he would offer his resignation. He thought it would be perfectly 
simple for him to obtain a university post. He also foresaw that there would 
be no particular disadvantage in his doing so. It seemed to me to be quite 
clear tliat his great interest was in the work upon which he was then engaged." 

"Was there a further interview on December 30 when you told Dr. Fuchs that 
the Ministry would undoubtedly decide to dispense with his services?" 

"Yes " 

''Thereafter future interviews were arranged at the current meeting when an 
alternative arrangement was made to meet every eventuality. For a long time 
the defendant confined his information to the product of his own brain. But as 
time went on this developed into something more. He said the talks were some- 
times certainly with Russians, but others were with persons of unknown nation- 
ality. He had realized that he was carrying his life in his hands, but he had 
done this from the time of his un;lerground days in Germany. 

"He .said there was a prearranged rendezvous, and recognition signals were 
exchanged. The association continued through 1944 in New York, for a period 
-at Los Alamos and in London again on his return to England." 

DOCUMENTARY INFORMATION 

"Generally, the meetings were of short duration and consisted of his passing 
documentary information and with the other party arranging the next rendez- 
vous. At times he was questioned, but the defendant thought it to have been 
inspired from some other quarter than his contact. 



32 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

"For the last 2 years of his association with the Russians there was a gradual 
reduction in the flow of information which he imparted since he was begin- 
ning to have doubts as to the propriety of his actions. 

"He said he still believed in communism, but not as practiced in Russia today. 
In this form he thinks it is something to fight against. He said he had never 
been a member of the British Communist Party. He said that he had decided 
fairly recently that he could only settle in England and that he had been terribly 
worried about the impact of his behavior upon his friendship with various people 
and in particular with Wing Commander Arnold at Harwell." 

"What did he say about expenses or reward?" 

"He said that in the early days of the relationship he had accepted expenses 
and admitted taking the sum of £100 shortly after his return to England in 1946 
from his contact. 

"He explained that he had discussed the acceptance by Dr. Allah Nunn May 
[British scientist who was sentenced to 10 years] of money from the Russians 
with a friend who knew him who said that he thought Dr. May had taken this 
money merely as a token payment. 

"The defendant after thinking it over accepted the sum of flOO, regarding this 
as a symbolic payment signifying his subservience to the cause. 

"On January 26 of this year I saw him again at his own request. He was 
anxious that his position should be resolved as quickly as possible. He wondered 
whether the authorities would clearly understand his position and I asked him 
whether he would like to make a written statement, incoi*porating any details 
which he thought ought to be borne in mind. I suggested three possibilities : 
that he should write out a memorandum himself ; that he should dictate a state- 
ment to a secretary ; or that I should write down a statement at his dictation. 

MEETINGS WITH AGENTS 

He said he would like to avail himself of my services and we made arrange- 
ments to meet in London on January 27 for this purpose. 

"I then asked him about meetings with agents, and he said the first was a 
private house in London where he had met a man whom he believed to be a 
Russian. That was early in 1942. 

"He said that after that first meeting there were meetings at intervals of 2 
or 3 months for about 6 months before he went to New York in December 1943. 

"In New York three or four meetings took place following the first which had 
been arranged before lie left England. There were further meetings between 
the time when he went to Los Alamos in August 1944, and his return to England 
in 1946. He said there was only one person at each contact. 

"He thought his first meeting after his return to England was at the beginning 
of 1947 and thereafter meetings took place at roughly two monthly intervals, 
always with the same man in London. 

"On January 27 this year I took the defendant to the War OfiBce, having met 
him at Paddington station, I cautioned him and said '1 ought to tell you that 
you are not obliged to make a statement, and you must not be induced to do so 
by any promise or threat which has been held out to you.' He said 'I under- 
stand. Carry on." I then wrote down a statement at Dr. Fuchs' dictation. 

"Dr. Fuchs read it over, corrected it in several places in his own handwriting 
and himself wrote the last line which read, 'I have read this statement and, to 
the best of my knowledge, it is true.' " 

Prosecutor Humphreys passed the statement to Mr. Scardon for identification 
and then asked the court to treat it as a "secret document." 

Mr. Scardon continued testifying : 

"After making the statement Dr. Fuchs said he was most anxious to discover 
what his future was to be. He said he did not want to waste any time in get- 
ting the matter cleared up. 

"Dr. Fuchs offered to give all technical information to a technical expert and 
on January 30, after meeting Dr. Fuchs at Paddington station, I took him to the 
War Office where he met Mr. Perrin." 

There was only one question by Dr. Fuchs' own lawyer when Mr. Scardon 
had ended his testimony for the prosecution : 

"Would it be fair to say that since lunch time on January 24 he has helped 
you and been completely cooperative in every way?" 

"Yes, sir," Mr. Scardon replied to the attorney, Thompson Halsall. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 33 

VALUABLE TO AN ENEMY 

Mr. Perrin was then called. An atomic scientist whom the security oflBcers 
had used to question Dr. Fuchs, Mr. Perrin said Dr. Fuchs had given him what 
the accused said were full details. 

Mr. Perrin was asked when Dr. Fnchs said he had had his first contact with 
a Russian about work at Los Alamos. 

"In February 1945, at Boston, Mass.," he replied. 

"Did he tell you whether he had passed any information?" Mr. Perrin was 
asked. 

"Yes, he did." 

"Was the information of value to a potential enemy?" 

"It was." 

"During the course of his discussions with you did he deal with the year 
1947?" 

"Yes." 

"Did he describe the information and the purport of it?" 

"Yes." 

"Was that technical information about atomic research, and of the greatest 
possible value to a potential enemy?" 

"Yes." 

"In general was all the technical information thus passed valuable to a po- 
tential enemy?" 

"Yes, it was." 

When Mr. Perrin finished, Mr. Humphreys asked the court for trial at Old 
Bailey's at the next session. 

Dr." Fuchs stood in the dock while the magistrate read the charges against 
him. He then asked Dr. Fuchs if he wished to make any statement. Dr. Fuchs 
said he did not. 

Mr. Halsall said on Dr. Fuchs' behalf : 

"He has nothing to say at this stage, and will call no evidence in this court." 

Dr. Fuchs was then committed for trial, and the hearing ended. 

The Fuchs' trial was held on March 1, 1950, with Lord Chief Justice 
Rayner Goddard presiding. Attorney General Sir Hartley Shawcross 
was the prosecutor and Derek Curtis-Bennett, chief defense counsel. 
Ultimately, there were four couifts in the indictment, charging that 
Fuchs communicated to unknown persons atomic research information 
calculated to be useful to an enemy. Two counts were added to the 
original charge at the time of Fuchs' arrest. The four offenses were 
said to have been committed in Birmingham, England, in 1943; in 
New York City between December 31, 1943, and August 1, 1944; in 
Boston, Mass., in February 1945 ; and in Berkshire, England, in 1947. 
There was only one witness, Mr. William J. Skardon, who had also 
testified earlier and who was called by the defense to state that when 
Fuchs made his confession of guilt he was not under arrest but was 
a freeman. The trial lasted 1 hour and 27 minutes; there was no 
jury and no evidence beyond that offered at the prior Bow Street 
proceedings. 

Lord Goddard told the prisoner : 

You have betrayed the hospitality and protection given to you with the grossest 
treachery. 

Dare we now give shelter to political refugees who may be followers of this 
pernicious creed, who may well disguise themselves and bite the hand that feeds 
them? 

You might have imperiled the friendship between this country and the great 
American Republic with whom His Majesty (the King) is allied. 

You have done irreparable harm both to this land and to the United States of 
America, and you did it as your statement shows, clearly for the purpose of 
furthering your political creed. 



34 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Sir Hartley Shawcross, after telling the court that the information 
betrayed was "likely to be of utmost value to an enemy," made the 
following statement : 

As to the value of the information, perhaps, it is not in the public interest to 
say more than this. There were, of course, many fields of atomic research and 
of the general experimental and developmental work in regard to atomic energy 
which were being carried on and which were unknown to him, and those fields 
were consequently protected. 

On the other hand he was a scientist of the highest standing in his own 
particular field, and although, according to his statement, he did not disclose the 
whole of his knowledge as to that field, information he had admittedly disclosed 
would undoubtedly have been of the greatest assistance as to that particular 
field. 

One must therefore, regard the disclosures as a very grave matter indeed. 
Tliat gravity he cannot now, even if he would, mitigate, and the bitterness of 
his position must be made the more acute by his own belated realization that 
the cause to which he gave such unswerving devotion was itself a false cause. 

Mr. Curtis-Bennett, the defense counsel, said of Fuchs, in part : 

He came to Britain for the purpose of conducting liis scientific investigation 
and study, and he said quite frankly, to fit himself out as a scientist in order 
to help the i-ebuilding of Communist Germany. He did not come to Britain to 
build atom bombs. 

He pursued his peaceful studies, and if the war had not come he might have 
been njore a candidate for a Nobel peace prize or a membership of the Royal 
Society. 

Within the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy it had been sug- 
gested that the possibility of seeking to extradite Fuchs from Britain 
for trial in the United States should be explored. Under British law 
the maximum possible sentence which coidd be imposed was 14 years, 
whereas United States law would have allowed the death penalty. 
However, the applicable treaty between the United States and Great 
Britain did not permit extraditing Buchs unless its provisions were to 
be construed with great liberality ; and in this branch of international 
law a strict construction has been the rule. Also, where an individual 
has violated the laws of two countries, he is normally tried and pun- 
ished in the country where apprehended before the issue of extradition 
is considered. Therefore Fuchs was sentenced to 14 years by the Brit- 
ish court and is ixow serving this term at Brixton Prison, near London. 
He is permitted to devote some time, as a prisoner, to scientific studies. 

A month after the trial it developed that Fuchs' name had appeared 
in Hal])erin's notebook, an exhibit in the Canadian spy trials of 1946. 
Israel Halperin, a member of the wartime espionage ring operating 
in and around Ottawa, Canada, had compiled many hundreds of names 
and addresses of people who, for one reason or another, he desired to 
remember. The fact that Fuchs had been so listed in Halperin's 
notebook was announced by the Lord Chancelor, Viscount Jowitt, 
before the British House of Lords on April 5, 1950. He said : 

My Lords, I wish to correct a point of fact arising out of a speech which I made 
last week on the motion of the noble Lord, Lord Vansittart. I then said that 
there was no truth in certain statements which had been made in the press about 
the Fuchs case. The fact is that in a notebook belonging to a man who was one 
of those examined by the Canadian Royal Commission there did 'appear, amongst 
a long list of other names, the name of Klaus Fuchs. This notebook, together 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 35 

With all other relevant material, was promptly made available to us by the 
Canadian authorities. Subsequent events have, of course, attached a significance 
to that name which it did not then bear. As I was, when I made my speech, 
imperfectly informed on this particular, I thought I owed it to your Lordships 
and to the press to make th^s correction. 

Another post-trial development had to do with the question of 
whether or not American FBI agents would be permitted to interview 
Fuchs in prison and seek to elicit from him information which might 
help bring about the arrest of United States confederates. The De- 
partment of State requested the United Kingdom to grant permis- 
sion for such an interview, and the chairman of the Joint Committee 
on Atomic Energy subsequently made the strongest possible repre- 
sentations in favor of this step. On May 11, 1950, Mr. James Chuter 
Ede, in behalf of the Labor Government, made this statement to the 
British Parliament: 

It is provided by the Prison Rules, 1949, that an officer of police may visit any 
prisoner who is willing to see him on production of an order issued by or on 
behalf of the appropriate chief officer of police, such visit being additional to 
the prisoner's normal entitlement of visits. This provision is intended to relate 
to visits by officers of British police forces and I am not aware of any precedent 
for such a visit by police of other countries. The Government of the United 
States has, however, recently made a request that a representative of the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation should be allowed to visit the prisoner Klaus Fuchs, 
and in the exceptional circumstances of this case the request has been granted. 
In accordance with the usual practice the visit will take place in the presence 
of a prison officer and will be subject to the usual conditions governing the 
interviewing of prisoners. 

As a result FBI agents, Hugh Clegg and Kobert Lamphere, visited 
at length with Fuchs in his prison cell in order to fill out the complete 
details of his activities. 

The FBI eventually pieced together enough information to bring 
about the arrest of courier Harry Gold. Fuchs was able neither to 
give the FBI Gold's name nor to furnish an accurate description. But 
the FBI managed to single out Gold after sifting approximately 1,500 
possible suspects. When photograplis of Gold were located and shown 
to Fuchs, he could.not recall having seen the individual pictured. But 
when the FBI produced motion pictures of Gold, the prisoner was 
tlien able to identify Gold with positive assurance. This occurred after 
Gold had been arrested and had confessed. 

Fuchs is today 40 years of age, 5 feet 8 inches tall, broad-shouldered, 
sallow, dark-haired, and balding. He wears glasses and speaks Eng- 
lish with a strong German accent. His last public statement at the 
trial is as follows : 

There are also some other crimes which I have committed, other than the 
ones with which I am charged, \\hen I asked my counsel to put certain facts 
before you I did so in order to atone for these crimes. 

They ai-e not crimes in the eyes of the law. 

I have had a fair trial and I wish to thank you, my Lord, my counsel and. 
the governor and staff of Brixton Prison for their considerate treatment. 



36 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The following excerpt from an interview with Gordon Dean, Chair- 
man of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, constitutes a 
kind of postmortem on the case — insofar as such a case can ever be con- 
sidered closed : 

[Reprinted by permission of the United States News Publishing Corp.] 
******* 

Q. How long does it take to clear an individual? 
A. The average today is 53 days. 

Q. And also the money that it costs to do the clearing? 

A. The cost is between $100 and $200 per person, and if you clear thousands 
of people for projects, that's a lot of money — and time. 

We are taking, I might add, a very hard look now. As a matter of fact, 
we've just had a long session on what we might recommend to change the act, 
with the objective both of keeping secret those things which we should keep 
secret and at the same time getting on with the job. I think that probably 
by the time Congress comes back we will have some constructive suggestions 
to make as to how it can be done. 

Q. What percentage of the people you examine fail to get clearance? 
A. Very small. My guess is that it is less than half of 1 percent. 
Q. Would you say that the arrangement or the setup you have with other 
governments for obtaining information from us is now satisfactory? 

A. Do you mean, can we trust the certifications of other governments? 
Q. Well, that is another way of asking it. The Fuchs case arose out of the 
fact that we didn't have it. Is the present arrangement satisfactory? 

A. I think the present arrangement is generally satisfactory. We did have 
conferences, you know, with the British and the Canadian security officers imme- 
diately after this thing. They came over here and we had a 3-day session, largely 
to determine the comparability of our security standards, and I think it is 
reasonably safe. 

Q. You don't feel so apprehensive of losing out in that direction? 
A. No, although in the most perfect system there may be someone who will 
slip through. 

Q. We now clear foreigners, don't we? We didn't clear Fuchs ourselves — we 
depended upon the British? 

A. You still can't have the FBI running investigations through all foreign coun- 
tries, making their own investigations. What we have to do is to delegate it to a 
competent security group, comparable to our own, to make sure that the investiga- 
tions cover the same type of points we make here in the States. Of course, the 
FBI, in turn, does the same thing for other governments. When someone is over 
here that the foreign government wants a check on, the FBI will make the check 
for them. 

Q. Can you evaluate the damage that was done to our country by Fuchs and 
his associates in terms of the Russian progress? 

A. It is hard to do, but I don't think you would be taking too extreme a posi- 
tion if you said he had advanced them between a year and 2 years. 

Q. To what extent did the British have access to our atomic information? I 
believe we were supposed to be partners with them in the original development 
of atomic energy? 

A. During the war, it was a complete partnership. The British decided to 
give up trying on the gaseous-diffusion work and they came over to this country, 
and we had a complete partnership. As a matter of fact, there were about 30, 
I believe, in the military mission from Britain who went to Los Alamos. They 
knew everything. They helped us very much in the development of the weapon. 
Since the war, we have operated under an understanding with the British and 
the Canadians in several areas which are not weapons areas. We have exchanged 
some visits within those areas, but that is the extent of it. 
Q. In weapons there is now no real exchange? 
A. No. 

Q. Has the Fuchs episode had any effect on those scientists who were inclined 
for a long time to pooh-pooh the need for security — American scientists who 
were a little bit annoyed and irritated by our desire to have security because 
they thought it was inconceivable that Russia could do what she has done? 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 37 

A. I wouldn't limit it to scientists. I would say that the Fuchs episode has 
had a sobering effect upon everybody connected with the program. 

Q. In that way it was a blessing in disguise? 

A. I think so. Some good came from it. It certainly doesn't equal the bad, 
but some good did come from it. 

Q. Have you any idea what is wrong with human beings or with our system 
in these democracies of ours that these people will do the things that Fuchs did? 
Does the scientist have less regard for loyalty to his country than other people? 
Is he a world citizen who wants to give everything away? What is the reason 
that Fuchs got into this thing? 

A. I don't think that you can say that scientists are an entirely different breed 
in that respect. In Fuchs' defense, let me say that we have had some of them 
who were not scientists. Fuchs is the type of man who, while he might have 
been caught had there been a real security check on him, might never be caught 
by any kind of investigation, because apparently he owes his allegiance to nothing 
that ordinary humans owe theirs to. He is going to make his own decisions 
regardless of any rules he purports to operate under. 

What do you do with a man like that? Usually he is a very intelligent man. 
He is an independent man. He is an idealist of some kind. He might be a Com- 
munist-idealist, but he is a man of ideals of some kind. You don't usually spot 
this type in a check. 

Q. Was he an inventive type, or was he just a theoretician? 

A. I would say the inventive type — he was a very bright man. 

* "» ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ • 



5. The Pontecorvo Case — Details 

Sixteen years ago there appeared in the April 1935 Proceedings of 
the Eoyal Society of London wliat is now a famous scientific article. 
It is entitled, "Artificial Radioactivity Produced by Neutron Bom- 
bardment — II," and the six authors are E. Amaldi, O. D'Agostino, E, 
Fermi, B. Pontecorvo, F. Rasetti, and E. Segre. Several of these same 
authors, although not including B. Pontecorvo, had published an 
earlier article along similar lines in 1934. Both articles stemmed from 
research performed at Rome, Italy, and one of the authors, E. Fermi, 
is today known throughout the world as a Nobel price winner in 
physics and a foremost contributor to American atomic energy de- 
velopment both during and after the war. 

In 1935 the six scientists filed a patent claim with the United States 
and other countries concerning the results of their work. United 
States Patent No. 2,206,634 was actually awarded in 1940 and is 
labeled, "Process for the Production of Radioactive Substances." 
This patent is today the subject of litigation, with the holders claiming 
$10,000,000 in damages for wartime and postwar governmental use of 
their processes. Bruno Pontecorvo would have stood to gain from the 
litigation, if it results in a damage payment and if he had not disap- 
peared behind the iron curtain. 

Dr. Fermi has written the following letter in regard to Pontecorvo : 

The University of Chicago. 
Institute for Nuclear Studies, 

Chicago 37, lU., March IS, 1951. 
Senator Brien McMahon, 

United States Senate, Washington, D. C. 

Dear Senator McMahon : This is the answer to the telephone call that I 
received this luoi-ning from William Borden, asking me to supply you with a 
statement about Bi-uno Pontecorvo. 

I knew Pontecorvo very well when he was my student and collaborator in 
Rome for 2 or 3 years, beginning about 193.5. After that I have seen him much 
less frequently, perhaps on the average about once a year. 

Personally I'ontecorvo is a very attractive person, who makes friends easily 
and appears to be quite extroverted. Scientifically he is one of the brightest 
men with whom T have come in contact in my scientific career. He is responsible 
for a number of impoi-tant contributions to physics. Since his student days he 
has always been working in the field of nuclear physics except for a short inter- 
lude when he was employed by an oil-prospecting firm in Oklahoma. 

His family owned a small manufacturing concern in Pisa, Italy. He has a 
large number of brothers and sisters. One of his brothers is a noted biologist, 
who is now living in England. I believe that one of his brothers and a brother- 
in-law are, or have been, high in the council of the Communi.st Party in Italy. 

After his student days in Rome, probably about 1936, Pontecorvo worked in 
France in the Curie T^aboratory. He came to this country at the time of the 
fall of France and found first employment in an oil concern in Oklahoma ; later 
on he joined the Canadian atomic project and worked there until about 2 or 
3 years ago, when he moved to the Harwell Laboratory in England. I believe 
that he is a British citizen. 

I do not knon', of course, what are the reasons that prompted his alleged escape 
to Russia. My personal impression of his research activities has been that he 
did not have much interest in the atomic developments except as a tool for 

38 



SOVIET ATOAIIC ESPIONAGE 39 

scientific reseaix-h. In particnlar I do not remember any instances in which he 
took up with me any subject connected with atomic technology and he did not 
seem to have any special interest in atomic weapons. 

For these reasons my impression is that if he went to Russia lie may not be 
able to contribute to their work by the things that he has learned during his 
connection with the Canadian anci the English projects but rather through his 
general scientitic competence. This naturally is only a surmise. 

I do not remember that Pontecorvo seemed very much interested in politics and 
I do not remember ever to have had political discussions with him. 
Sincerely yours, 

Enrico Fermi. 

Another of the authors of the 1935 scientific article and one of the 
cLainiants in the patent suit is Dr. Franco Rasetti. He kindly con- 
sented to be interviewed about Pontecorvo, and this interview resulted 
in the following joint committee staff paper: 

Memorandum for the file. 

From : Harold Bergman, Deputy Director, JCAE. 

Subject : Interview with Dr. Rasetti, May 14, 1951. 

Following advance telephone arrangements, I this afternoon interviewed Dr. 
Franco Rasetti in his office at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md., on the 
subject of Bruno I'ontecorvo. Dr. Rasetti lias been a professor of physics at the 
Johns Hopkins University since October 11)47. Previously, he was associated 
with the physics department of Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, from 
1939 to 1947 ; the University of Rome, Italy, from 1927 to 1939 ; and the Univer- 
sity of Florence, Italy, from 1923 to 1927. His chief field is the physics of geology 
and, in 193G. Prentice-Hall published his Elements of Nuclear Physics. 

According to Dr. Rasetti, the city of Pisa. Italy, was — before the war — a small 
town in which "everybody knew each other." Consequently, he knew the Ponte- 
corvo family quite well, althou.uh his closest contact was with tlie oldest son, 
Guido, now about 46. Dr. Rasetti lists the Pontecorvo family as follows : 

Massimo, father Guiliana Anna 

Maria, mother Bruno Giovanni 

Guido Gilberto 

Paul Laura 

The children were born approximately 2 to 3 years apart, and probably in the 
order above-named. Guido is now professor of genetics at the University of 
Edinburg, Scothmd. Two of the other children are probably now in France and 
England. 

Dr. Rasetti commented that the Pontecorvos were a respected and fairly 
wealthy Italian-Jewish fi mily. Massimo, the father, and several brothers owned 
textile mills in and around Pisa until the depression of the 192(>'s, when tliey 
lost much of their money. The parents are still living in Milan, Italy. 

While Dr. Rasetti was working at the University in Rome, he received a letter 
from the oldest brother, Guido, in either 1931 or 1932. The letter indicated 
that Guido's younger brother. Bruno, was interested in the field of physics and 
desired to study at the University of Rome. Dr. Rasetti was asked to do what 
he could to help. 

Bruno I'ontecorvo, according to Dr. Rasetti's recollection, attended the Uni- 
versity of Rome as an undergraduate for 2 years and continued there for perhaps 
three additional years as a graduate student. Dr. Enrico Fermi was then a 
professor of physics at the University of Rome, and it was there, during 1934, 
that he, Pontecorvo, and others. i)erfonned the work which lead to the publica- 
tion of the famous scientific paiiers appearing in the Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London. 

Dr. Rasetti commented further that during his association with Bruno Ponte- 
corvo, during 1S34 and 1935. the latter was quickly recognized by his seniors as a 
"gifted youth." Furthermore "everybody liked him." Dr. Rasetti stated that 
this popularity has been true of I'ontecorvo through the years. Recently Dr. 
Rasetti met some of Pontecorvo's Chalk River associates and. accordimi to Dr. 
Rasetti, they commented on Pontecorvo's fiight to Russia thus : "We just can't 
believe it." "He appeared to us in 1935 as a normal young man, only more 
gifted." Dr. Rasetti said. 

He added that, during the Rome years, Pontecorvo showed no interest in poli- 
tics and managed, "as most of us tried," to stay out of the Fascist organizations — 
with the possible exception of normal membership in "required" organizations. 

81095—51 4 



40 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

In 1935, Mussolini — under pressure from Hitler in Germany — began empha- 
sizing anti-Semitism. About this time, according to Dr. Rasetti, Bruno Ponte- 
corvo felt that he could not progress in his scientific work if he remained in 
Italy. Therefore, Dr. Rasetti continued, Pontecorvo applied for and received 
a Government fellowship for study in the field of physics with Prof. Fredric 
Joliot-Curie in Paris. Dr. Rasetti observes that he himself may have signed a 
letter to help procure the fellowship, but he does not recall for sure. The dura- 
tion of the fellowship was 1 year, but Pontecorvo secured its renewal for an addi- 
tional year. Thereafter, he may possibly have received fellowship assistance 
from a French source. Dr. Rasetti stated that he doubts Pontecorvo had much 
actual contact with Joliot-Curie, since the latter was a recognized scientist and 
the other a student. However, Dr. Rasetti has heard that during Pontecorvo's 
stay in Paris, he did associate with "Leftist" elements, probably younger indi- 
viduals than Joliot-Curie. 

In Paris, according to Dr. Rasetti, Pontecorvo met and married a Swedish girl, 
named Mariana. They had a boy in Paris. Mariana is known to Dr. Rasetti, 
who later met her in Montreal. He states that she is "no intellectual" ; showed 
no interest in politics or science, and appeared to be interested only in her hus- 
band and children. When the Nazis took Paris in June 1940, Pontecorvo, his 
wife, and child left Paris hurriedly by bicycle for unoccupied France and remained 
in Bordeaux until late 1940 or early 1941, when they came to the United States. 

In the United States Pontecorvo worked during 1941 and 1942 for the Wells 
Survey, Inc., Tulsa, Okla., doing radiographic oil well logging. He did not invent 
the method, but he improved it. In the fall of 1942 Pontecorvo was offered a 
position with the National Research Council of Canada in Montreal. Rasetti 
was then teaching at Quebec City and saw Pontecorvo again for the first time 
since 1935. They subsequently met at scientific meetings perhaps a half dozen 
times between 1942 and 1949 in Canada and the United States. Rasetti advised 
that although he realized that Pontecorvo, while in Montreal, was working on 
"something classified" for the Government, he had no idea what it w^as, as "he 
never told me and I never asked." Two children were born to the Pontecorvos 
in Montreal. 

Dr. Rasetti states Pontecorvo was transferred from Montreal to Chalk River 
with the rest of his group in either 1945 of 1946, and "after he went to Chalk 
River, I saw him perhaps three or four times at Physical Society meetings in 
the United States. The last time was in Washington, D. C, in April 1949. We 
talked primarily about work in cosmic rays." Dr. Rasetti further stated, "It 
was my understanding he was working at Chalk River in the unclassified field 
of cosmic-ray study." Queried as to the source of this understanding, Rasetti 
said he believes it derives from his conversations with Pontecorvo and his asso- 
ciates and from the fact that Pontecorvo later published papers on cosmic rays. 
Shortly after this Dr. Rasetti heard from a third party that Pontecorvo had gone 
to Harwell, the British nuclear research center. 

Dr. Rasetti further stated he never heard Pontecorvo discuss politics or 
express any interest in political questions. He does not recall ever discussing 
the problem of citizenship with him. He does not believe they have exchanged 
more than a half dozen letters — the last, about 5 years ago — always on scientific 
subjects or relating to scientific meetings. He stated he knows definitely that 
Pontecorvo's parents and the two oldest brothers have shown no political in- 
terests. He thinks that if Bruno Pontecorvo has gone to Russia, it is "because 
he has sincere faith in their system" and wants to live with "congenial spirits" 
and "not for the express purpose of giving them atomic secrets." In fact, 
Dr. Rasetti doubts that Pontecorvo could have had access to "very valuable 
secrets" since 1945, when he left Montreal, and Dr. Rasetti also observed that 
1945 secrets would be "no secrets" now. 

He commented that he classes Pontecorvo as "a good nuclear physicist but 
not a first-rate one." By "first rate," he said he means men like Enrico Fermi, 
Edward Teller, George Gamow, Hans Bethe, etc. He stated "I can better ex- 
press it by saying that in this country there are maybe 100 nuclear physicists 
in Pontecorvo's class." 

He stated that while he is perhaps the best authority in the United States 
on Bruno Pontecorvo's "early period" — others know more about his later life. 

Upon reaching the United States in 1940, Pontecorvo secured pri- 
vate employment with the Wells Survey Co., of Tulsa, Okla., in 
connection with work on the location of oil deposits through neutron 
sources. He took out first papers for American citizenship and, in 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE ' 41 

order to keep his application valid, continued to pay American 
income taxes after he later moved to Canada. 

At the beginning of 1943 Pontecorvo joined the British Govern- 
ment's atomic effort, briefly in New York City and then as a member 
of the Anglo-Canadian team in Montreal. For the following 2 years 
he was engaged in classified experiments on the development of the 
Canadian heavy-water piles, moving to Chalk River for that purpose. 
At the beginning of 1946 he took a position with the British Ministry 
of Supply Atomic Energy Organization, but remained at Chalk River, 
Canada, until January 1949. During 1948 he was granted British 
citizenship in absentia. 

Pontecorvo made three visits to American atomic installations. In 
January 1944 he was one of a group of British scientists who par- 
ticipated in classified discussions at the metallurgical laboratory of 
the University of Chicago. Two years later he appeared at the 
General Electric installation in Schenectady and unsuccessfully 
sought employment. In November 1948 he paid an unclassified visit 
to the University of California at Berkeley. 

In early 1949 Pontecorvo transferred to the Harwell Laboratory in 
England,' becoming a senior principal scientific officer in the Nuclear 
Physics Division. After some months there he accepted appointment 
to a professorship at Liverpool University. Before he and his family 
moved to Liverpool they took a vacation on the continent of Europe, 
never returning. 

On October 20, 1950, all except the Communist newspapers in Rome, 
Italy, banner-headlined stories to the effect that British officials were 
seeking the whereabouts of Dr. Bruno Pontecorvo, who had disap- 
peared. Two days later the New York Times carried the following 
dispatch : 

[New York Times, October 22, 1950] 

Stockholm, Sweden, October 21. — (Reuters). — Bruno Pontecorvo, naturalized 
British scientist from HarweU, Britain's bissest atom research center, has van- 
ished after flying; to Finland. He is believed to be in Moscow. 

Scandinavian Airlines System ofiicials said today that the Italian-born profes- 
sor had checked out of Stockholm September 2 for Helsinki, en route to the 
Soviet capital. 

Helsinki Airport otficials said no one named Pontecorvo had flown back to 
Stockholm. The only other routes out of Finland by boat, train, or plane all 
lead to Russia. 

The Finnish Ministry of the Interior announced tonight it had been unable 
to find any record that Mr. Pontecorvo or liis family had left Finland by air, sea, 
or land. The name did not appear on any passenger list. Nor are they listed 
as foreigners staying in the country, the ministry added. 

Finnish officials did not discount the possibility the family might have left the 
country under an assumed name. 

VISITED ITALY 

Mr. Pontecorvo is known to have gone to Italy on vacation after resigning 
from Harwell in July. His Swedish wife and three sons — Gil, 12; Tito Nils, 6, 
and Antonio, 5— went with him. He was scheduled to become professor of 
experimental physics at Liverpool University in January. 

From Rome his movements were traced today to Helsinki, where the Finnish 
Airlines said he and his family were checked off as they left the plane from 
Stockholm. 

They had reached Stockliolm by the night express from Copenliagen. A Stock- 
holm Airport attendant said tliey caught the Helsinki plane after taking a taxi 
from the train. 

On the flight from Rome to Copenhagen tlie 40-year-old scientist and his family 
had 110 pounds of registered luggage, not counting 20 pounds of hand luggage 



42 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

that Mr. Pontecorvo insisted on taking witli him to his seat on tlie plane. He- 
also was reported carrying a bulging brief case. 

The family reached Copenhagen the evening of September 1 and went straight 
from the airport to the railway station to reserve sleepers to the Swedish capital. 

VISITED UNITED STATES, CANADA 

On arrival at Stockliolm the morning of September 2 Mr. Pontecorvo went 
straight to the airline ticket office in the city center and bought tickets for 
Helsinki. 

Tlie home of Mi-, and Mrs. Hans Nordbloni, Mrs. Pontecorvo's parents, is a 
15-minute streetcar r.de from the airlines office, but neither the professor nor 
his -wife visited or telephoned them. 

The flurry over the Pontecorvo family's travels began in Rome yesterday when 
Italian newspapers said he had "disappeared." Tliey said British- and Italian 
intelligence were searching for him. 

Fellow scientists say they believe Mr. Pontecorvo never worked directly on 
atomic bomb projects. Dr. C. J. Mackenzie, head of Canada's National Research 
Council, said he did much independent research on cosmic rays. 

He visited the United States with a team of British atomic scientists in 1943- 
or 1944, Dr. Mackenzie added, and later worked in Montreal and at the Chalk 
River project, Ontario, though he was never officially employed. 

The Hartford Courant of October 23, 1950, carried this item : 

[Hartford Courant, October 23, 1950] 

Rome, Monday, October 23 (AP). — The Italian atomic scientist. Dr. Bruno 
Pontecorvo, now a British citizen, sailed on a Russian ship from Finland for 
Leningrad on September 2, the Stockholm correspondent of II Tempo reported 
today. 

The correspondent, Henrico Altavilla, said he flew from Stockholm to Helsinki 
to investigate the international mystery of the whereabouts of Pontecorvo, 
described by European scientists as one of the foremost researchers in tritium, 
basic element of the hydrogen bomb. 

Since July 25 the scientist has been on a vacation from England where he 
worked for 2 years at the British atomic research plant at Harwell, Italian 
newspapers reported Saturday that he had skipiied to Russia. 

II Tempo's correspondent said Pontecorvo, his Swedish-born wife and three 
children flew from Italy to Copenhagen where they left their Swedish plane 
"for fear of being followed" and took an express for Stockholm. 

At Stockholm, he reported, the family spent the night of September 1 at a 
house occuiiied by the Soviet Embassy. 

An attendant at Stockholm's Broome Airport recalled that they arrived at 
the airport about 11 a. m. on September 2 in a Soviet Embassy car with 12 suit- 
cases, the correspondent said. 

Finland's Interior Minister Johannes Viroelinen flew to Helsinki on the same 
plane. 

Altavilla said the scientist and his family refused to take the airline bus at 
the Helsinki airport and waited until an automobile from the Soviet Legation 
arrived and took them to the harbor. 

The correspondent said the Russian ship Bellostov, scheduled to sail at 10: 40 
a. m., waited until 5 p. m. when the party arrived. He said the ship weighed 
anchor as soo.'i as the scientist and his family were aboard. The ship was due in 
Leningrad September 5, he added. 

Neither the British nor Italian legations here have heard from the scientist, 
who for 2 years was one of the top men at Britain's atomic research plant at 
Harwell along with Dr. Klaus Fuchs, now serving 14 years on conviction of 
having given atom secrets to Russia. 

Meanwhile, British officials, both in the Ministry of Supply, which controls 
atomic research, and at Scotland Yard, said there had been no developments and 
'no progress whatsoever" in the search for the scientist. 

There was a report that higgage had been found at Pontecorvo's 
Harwell residence bearing the fresh label of a hotel in Spain. The 
original reports from Rome suggested that the scientist had flown 
direct from Italy to Czechoslovakia. Still another report states that 
Pontecorvo had talked with an unidentified Czech and an uniden- 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 43 

tified Italian near Lako Como in Italy during August 1950, where- 
upon he said to his wife, "I dare not go back. I should be sent to 
prison if I did." The Hartford Courant, on October 25, printed this 
further story : 

[Hartford Courant, October 25, 1950] 

PONTECOBVO'S Son'S REMARK MAY BE ClUE 

BOY. WAS OVERHEARD ON PHONE SAYING "WE ARE GOING TO RUSSIA" 

Helsinki, Finland, October 24 (UP). — A passenger on the plane which 
brought Prof. Bruno Pontecorvo, the missing British atom scientist, to Finland 
said today tlie professor's 5-year-oId son told him, "We are going to Russia." 

Pontecorvo, his wife and three children have not been seen since September 
2 when they landed at Malmi Airport outside Helsinki after a flight from 
Sweden. The Italian-born physicist is employed at Britain's top secret Harwell 
research station aud fear has been expressed in the House of Commons that he 
may have gone to Russia with priceless atomic bomb secrets. 

Police reported today they had uncovered no leads on how the family left 
Finland, if they did leave. 

The plane passenger, who asked that his name be withheld, said Pontecorvo's 
son, Antonio, was seated in front of him on the plane and that the boy said, 
"We are going to Russia." 

At another point the boy was said to have looked out of the plane window 
as it flew over land and asked: "Is that Russia?" Later, on the bus which 
brought the passengers from the airport to Helsinki, Antonio reportedly asked if 
the houses beside the road were Russian houses. 

Lord Lucas of Chilworth, parliamentary secretary, British Ministry 
of Transport, gave an official account of the episode on November 7, 
1950. Speaking before the House of Lords, he said : 

My Lords, I must apologize for the length of this reply. Dr. Pontecorvo, a 
senior principal scientific officer in the nuclear physics division at Harwell, and 
a naturalized British subject, was granted leave of absence on July 25 last and 
left this country with his family on the same day for a holiday in France and 
Italy. He took his car with him. Before proceeding further, I must explain 
that, under tlie British Nationality and Status of Aliens Act, 1914, a naturalized 
British subject has to all intents and purposes the status of a natural-born 
British subject. Even if there had been any reason at the time to suppose that 
Dr. Pontecorvo might not return to tliis country — and there was no such indica- 
tion whatever — there would have been no legal means of preventing his departure. 

Dr. Pontecorvo's leave expired on August 31. On this date he had written a 
note to Harwell, which was received on September 4, explaining that he had 
liad trouble with his car — the fact that there had been a car accident has been 
confirmed through other channels — but hoped to be back in time for a conference 
to be held between September 7 and 13. A message had also been sent to him 
from Harwell asking him to visit and advise a team of scientists employed in 
Switzerland on cosmic ray work, on which he had specialized. It was his failure 
to pay this visit, or to communicate with Harwell after September 4, which 
gave cause for concern, and security inquiries as to his whereabouts were started 
on September 21. These were naturally conducted with considerable discre- 
tion, because there was little point in creating undue alarm about an absence 
which might have been capable of a perfectly innocent explanation, and because 
all the evidence at Harwell and elsewhere suggested strongly that it was Dr. 
Pontecorvo's intention to return to this country. He had received in June last 
an offer of appointment to a professorship at Liverpool University, had written to 
the vice chancellor accepting the offer, after discussing it with his director, had 
arranged to take a university flat and had booked a return passage for his car. 

Dr. Pontecorvo and his family flew to Stockholm from Rome on August 31 
and on September 2 they traveled to Helsinki. Since then, there has been no 
■definite information about Dr. Pontecorvo's movements, but His Majesty's Gov- 
ernment have no doubt that he is in Russia. Dr. Pontecorvo, although employed in 
the nuclear physics division at Harwell, was not engaged on secret work. For 
several years past his contacts with such work had been very limited, and 
he had no direct contact with work on atomic weapons. 



44 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Although this statement makes clear that, under British law, the 
authorities possessed no power to prevent Pontecorvo's trip to Europe, 
it nevertheless leaves much of the mystery unresolved; and that 
mystery remains largely intact today. However, two discussions in 
the House of Commons tend to clear up several points in the case. 
The first, held October 23, 1950, is as follows : 

SciENTiFio Officer, Harwell (Absence From Duty) 

Mr. Erroll (by private notice) asked the Minister of Supply if he has any 
statement to mal^e on the disappearance of the Harwell atomic scientist, Profes- 
sor Bruno Pontecorvo. 

Mr. G. R. Strauss. Dr. Pontecorvo is a senior principal scientific officer at 
Harwell. He was granted leave of absence on 25th July last and was due to 
return to duty on 31st August. He had accepted an appointment at Liverpool 
University and was shortly about to take up this position. 

Dr. Pontecorvo was born in Italy. He left that country for France in 1936 
and went from France to the U. S. A. in 1940. In 1943 he became a member 
of the Joint Anglo-Canadian atomic energy team at Montreal and was transferred 
to the Ministry of Supply atomic energy organization in January 1946. He 
remained in Canada as a member of that organisation until January 1949, when 
he was posted to Harwell. Dr. Pontecorvo became a naturalised British subject 
in March 1948. For several years past Dr. Pontecorvo's contacts with secret 
work have been very limited. I have no information about Dr. Pontecorvo's 
present whereabouts beyond what has appeared in the Press. 

Mr. Erroll. May I ask two questions? First, can the Minister state that 
the Professor has never had the opportunity of acquiring knowledge of atom 
bomb manufacture likely to be of value to a foreign power, and second, can 
he explain how reliable the British screening of this person was in view of the 
fact that, according to the "Daily Herald" his sister is the wife of a Communist 
ofiicial in Italy? 

Mr. Strauss. Although Dr. Pontecorvo has not had direct access, except in a 
very limited way, to secret subjects for some time, it would be quite impossible 
to say that he has not been able to gather information while he was resident in 
Harwell or in Canada which might be of value to an enemy. On the second 
point I can only say that this individual has been screened several times during 
the last few years by our security officers. 

Mr. C. S. Taylor. When a man like this is known to have relations who are 
Communists — [Hon. Members: "Oh."] — when it is also known that he was a 
bosom friend of Dr. Fuchs, why is it he is allowed to continue in such a respon- 
sible position? 

Mr. Strauss. I do not agree with the hon. Member in his last allegation. I 
do not think it is true. As I say, this man has been screened several times, 
and according to the security officers the screenings were particularly satisfactory. 

Mr. R. A. Butler. Would the right hon. Gentleman tell us, in view of the pro- 
found disquiet created by this news, whether, since the Fuchs episode, the 
whole of this screening business has been tightened up, and whether there has 
been any investigation since this case into all the oflBcers concerned? 

Mr. Strauss. Yes, Sir, since the episode the whole matter has been looked 
at very carefully and there has been a certain tightening up of the system. 

Mr. Butler. Does that apply to this case in particular? 

Mr. Strauss. Yes, Sir, but this man was leaving Harwell anyhow and going 
to Liverpool. 

Sir P. MacDonald. Is not it a fact that he was leaving the country? Why 
was he allowed to take his family and car to Italy when it was well known 
that he was visiting his sister, who is the wife of a prominent Communist in 
Italy? 

Mr. Strauss. As he was the holder of a British passport there was no means 
of retaining him in this country. 

Mr. Blackburn. While entirely admitting the great difficulties of screening 
refugee scientists and welcoming the policy of the Government in accepting 
refugees, may I beg the Minister to bear in mind that this very distinguished 
scientist, as the Minister admitted, was only making £1,100 a year and that the 
salaries of scientists ought to be reconsidered? 

Mr. Low. In replying to my right hon. Friend the Member for Saffron 
Walden (Mr. R. A. Butler) the right hon. Gentleman seemed to indicate that, 
because this man was shortly leaving Harwell, the new, strict precautions for 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 45 

screening were not taken in this ease. [Hon. Members: "No."] I may have 
misunderstood the right hon. Gentleman, but is it not imiiortant that this 
screening should have been applied because of the opportunities the man had 
to get to know the most detailed secrets? 

Mr. Strauss. I said that more rigid screening was applied after the Fuchs 
case. I continued that just at that time this man took up an appointment at 
the Liverpool University and was not going to be at Harwell more than a few 
months longer at the outside. 

Mr. SuTCLiFFE. Has the right hon. Gentleman given any indication of the 
reason for his leaving Harwell to take up another appointment? 

Mr. Strauss. This post was offered to him: it was suggested he would be 
doing more useful and more remunerative work at Liverpool than at Harwell. 

Mr. Boyd-Caepenteb. In view of the fact that the right hon. Gentleman said 
this gentleman was due back from leave on 31st August, can he say when in- 
quiries as to his whereabouts were set on foot? 

Mr. Strauss. No, not at the moment. I am not sure when the inquiries 
started. I imagine quite recently, when he was overdue from his leave, but I 
am not certain about the exact date. 

Mr. PicKTHORN. When the right hon. Gentleman says that it was suggested 
that this scientist would be more useful at Liverpool than elsewhere, can he tell 
us by whom it was suggested, and to whom? 

Mr. Strauss. The deputy director at Harwell was taking up an important 
post in Liverpool and he wanted assistants. It was suggested by the people at 
Harwell that this man might well go with Dr. Skinner, the deputy director, and 
would be useful to him at Liverpool, and he agreed to take the iwst. 

Mr. H. Strauss. Was any investigation made of what documents the scientist 
took with him, since such an investigation would have been within the law? 

Mr. Strauss. No, sir, so far as I am aware no such investigation took place. 

Air Commodore Harvey. Does not all this suggest that the present method 
of screening is completely ineffective? Will the right hon. Gentleman go into it 
with his colleagues and overhaul the methods of screening? 

Mr. Strauss. I do not agree that it is ineffective, but we are always looking 
for ways to improve the system. 

Wing Commander Hulbert. Can the right hon. Gentleman say if, in view of 
the recent incidents, he is satisfied with the present security and screening 
arrangements at Harwell, and how many pseudo-Communists are still there? 

Mr. Strauss. I am satisfied that the screening arrangements are very good. 
It is never possible to be absolutely certain that anybody who may have had any 
connection, either himself or through his friends or his relatives, with any 
Communist or Fascist organization, is working in a research establishment. 
We cannot be absolutely certain about that, but we believe that the screening 
arrangements are as good as they can possibly be devised, unless we go to limits 
which this House would not tolerate. 

Mr. Thurtle. Can my right hon. Friend say whether the security officers have 
still complete faith in the loyalty of this gentleman to the British nation? 

Mr. Strauss. I would like to wait a few days longer to see what happens. 

Later — 

Lord John Hope. On a point of order. I beg to ask leave to move the Ad- 
journment of the House for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent 
public importance, namely, the disapijearance of Professor Pontecorvo and the 
failure of the Government to take adequate precautions to prevent it. 

Mr. Speaker. The noble Lord has asked leave to move the Adjournment of 
the House for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public im- 
portance, namely the disappearance of Professor Pontecorvo and the failure 
of the Government to take adequate precautions to prevent it. 

The noble Lord's iNIotion fails on the ground of urgency in regard to this 
particular case. Professor Pontecorvo is not in this country, there was no 
particular reason for stopping him when he left the country, and the Govern- 
ment have no power now to get him back or deal with him. 

If the remedy sought by the hon. Gentleman is to impose some kind of exit 
permit on any persons employed on atomic research who wish to leave this 
country, then the matter fails to qualify as definite. I cannot therefore allow 
the noble Lord's Motion. 

Lord John Hope. Further to that 

Mr. Speaker, The matter cannot be argued. I have given a Ruling and that 
must stand. 



46 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

A later discussion in the House of Commons, "which took place on 
November 6, 1050, is as follows: 

Dr. Pontecorvo 

4. Mr. BorD-CARPE^'TER asked the jNIinister of Supply when Professor Bruno 
Pontecorvo entered the employ of his Department ; ^Yhat was the nature of his 
work ; and if he has any further information as to where this gentleman now is. 

6. Mr. Baker White asked the Minister of Supply how many days elapsed be- 
tween the date on whicli Professor Pontecorvo was due back from leave and the 
date on which his Department notified the security departments, on a high level, 
of his disappearance. 

Mr. G. R. Strauss. Dr. Pontecorvo entered Government service in January 
1943, and joined my Department in January 1946. He took up duty at Harwell 
in January 1949, where he was employed in the Nuclear Physics Division. Dr. 
Pontecorvo's leave expired on 31st August. On this date he had written a note 
to Harwell, received on 4th September, saying that he had trouble with his car 
but hoped to be back in time for a conference to be held between 7th and 13th 
September. A message was sent to him from Harwell asking him to visit and 
advise a team of scientists employed in Switzerland on cosmic ray work on which 
he had specialized. It was his failure to pay this visit or to communicate further 
with Harwell after the date of the conference which first gave cause for concern. 
Inquiries as to his whereabouts were started on 21st September. I have no 
conclusive evidence of his present whereabouts, but I have no doubt that he is 
in Russia. 

Mr. Boyd-Carpenter. Can the right hon. Gentleman say whether, at the time 
this gentleman's employment at Harwell began, it was known to his Depart- 
ment that he was closely connected with a well-known Italian Communist ; and 
can he also say if he has any information as to whether, on his recent trip 
abroad, Professor Pontecorvo took with him any documents of a secret nature? 

Mr. Strauss. No, Sir, it was not known at the time Professor Pontecorvo was 
first employed at Harwell that he had a relative abroad who was connected with 
the Communist Party. As to the second part of the hon. Gentleman's question, 
so far as is known he took no documents abroad with him. 

Mr. Baker White. May I ask the Minister, although I see the difficulty in 
this case, whether it would be possible to extend to Harwell the system used in 
the Services, namely, that if anybody is absent and over-stays his leave machin- 
ery is set in motion immediately to find out where he is? 

Mr. Strauss. Yes, Sir, but the reasons for this man overstaying his leave 
seemed quite normal. He had a motor car bi'eakdown, and was asked to visit 
some people in Switzei'land, and it was, naturally, only about a week afterwards 
that those at Harwell became worried about him. 

Captain Waterhouse. In answer to a previous Question I understood the 
Minister to say that foreigners were carefully screened before they got these 
jobs. Does the right hon. Gentleman agree that we ought to have found out 
that Professor Pontecorvo had a Communist connection in Italy ? 

Mr. Strauss. One finds out a great deal by screening, but it so happens that 
the fact that he had a Communist relative abroad was not in the possession 
of the security officers. 

Mr. Nabarro. Can the Minister say whether the three defections which have 
taken place in the last four years — Dr. Nunn May in 1946, Professor Fuchs in 
1949 and now Professor Pontecorvo in 1950 — arise from the fact that these three 
gentlemen were working in conjunction with one another in the Harwell atomic 
establishment? 

Mr. Strauss. It is true that Dr. Fuchs and Professor Pontecorvo were working 
in the same major establishment, the one research establishment in this country. 
But they were not particular friends, and I do not think that the fact that they 
were working in a centre where research takes place is really a significant fact. 

Mr. Walter Fletcher. Would not about the first series of questions asked in 
screening be about Communist connections, either relations or friends, of the 
person who is being screened? 

Mr. Strauss. I do not think so, particularly in this case. The man had not 
been abroad for a long time. He had left Europe in 1940. The fact that he had 
relatives abroad who were members of the Communist Party was not suggested 
to the security officers, and they were not aware of that fact. 

Captain Crookshank. If these people are not asked about their friends and 
relations, what are they asked about? 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 47 

Mr. Strauss. It must be remembered that the major screening of this man 
tooli place in 1943, when he .ioinecl the atomic energy organisation in Canada 
and the security services made the necessary inquiries. Similar inquiries were 
made at a later date and, as I have informed the House, this fact was not known 
when the man joined the Harwell organisation at the beginning of 1949. It was 
known later, but by that time he had made, arrangements to leave Harwell 
anyhow, and go to Livei'pool. 

Mrs. MiDDLETON. Is my right hon. Friend aware that a "star turn" at the 
recent Conservative Party Conference was a former Communist? What screen- 
ing would be appropriate in that case? 

Several Hon. Members rose 

Mr. Speaker. We cannot debate this matter further. We have had at least 
five minutes on it already. 

SECURITY MEASURES, HARWELL 

9. Squadron Leader Burden asked the Minister of Supply if he is satisfied 
with present security measures at Harwell. 

Mv. G. R. Strauss. Yes, Sir. 

Squadron Leader Burden. Is not it a fact that a list in a telephone directory, 
giving the names and places of work of the people working at Harwell, is avail- 
able to anyone? Would not the Minister agree that the first step to breaking 
down security is to know the names of those people and, in particular, to dis- 
cover whether they have relatives living behind the iron curtain upon whom 
pre.ssure can be brought to bear? 

Mr. Strauss. I do not think there is any danger in someone discovering the 
names of people working at Harwell by looking at a list in one of the telephone 
booths at Harwell. 

Sir Waldron Smithers. Would the right hon. Gentleman consult with other 
Ministers to see if they are satisfied with the security measures at Broadcasting 
House? 

Mr. Godfrey Nicholson. May I ask the Minister whether any steps are taken 
to keep a check on people abroad with whom these people may correspond? 

Mr. Strauss. Certain checks are kept. Reasonable checks are kept on the 
people working at Harwell and other secret research stations. But it would be 
quite imix)ssible, in view of the thousands of people who work there and else- 
where, to keep a check on people in other countries with whom they may 
communicate. 

It is possible to hope that some innocent explanation accounts for 
Pontecorvo's disappearance. Conceivably he was kidnaped by the 
Soviets. Conceivably he became insane and is hiding in western 
Europe. If an innocent explanation should develop subsequent to the 
appearance of this report, apologies are herewith rendered in advance. 
At the same time, the facts as reported to the British House of Lords 
and House of Commons suggest that the possibility of an innocent 
explanation is extremely remote, and prudence dictates the assump- 
tion that Pontecorvo indeed went to Russia at his ow^n volition. 

By way of pure speculation it may be theorized that Pontecorvo — 
since he was about to lose all contact with classified information at the 
time of his European trip — had been ordered by Soviet superiors in 
an espionage apparatus to leave England and go to Russia. In the 
same vein it may be speculated that, just as a travel itinerary from the 
United States to Mexico to Czechoslovakia to Russia seems to be a 
standard escape route for American agents of the Soviet Union, so 
Pontecorvo's path from Britain to Italy to Sweden to Finland to 
Russia constitutes a standard escape route for English agents of the 
Soviet Union. It may also be speculated that Pontecorvo's flight is 
somehow related to the Fuchs case. Conceivably Pontecorvo feared 
that, since he was acquainted with Fuchs, he too would fall under sus- 
picion. Still other speculations are to the effect that Pontecorvo was 
somehow blaclnnailed into fleeing or that he was lured by a Soviet offer 
of some description or even that he thought he might serve as an inter- 



48 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

national liaison man between scientists of the East and West, looking 
toward a peaceful solution of differences. The psychology which 
apparently motivated Fuchs implies that the most far-fetched specu- 
lation cannot be ruled out as to Pontecorvo, but the mystery remains. 
Mr. Gordon Dean, Chairman of the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission, indicated his attitude toward Pontecorvo during an 
October 24, 1950, press conference. The relevant portion of the 
transcript reads thus : 

Question. Mr. Dean, is the Atomic Energy Commission taking interest in the 
disappearance of that British atomic scientist? 

Chairman Dean. Yes. 

Question. Do you know if he has any relations in this country? It is reported 
he has a brother working on a project. 

Chairman Dean. As yet I don't know, personally. 

Question. Mr. Chairman, when he came here with a British team, wouldn't 
he have had some clearance then from us? 

Chairman Dean. I believe the process then was for the British to certify that 
he was a reliable man, or words to that effect, and could be used in the program. 

Question. Can you tell us what kind of work he did, then, sir. 

Chairman Dean. In Canada? 

Question. No ; while he was here. 

Chairman Dean. I am a little bit uncertain as to that period before he went to 
Canada so I wouldn't like to say. I just don't know at this point. We could 
probably find out for you. 

Question. That was prior to 1946. 

Chairman Dean. It was prior to 1946 ; 1943 is when he went to Canada. 

Question. Do you think this incident offers any serious period of threat? 

Chairman Dean. That depends entirely on the extent to which he had access 
to vital information, and that to me, would mean largely weapons information. 
I think the British will have to make the appraisal of the extent of that access, 
not ourselves. 

Question. Will this have any effect on our relationship with the British Atomic 
Commission? 

Chairman Dean. Of course, it is always difficult when somebody goes sour. 
What the effect is, it is very hard, without being a good prophet, to forecast. 

Of course, we are interested in the disappearance of anybody who has had 
access to restricted data or been in any way connected with the program. How- 
ever, he is not our baby. 

Question. There have been a good many reports that he was quite an expert. 
Is that true? If it is true that he has gone someplace, is it true that he is th6 
man that could take away with him any important information? 

Chairman Dean. It is pretty hard for us to answer on this side of the water. 
He has been a senior scientist, I believe, at Harwell. Some sort of statement, 
which I don't have before me, was made by the British, indicating that his access 
was not particularly broad. I have forgotten the exact language of that. But 
I think they are in a better position to say what his standing was in Harwell 
than we are. 

Question. Had he any kind of American access? 

Chairman Dean. I believe the record will show that he came over here with 
a British team during the war, and went shortly thereafter into the Canadian 
program, where he would have access to one phase, but a very limited phase. 
I think he has returned to this country on two occasions. In neither case did 
he come on a classified visit or have access to any classified material. 

Question. So his connection, if any, with the American program would have 
been collateral through the Canadian work. 

Chairman Dean. Yes; except for a very brief period before he went to Canada 
at which time he was stationed in the British Mission probably in New York. 

Mr. Salisbury. I don't know precisely. 

Question. Was he given clearance by the British or was he cleared here, sir? 

Chairman Dean. He was never cleared here, so if there was any kind of a 
certification of that group, it was from the British. 

Question. The same way as Fuchs had the clearance. Have you asked for 
information from Britain, sir? 

Chairman Dean. I don't believe that we, as the Atomic Energy Commission, 
have made such a request. I imagine it has been made through other depart- 
ments. 



6. Allan Nunn May — Details 

Dr. May was the first of the major atomic energy spies to be ap- 
prehended. He is today serving- a 10-year prison sentence for espio- 
nage at Wakefield, Yorkshire, England. The London Times of March 
-20, 1946, describes an early phase of his trial as follows : 

Atomic Secrets Charge — Scientist Sent for Trial — Bail Refused 

Dr. Allan Nunn May, 34, university reader, of Stafford Terrace, Kensington, 
was at Bow Street yesterday committed for trial at the Central Criminal Court 
on a charge of having, for a purpose prejudicial to the safety and interests uf 
the State, communicated to some person unknown certain information calculated 
to be directly or indirectly useful to an enemy, contrary to the Official Secrets 
Act, 1911. 

Mr. Anthony Hawke and Mr. H. A. K. Morgan conducted the case on behalf of 
the Director of Public Prosecutions; Mr. Gerald Gardiner, instructed by Mr. 
Harold Kenwright, defended. Dr. May pleaded "Not Guilty," and reserved bis 
defence. 

Mr. Hawke, opening the case, said that Dr. May was a reader in physics at 
the London University, but from May 1942 until September 1945, he was a member 
of an organization, set up by the Government in November 1941, to investigate 
problems of atomic energy. The organization was part of the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research, and for security reasons was known at the 
time as Tube Alloys Research. It was under the direction of Sir Wallace Akers, 
and consisted of various teams of experts working in different university and 
industrial laboratories. Dr. May worked first at the Cavendish laboratory, 
Cambridge and in January 1943 went to Canada. While in Canada he was a 
senior member of the nuclear physics division of the organization. Not only did 
he have knowledge of all the physics work in connexion with this research, but 
also, owing to his ability — and there was no question that it was considerable — 
he was consulted on problems in connexion with physics relating to the researches 
in progress. 

CONDITIONS OF SECRECY 

He was on two committees which gave him access to s-cret reports and to 
the latest developments in connection with uranium. This indicated the vital 
importance and secrecy of his post. On his own admission Dr. May com- 
municated, in Canada last year, to a person whose identity he refused to divulge, 
a written report on atomic research, as it was then known to him, and he also 
gave to the same person specimens of certain types of newly discovered material 
regarded as of peculiar importance and secrecy. Before accepting the post he 
was required to sign a document that he would not give information except 
to persons named. Conditions of secrecy and confidence were imposed upon 
him. 

At the end of last year or early this year certain information reached the 
Intelligence Corps in this country. On February 15 last Deputy Commander 
Burt, head of the Special Branch at Scotland Yard, saw Dr. May at Shell-Mex 
House, where he had resumed his work. Dr. May was asked if he was aware 
that there had been a leakage of information in Canada relating to atomic 
energy. He replied that it was the first he had heard of it. He denied that 
any approach had been made to him while he was in Canada, and added that 
he was not prepared to answer any question if it related to counterespionage. 
Between February 15 and February 20 further information came to the notice 
of the authorities, and Deputy Commander Burt again saw Dr. May. He told 
him it was understood that shortly after his return from Canada he had an 
appointment to meet someone in the vicinity of the British Museum, and it 
was known that he did not keep that appointment. 

49 



50 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. Hawke added that the usefulness of the information disclosed by Dr. 
May could be measured in this way — that it might enable persons in possession 
of it to save a substantial period of time in arriving at conclusions connected 
with this research. 

ALLLGED APPOINTMENT 

Deputy Commander Burt gave evidence that when he spoke to Dr. May about 
not keeping an appointment near the British Museum his reply was : "No ; I 
did not keep that appointment as when I returned I decided to wash my hands 
of the whole business." He was asked who, in Canada, had made an appoint- 
ment for him to meet someone in London. 

In cross-examination, Mr. Burt said he did not exercise any pressure on 
Dr. May, either by way of inducement, threat, or promise of favour. He did not 
tell him the authorities had a lot more information abc-ut him and that he was 
implicated. At the interview on February 20 he was not in a position to accuse 
Dr. May. Dr. IMay had been followed from February l.") until February 20. 

Mr. Gardiner. Did you tell him you did not suggest he had done this for 
gain? — No. That was contrary to my instructions, which were that the question 
of gain had entered into it. 

A statement alleged to have been made by Dr. May at this interview wa& 
handed to the Magistrate, and it was agreed that the contents should not be 
divulged at this stage. 

Mr. Hawke said there was one passage in the statement which it was desirable 
should not be read at any time. 

Sir Wallace Akers, on the board of Imperial Chemical Industries, Limited,^ 
and director responsible for scientitic research by that concern, said that on De- 
cember 1, 1941, he was appointed director to supervise a special organization set 
Up to handle the problem of atomic energy. While in Canada Dr. INIay, as senior 
member of the Nuclear Physics Division, would be consulted on problems con- 
nected with physics. He was also a member of two important committees, whicli 
would give him access to secret reports and thus keep him informed of the latest 
developments in the methods of use and production of uranium. Everything in 
connection with that matter discovered by Canadian or British sources since 
the war had been kept secret. 

Referring to the statement alleged to have been made by Dr. INiay to Mr. Burt, 
Sir Wallace Akers said that materials mentioned in it would enable scientists to 
determine important nuclear physical data earlier than if they had had first 
to prepare the material. 

Cross-examined, he agreed that Dr. May was engaged on re.search on nuclear 
atomic energy, and not on atomic bombs. 

Mr. Gardiner. Most of what was known about atomic energy some little time 
ago has been published? — Qualitatively, but not quantitatively. 

Is there a strong feeling among scientists, rightly or wrongly, that contribu- 
tions to knowledge made by them with respect to the benefits of atomic research 
ought not to be the secrets of any one country? — Yes. 

Mr. Gardiner asked if Russia was a gallant ally in February last year. 

Mr. Hawke. I should like to know why Russia has been introduced. I made 
no reference to Russia or America. 

The Magistrate, Mr. McKenna, refused an application for bail. 

On May 2, 1946, the London Times carried this additional story : 

Atomic Secrets 

scientist sentenced to 10 TEARS 

Dr. Allan Nunn May, 34, atom scientist and lecturer in physics at King's 
College, London, pleaded "Guilty" at the Central Criminal Court yesterday to com- 
municating information contrary to the Official Secrets Act, and he was sentenced 
to 10 years' penal servitude. He admitted giving to an unknown jierson on a 
day between January 1 and September PA), 194.", for a purpose pre.iudicial to 
the safety and interest of the state, information about atomic research calcu- 
lated to be useful to an enemy. 

The Attorney General, Sir Hartley Shawcross, K. C, who prosecuted with 
Mr. Anthony Hawke, said that if certain information had got into the hands 
of scientists of other countries it would have shortened their researches by a 
considerable period. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 51 

Mr. Gerald Gardiner, defending, remarked that Dr. May told him that the 
person to whom he gave the information was Russian. 

The Attorney General replied : "There is no kind of suggestion that the Rus- 
sians are enemies or potential enemies. The court has already decided that 
this offense consists in communicating information to unauthorized persons." 

Sir Hartley said that early in May 1942, Dr. May was invited to become a 
member of one of the staffs of scientists set up by the Government for research 
into atomic energy. In January 1943 he went to Canada with other scientists 
to continue their "researches. He occupied a position there of considerable re- 
sponsibility as senior in the Nuclear Physics Division. He remained in Canada 
until September 1945 and no suspicion had arisen. In February last he was 
seen by Lieutenant Colonel Burt, head of the Special Branch of the CID 
of the military intelligence authorities, who told him it was known he had an 
appointment after his return from Canada to meet somebody in the neighbor- 
hood of the British Museum, and that he did not keep the appointment. 

Dr. May replied: "No, I did not keep the appointment. When I got back 
to this country I decided to wash my hands of the whole business." He made 
a statement in which he said : "About a year ago, while in Canada, I was con- 
tacted by an individual whose identity I decline to divulge. He called on me 
at my private apartment in Montreal and apparently kne^^ that I was employed 
by the Montreal laboratory, and sought information from me concerning atomic 
research. * * * After this preliminary meeting I met the individual on 
several subsequent occasions while in Canada. * * * i gave the man a 
routine report on atomic research as known to me. This information was mostly 
of a character which has since been published or is about to be published." 

The Attorney General remarked that all of this information had by no means 
been made public. 

The statement went on to say : "Before I left Canada it was arranged that 
on my return to London I was to keep an appointment with someone I didn't 
know. I did not keep the appointment because I had decided that this clandes- 
tine procedure was no longer necessary in view of official release of information. 

"The wdiole affair was extremely painful to me. I only embarked on it 
because I thought this was a contribution I could make for the safety of man- 
kind. I certainly did not do it for gain." 

Mr. Gardiner, addressing the Judge, said : "Doctors take the view that if they 
discover something of benefit to mankind, they are under obligation to see 
it is used for mankind and not kept for any country or people. There are 
scientists who take substantially the same view, and Dr. May held that view 
strongly." 

Mr. Justice Oliver, passing sentence of 10 years' penal servitude, said to 
May : "I cannot understand how any man in your position could have the crass 
conceit to arrogate to himself to do what you did, knowing it was one of the 
country's most precious secrets. I find you have acted not as an honourable man 
but as a dishonourable man. It is a very bad case indeed." 

Additional documentation of the case is to be found in a letter sent 
by Gen. Leslie K. Groves to Senator Hickenlooper on Marcli 12, 1946. 
The Senator read the letter to the Senate on March 19, 1946 : 

[From the March 19, 1946, Congressional Record] 

War Department, 
WasMngton, D. C, March 12, 19J,G. 
Hon. B. B. HioivENLOOPER, 

United States Senate, Washington, D. C. 

Dear Senator Hickenlooper : In reply to your letter of March 7, 1946, in which 
you requested certain information particularly as to any connection which Allan 
Nunn May, the British physicist whose arrest was recently announced in London, 
had with scientific research and development of atomic energy and the atomic 
bomb, and the seriousness of any possible disclosures by him, I submit the follow- 
ing information which I believe to be correct. 

Dr. Allan Nunn May is a native-born English physicist of about 40 years of age. 
He holds a doctor of philosophy degree from Trinity College, Cambridge. He 
came to Canada some time in 194.3 and was employed in the British group in the 
Montreal Laboratory of the National Research Council of Canada which was 
then embarking on research in the atomic energy field. He had been investigated, 
for security purposes, by the British Intelligence. That organization cleared 
him for access to any atomic energy work. It was not practicable nor was it our 



52 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

custom to look behind the approval of the British organization as to the trust- 
worthiness of any individual whom they had investigated. I am sure that they^ 
found no indication that he was not completely loyal and of unquestioned: 
integrity. 

On January 8, 1944, in the company of 12 other scientists from the National 
Research Council, Dr. May first visited the metallurgical laboratory of the Uni- 
versity of Chicago, which was, as you know, engaged in work for the Manhattan. 
District exclusively. May's visit had been approved by me in accordance with, 
our previously established and approved arrangements for the interchange of 
information. My records indicate that I met May at that January 8 meeting, 
which was the flrst meeting between representatives of the metallurgical labora- 
tory and of the National Research Council since I had been placed in charge of 
the project. At that meeting some phases of the work then in progress at the 
Chicago Laboratory were discussed, particularly with reference to phases of 
importance to the Montreal work. 

On April 13, 1944, May returned to the Chicago Laboratory and stayed until 
April 27. He worked on a minor experiment at the Argonne Laboratory, where 
the original graphite pile was, and is, located, and where a small-scale heavy 
water pile had also been constructed. He came to Chicago again on August 28- 
and staj^ed through September 1, conferring with officials of the Chicago Laboi'a- 
tory on the construction and operation of the Argonne pile and the proposed 
Montreal pile. 

His third and last visit occurred between September 25 and October 30, 1944. 
At that time he carried on extensive work in collaboration with our scientists iUx 
a highly secret and important new field. His work resulted in a research report 
in which he collaborated with an American scientist. May necessarily must 
have become familiar with the work then going on in the Argonne Laboratory. 
He also, at this time, probably acquired knowledge of some technical problems 
Avhich we encountered in the operation of the first Hanford pile. 

During his first two visits Dr. May stayed at a Chicago hotel. On his last 
visit he stayed at an Argonne dormitory, except for week ends which he spent, 
with an American physicist, in the Chicago apartment of another American 
physicist who was temporarily out of town. He had few social contacts with the 
other scientists although he was generally well liked by them. They have 
described him as charming, shy, little man with a dry sense of humor. The 
American scientists with whom he was in most intimate contact are in my 
opinion men of unquestioned loyalty and integrity. The revelation of his activi- 
ties came as a complete shock to them. 

By this time (October 1944) May had spent more time and acquired more 
knowledge at the Argonne than any other British physicist. Although I had 
absolutely no reason to suspect him, I did not like to have him acquire such a 
w idp ivnowledge of later developments. It is for that reason that in the spring of 
1945 I declined to approve a proposed fourth visit of 1 month's duration. May 
never returned to the Chicago Laboratory and never visited any other Man- 
hattan District installation. 

It is very doubtful if May has anything but a general knowledge of the con- 
struction of the atomic bomb. He would not have been able to secure any such 
knowledge through legitimate channels. It would have required a breaking 
down of the compartmentalization rules in each instance where he secured such 
knowledge. 

Dr. May has a rather wide knowledge of the Canadian effort. He understands 
the principles of design and construction of piles. He knows some important facts 
about the design, construction, and operation of the Hanford pile. 

We do not know whether May was in the pay of any outside agency at the time 
of his visits to the United States. Summarizing, he could have furnished to an 
unauthorized person small samples of plutonium and U-235 of unknown purity 
and degree of enrichment since it would be a virtual impossibility to trace the 
theft of such a small amount; and he could have given information of varying 
degrees of accuracy with respect to — 

(a) The bulk of the research and development carried on at the Argonne 
Laboratory of the Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago during 
1944 and early 1945. 

(6) Some of the technical problems involved in the design, construction, and 
operation of the Hanford Engineer Works. 

(c) A very limited amount of information with respect to the materials used in 
the actual bombs. 

(d) A very limited amount of information on which to base guesses as to our 
production rates of fissionable materals, both U-235 and plutonium. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 53 

I do not include in the above summary any knowledge secured from his work 
under British auspices. 

Although one of the other individuals whom the Canadians have arrested 
has been announced as an employee of the National Research Council, I under- 
stand that he was not connected with the atomic energy project there and he did 
not visit the United States Manhattan District installations. 

I do not know what other persons, Canadian or otherwise, may hereafter be 
publicly announced by Canada, the United States, or Great Britain as having 
been implicated in these spy activities. 

I shall be pleased to furnished such additional information as you may desire 
from time to time, subject of course to the maintenance of adequate security. 

I have discussed your letter with the Secretary of War, who has authorized 
me to answer it directly. I am sending a copy of the correspondence to him. 
Sincerely, 

L. R. Gkoves, 
Major General, United States Army. 

The following material concerning Allan Nunn May is reprinted 
from The Report of the (Canadian) Eoyal Commission, Appointed 
under Order in Council P. C. 411 of February 5, 19-16, to investigate 
the facts relating to and the circumstances surrounding the com- 
munication, by public officials and other persons in positions of trust 
of secret and confidential information to agents of a foreign power, 
June 27, 1946, Section VII, "Evaluation of Information and Material 
Handed Over," p. 617 : 

As to the question of atomic energy and the work done by nuclear physicists, 
we are able to say in the first place that on the evidence before us no one in 
Canada could have revealed how to make an atomic bomb. There was no 
one in Canada who had that information. In the second place there is no 
suggestion in the evidence that anyone who had any information on the subject 
made any disclosures except May. As to May, he did have certain information 
that would be of value to the Russians. He was in a position to get, where 
we do not know but possibly in Montreal, samples of Uranium 235 enriched 
and Uranium 23.3; he did get them and did deliver them to Lt. Angelov. These 
samples were considered so important by the Russians that upon their receipt, 
Motinov flew to Moscow with them. May also possessed considerable knowledge 
of the experimental plant at Chalk River, Ontario, which was described as 
"unique". In addition to May's work in Canada, he also did some work in 
the United States in collaboration with American scientists, but the evidence 
before us is that in such work also he could not properly have obtained the full 
story. How much of his information he handed over we are not able to say, 
but what he is known to have given, as shown by the documents and by bis 
own written statement, we are told would be of considerable help to the Russians 
in their research work. May, in his written statement, did not particularise 
about the extent of the information he gave, but stated in effect that it was 
more than has since appeared (i. e. in the Smyth Report). He said that he gave 
his "contact" a "written report on atomic research as known to me. This infor- 
mation was mostly of a character which has since been published or is about 
to be published." 

The following material concerning Allan Nunn May is also reprinted 
from The Report of the '(Canadian) Royal Commission, June 27, 1946, 
pp. 447 through 457. Many of the names referred to in this extract 
denote individuals connected with the Canadian espionage ring either 
by their real names or their code names. 

section iii. 13 

Allan Nunn May 

One of the many objectives of the Russian organization in Ottawa was the 
atomic liomb. The exhibits produced reveal bow anxious the organization was 
to obtain as full information as possible about the work done by the nuclear 
physicists, in connection with the use of atomic energy. 



54 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

As far back as March 28th, 1945, Lunan reported to Rogov : — 

Badeau [Smith] informs me that most secret work at present is on 
nuclear physics (bombardment of radioactive substances to produce 
energy). This is more hush-liusli than radar and is being carried on at 
the University of Montreal and at McMaster University at Hamilton. 
Badeau thinks that government purchasing of radium producing plant is 
connected with this research. 
Lunan was here transmitting a report from Durnford Smith (Badeau) on the 
work of the National Research Council. 

In mid-April of the same year one of the tasks given to Lunan and set out in 
the "Organisational Directives" for his group was: — 

5. . . . Ask Badeau whether he could obtain Uran No. 285, let him 
be cautious. If he can, let him write in detail about the radium pro- 
ducing plant. 
At about the same' time, Motinov prepared a draft of a telegram for Zabotin 
to send to Moscow, which reads : — 
To the Director, 

The Professor reported that the Director of the National Chemical Re- 
search [InstituteJ Committee, Stacey, told him about the new plant 
under construction : Pilot Plant at Grand'Mere, in Province of Quebec. 
This plant will produce "Uranium''. The engineering personnel is being 
obtained from McGill University and is already moving into tlie district 
of the new plant. As a result of experiments carried out with Uranium, 
it has been found that Uranium may be used for filling bombs, which is 
already in fact being done. 

The Americans have developed wide research work, having invested 
in this business 660 million dollars. 

"Grant" 

This telegram was probably not sent. "The Professor" is Raymond Boyer. 
The location of the plant is wrongly given ; it was at Chalk River and not at 
Grand Mere. The mistake evidently occurred when Motinov later made his 
notes of what Rose had told him of Rose's conversation with Boyer, which had 
also dealt with R. D. X. 

At this time, according to another document, Angelov {"Baxter") was given 
instructions to ai^jroach May (Alek) and to obtain from him a sample of Uran. 
235, and information as to the location of the United States Atomic Bomb Plant. 
The same mistake as to the location of the plant appears in this exhibit. 

There was some talk, too, that Smith might get into atomic research work. 
A report in Russian on one of the meetings of Lunan's Group, probably that 
of April 18th, says — 

Badeau asks for permission to change to work on uranium. There is a 
possibility either by being invited or by applying himself, but he warned 
that they are very careful in the selection of workers and that they 
are under strict observation. 
The same exhibit records Motinov's "Coficlusion" : — 

. . . 2. Not to recommend the transfer of Badeau to the production 
of uranium but to develop more widely the work in Research. 
In the future, for the purpose of more efficient direction, it is 
expedient to detach him from Back's group and to key him up 
as an indei^endent contact man. 
The matter was also taken up with Halperin (Bacon) because Lunan records, 
in a report dated oth July, 1945 : — 

Bacon . . . He is himself curious about the Chalk River Plant and 
tlie manufacture of Uranium. He claims that there is a great deal of 
talk and speculation on the subject but that nothing is known outside of 
the small and carefully guarded group completely in the know. He em- 
phasized that he himself is as remote from this type of information as 
I am m.vself. 
Evidently Lunan pressed Halperin to get Uranium-235 because another document 
records a report from him on Halperin (Bacon) as follows : — 



Words in black brackets, which appeared as "faint type" in the printed report of the 
Royal Commission, indicate words crossed out in original documents. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 55 

Black's Group Mat. No. 1 

Bacon. 

[He] It has become very difficult to work with him, especially after 
my request for Ur 235 (Uran 235). He said that as far as he knows, 
it is absolutely impossible to get it. Thus for instance he declared that 
perhaps it (Uran) is not available in sufficient quantity. Bacon ex- 
plained to me the theory of nuclear energy which is probably known 
to you. He refuses to put down in writing anything and does not want 
to give a. photograph or information on himself. [I believe] I think 
that at present he has a fuller understanding of the essence of my 
requests and he has a particular dislike for them. With such a trend 
of thought as he has, [we can not obtain] it is impossible to get any- 
thing from him [except] with the exception of verbal descriptions, and 
I am not in a position to [unable to] understand everything fully where 
it concerns technical details. 

I asked him what is taken into consideration in the construction of 
the very large plant (Chalk River, near Petawawa, Ontario), in the 
general opinion the principle of production of which is based on the 
physical properties of the nucleus; with regard to his expression of 
opinion that it is impossible to get Uran 235. He replied that he does 
not know. He believed that the project is still in the experimental 
stage. 

In July, 1944, Dr. Cockcroft, who holds the chair of Jacksonian Professor 
of Natural Philosophy at Cambridge, England, and who is a scientist of inter- 
national reputation, had been made director of Atomic Energy Project, Montreal 
and Chalk River, and worked in collaboration with Canadian scientists at the 
Montreal Laboratory of the National Research Council. 

Dr. Allan Nunn May, a British temporary civil servant, formed part of the 
research group that came over to Canada, and was at the Montreal Laboratory 
as a group leader under Dr. Cockcroft. In the performance of his duties. May 
had access to a substantial amount of knowledge of the work that was being 
done in connection with the Atomic Energy Project. The evidence shows that 
before coming to Canada, he was an ardent but secret Communist and already 
known to the authorities at Moscow. Not long after his arrival here he was 
contacted on instructions from ''The Director", and given the cover name "Alek" 
by the organization of Colonel Zabotin. In view of his background and the 
position he occupied, he was a logical person from whom the Russians could 
expect to obtain the available knowledge on atomic energy. By telegram dated 
July the 2Sth, 1045. "The Director" at Moscow sent a telegram to Colonel Zabotin 
with reference to Dr. Allan May ("Alek"), reading in part as follows:— 

No. 10458 
30.7.45 
To Grant 
Reference No. 218. 

. . . Try to get from him before departure detailed information on 
the progress of the work on uranium. Discuss with him : does he think 
it expedient for our undertaking to stay on the spot ; will he be able 
to do that or is it more useful for him and necessary to depart for 
London ? [In the first half] 

Director. 28.7.45 

These instructions were promptly followed in Ottawa, for a few days later, on 
the 9th of August, 1945, the following telegram was sent to Moscow by Zabotin : — 

241 
To the Director, 

Facts given by Alek : (1) The test of the atomic bomb was conducted 
in New Mexico, (with "49", "94-239"). The bomb dropped on Japan 
was made of uranium 235. It is known that the output of uranium 235 
amounts to 400 grams daily at the magnetic separation plant at Clinton. 
The output of "49" is likely two times greater (some graphite units are 
[established] planned for 250 mega watts, i. e. 250 grams each day). 
The scientific research work in this field is scheduled to be published, 
but without the technical details. The Americans already liave a pub- 
lished book on this subject. 

Words in black brackets, which appeared as "faint type" in the printed report of the 
Royal Commission, indicate words crossed out in original documents. 

81095—51 5 



56 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

(2) Alec handed over to us a platinum with 162 micrograms of uranium 
233 in the form of oxide in a thin lamina. We have had no nev?s about 
the mail. 
9.7.45. Grant. 

On the same date, another telegram was forwarded by Zabotin giving informa- 
tion obtained from May on a man by the name of Norman Veall, upon whom we 
are also reporting (see Section IV, 1). This telegram disclosed that May advised 
against accepting any information about the atomic bomb from Veall. 

243 
To the Director, 

Alek reported to us that he has met Normal Veal (he was at his home). 
Veal works in the laboratory of the Montreal branch of the Scientific 
Research Council. . . . He asked the opinion of Alek : Is it worth while 
for him (Veal) to hand over information on the atomic bomb. Alek 
expressed himself in the negative. Alek stated that Veal occupies a 
fairly low position and knows very little. . . . 

9.8.45. Grant. 

A few days after May had handed over to the Russians information con- 
cerning the atomic bomb, and the above-mentioned quantity of uranium 233, 
Zabotin paid a social visit to a friend living in the vicinity of Chalk River. He 
then had the opportunity of seeing the plant from the river during a motor-boat 
cruise, and reported to -'llie Dirictor' what he \va(\ seen. The hitier. ( n the 14th 
of August, 1945, sent him a telegram which included the following : — 

114.38. 
14.8.45. 
To Grant 
1. Your No. 231. 

Wire what connections F has with the plant indicated by you, 

where is he working at present, and what are your mutual relations 
with him? 

If possible, give a more detailed description of the exterior of the 
plant. . . . 

Director. 

May made two visits to the same plant : the first on the 16th August, 1945, 
and tiie second on the 3rd September. He also went on several occasions to the 
Chicago plant, doing experiments in coUaborati'in "itii ^ nip'-iean scientists. 
On August 22nd, 1945, "The Director'' telegraphed Zabotin: — 
Supplement to No. 11923 

N 11931 
22.8.45 
To Grant 

Take measures to organize acquisition of documentary materials on 
the atomic bomb ! 
The technical process, drawings, calculations. 

Director, 
22.8.45. 

On the 31st August Zabotin. not having received any reply from Moscow as 
to the value of the information on the atomic bomb which he had sent, tele- 
graphed to ''The Director" as follows: — 

275 
To the Director 

I beg you to inform tne to what extent have Alek's materials on the 
question of uranium satisfied you and our scientists (his reports on pro- 
duction etc.) 

This is necessary for us to know in order that we may be able to 
set forth a number of tasks on this question to other clients. Have you 
received all NN mail up to July of this year? 

Grant 
31.8.45 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 57 

The evidence shows that May provided the Soviet espionage leaders with 
information on other subjects as well as on the atomic bomb. One of the docu- 
ments is a telegram from Zabotin to Moscow, reading as follows : — 

242 
To the Director 

On our task Alek has reported brief data concerning electronic shells. 
In particular these are being used by the American Navy against 
Japanese suicide-fliers. There is in the shell a small radio-transmitter 
with one electronic tube and it is fed by dry batteries. The body of the 
shell is the antenna. The bomb explodes in the proximity of an aero- 
plane from the action of the reflected waves from the aeroplane on the 
transmitter. The basic difficulties were : tlie preparation of a tube 
and batteries which could withstand the discharge of the shell and the 
determination of a rotation speed of the shell which would not require 
special adaptation in the preparation of the shell. The Americans have 
achieved this result, but apparently have not handed this over to the 
English. The Americans have used a plastic covering for the battery 
which withstands the force of pressure during the motion of the shell. 

Grant. 
9.7.45. 

After his second visit to the Chalk River plant on September 3rd, 1945, Dr. 
May departed for England. The documents that have been produced reveal 
that Colonel Zabotin's organization was aware of this departure and that May 
was instructed to contact a person in London, England. This contact was being 
organized between Moscow, Londen and Ottawa. 

The following telegrams were exchanged between Zabotin and "The Director'* 
on this matter : — 

No. 10458 

30.7.45 
To Grant 
Reference No. 218. 
[28. 7.45] 

Work out and telegraph arrangements for the meeting and the pass- 
word of Alek with our man in London. 

Director. 28.7.45 
Grant 

81.7.45 



244 
To the Director, 

We have worked out the conditions of a meeting with Alek in London. 
Alek will work in King's College, Strand. It will be possible to find 
him there through the telephone book. 

Meetings : October 7.17.27 on the street in front of the British Museum. 
The time, 11 o'clock in the evening. Identification sign :— A newspaper 
under the left arm. Password :— Best regards to Mikel (Maikl). He 
cannot remain in Canada. At the beginning of September he must fly to 
London. Before his departure he will go to the Uranimum Plant in'the 
Petawawa district where he will be for about two weeks. He promised, 
if possible, to meet us before his departure. He said that he must come 
next year for a month to Canada. We handed over 500 dollars to him. 

Grant. 

11955 

• 22.8.45 
To Grant 
Reference No. 244. 

The arrangements worked out for the meeting are not satisfactory. 
I am informing you of new ones. 
1. Place: 

In front of the British Museum in London, on Great Russell Street, 

at the opposite side of the street, about Museum Street, from the side 



Words in black brackets, which appeared as "faint type" in the printed report of the 
Koyal Commission, indicate wdrds crossed out in original documents. 



58 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

of Tottenham Court Road repeat Tottenham Court Road, Alek walks • 
from Tottenham Court Road, the contact man from the opposite side — 
Southampton Row. 

2. Time : 

As indicated by you, however, it would be more expedient to carry 
out the meeting at 20 o'clock, if it should be convenient to Alek, as 
at 23 o'clock it is too dark. As for the time, agree about it with Alec 
and comnumicate the decision to me. In case the meeting should 
not take pUice in October, the time and day will be repeated in the 
following months. 

3. Identification signs : 

Alek will have under his left arm the newspaper "Times", the 
contact man will have in his left hand the magazine "Picture Post", 

4. The Password: 

The contact man : "What is the shortest way to the Strand?" 
Alek : "Well, come along, I am going that way." 
In the beginning of the business conversation Alek says : "Best 
regards from Mikel". 
Report on transmitting the conditions to Alek. 

18.8 Director. 

22.8.45 
Grant. 

The evidence before us does not reveal whether the contact referred to in the 
above telegram was made. 

In February, 1946, while our investigation was in progress. May was arrested 
in London on a charge of violating the Official Secrets Act. Before being ar- 
rested. Dr. May confessed his guilt. His written statement, signed by him, reads 
as follows:— 

About a year ago whilst in Canada, I was contacted ty an individual 
whose identity I decline to divulge. He called on me at my private apart- 
ment in Sioail Avenue, Montreal. He apparently kneio I loas employed hy 
the Montreal laboratory and he sought information from me concerning 
atomic research. 

I gave and had given very careful consideration to correctness of making 
sure that development of atomic energy teas not confined to U. S. A. I 
took the very painful decision that it was necessary to convey general in- 
formation on atomic energy and make sure it ivas taken seriously. For 
this reason I decided to entertain proposition made to me by the individual 
who called on me. 

After this preliminary meeting I met the individual on several subsequent 
occasions ichilst in Canada. He made specific requests for information, 
which toere just nonsense to me — / mean by this that they were difficult 
for me to' comprehend. But he did request samples of uranium from me 
and information generally on atomic energy. 

At one meeting I gave the man microscopic amounts of U.233 and U.235 
(one of each). The U.235 ivas a slightly enriched sample and toas in a 
small glass tube and consisted of about a milliogram of oxide. The U.233 
was about a tenth of a milliogram and teas a very thin deposit on a platinum 
oil and ivas wrapped in a piece of paper. 

I also gave the man a written report on atomic research as known to me. 
This information ivas mostly of a character which has since been published 
or is about to be published. 

The man also asked me for information about the U. 8. electronically 
controlled A. A. shells. I kneio very little about these and so could give 
only very little information. 

He also asked me for introductions to people employed in the laboratory 
including a man named Veale but I advised him against contacting him. 

The man gave me [200 ANM] some dollars (I forget how many) in a 
bottle of whiskey and I accepted these against my will. 

Before I left Canada it iras arranged, that on my return to London I was 
to keep an appointment ivith somebody I did not know. I tvas given precise 
details a.s- to making contact but I forget them now. I did not keep the 
appointment because I had decided that this clandestine procedure was no 
longer appropriate in view of the official release of information and the 
possibility of satisfactory international control of atomic energy. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 59 

The whole affair was extremely painful to me and I only embarked on it 
because I felt this was a contriMition I could make to the safety of mankind. 
I certainly did not do it for gain. 

As it will be seen, May clearly admits having done what has been revealed 
by the official documents from the Embassy, namely, the giving of uranium and 
a written report on atomic research as known to him. He denies having made 
the pre-arrauged contact previously mentioned. The person who contacted him 
in Montreal and obtained the uranium and other information concerning the 
atomic bomb has been identified by Gouzenko as being Lieut. Angelov, one of 
the Secretaries of the Military Attache. It has also been established by the 
documents that the amount of money which May received was at least $700. plus 
two bottles of whisky. 

After having elected to be tried by a jury in London, May, on the day set 
for his trial, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to ten years penal servitude. 

After he had pleaded guilty and the United Kingdom Attorney-General had 
summarized the facts of the case, defending Counsel put in a plea for leniency. 
In passing sentence Mr. Justice Oliver said : — 

Allan Ntmn May, I have listened with some slight surprise to some of the 
things which your learned counsel has said he is entitled to put before me: 
the picture of you as a man of honour tvho had only done tvhat you believed 
to be right. I do not take that vieio of yott, at all. How any man in your 
position could have had the crass conceit, let alone the wickedness, to 
arrogate to himself the decision of a matter of this sort, ivhen you yourself 
had given your written undertaking not to do it, and knew it was one of 
the country's most precious secrets, tchen you yourself had drawn and 
were drawing pay for years to keep your own bargain with your country — 
that you could have done this is a dreadful thing. I think that you acted 
not as an honourable but a dishOfiouraMe man. I think you acted with 
degradation. Whether money was the object of ivhat you did, in fact 
you did get money for what you did. It is a very bad case indeed. The 
sentence upon you is one of ten years' penal servitude. 

We have no doubt of the importance of the information given by Dr. May 
on atomic energy ; for that purpose we had the advantage of hearing Dr. Cock- 
croft whose collaboration has been most helpful in the determination of the 
extent and value of the secret data communicated. This is further dealt with 
in Section VII. 



7. The Greenglass Case — Details 

The particulars of this case are thoroughly developed in the testi- 
mony which David Greenglass himself gave at the trial of Julius and 
Ethel Rosenberg and Morton Sobell on March 9 and March 12, 1951. 
The following is a verbatim account of what was said, as taken down 
by the court reporter. The remarks of counsel for the Government 
and the defense have been omitted except where this would impair 
understanding of Greenglass' statements. Also included is the testi- 
mony of Dr. Walter S. Koski, an expert witness for the prosecution. 

From stenographer's minutes of Case 134-245, United States of 
America v. Julius Rosenberg et al. Before Hon. Irving R. Kaufman, 
district judge, United States District Court, Southern District of New 
York, March 9, 1951. 

David Greenglass, called as a witness in behalf of the Government, being first 
duly sworn, testified as follows : 

******* 

Direct examination by Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Mr. Greenglass, will you try to keep your voice up so the Court and jury 
can get the benefit of your testimony. Are you the David Greenglass who is 
named as a defendant in the indictment here on trial? — A. I am. 

Q. That indictment charging conspiracy to commit espionage? — A. Yes. 

Q. Have you entered a plea to that indictment? — A. I have. 

Q. What is that plea?— A. Guilty. 

Q. Are you now in the custody of the United States Marshal? — A. I am. 

Q. Now, prior to the time you were remanded to the custody of the United 
States Marshal, what was your home address? — A. 265 Rivington Street. 

Q. That is here in Manhattan? — A. Yes. 

Q. How old are you?— A. 29. 

Q. Wlien were you born?— A. March 3, 1922. 

Q. Are yoiu* parents alive? — A. My father is dead. My mother is alive. 

Q. Do you have any brothers and sisters? — A. I have two brothers and one 
sister. 

Q. Your sister is the defendant Mrs. Ethel Greenglass Rosenberg ; is that cor- 
rect? — A. That is true. 

Q. And another defendant, Julius Rosenberg, is your brother-in-law? — A. That 
is true. 

Q. Is Mrs. Rosenberg older or younger than you are? — A. Older. 

Q. What are the names of your brothers? — A. One brother is Samuel. One 
is Bernard. 

Q. Are you yourself married? — A. I am. 

Q. What was your wife's maiden name? — A. Ruth Printz. 

Q. How do you spell that? — A. P-r-i-n-t-z. 

Q. When were you married? — A. Novem'ber 29, 1942. 

Q. Do you have any children? — ^A. I have two. 

Q. How old are they? — A. One is nine months old and one is four years old. 

Q. Boys or girl? — A. One is a girl. One is a boy. 

Q. Where were you educated, Mr. Greenglass? — A. I was educated in New 
York. 

Q. Would you tell us briefly the schools which you attended here in New 
York?— A. I went to P. S. 4, P. S. 97, Haaren Aviation School, Brooklyn Polytech- 
nic, and Pratt Institute. 

Q. Wliat field have you pursued since your graduation from public school? — 
A. I am a machinist. 

Q. Have you studied the work of a machinist and related problems while you 
were at Aviation School? — A. Yes. 



Note. — Counsel for the U. S. Government : Irving Saypol, United States attorney ; Miles 
J. Lane, James Kilsheimer, and Roy Cohn, assistant United States attorneys. Other 
counsel whose names appear in transcript material represent defendants. 

60 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 61 

Q. And also at Pratt Institute ; is that correct?— A. Yes, sir. 

^ Tc fiifit" cori'PC'f" *^ A Ygs sir 

Q. After you left school and prior to 1943 did you have any practical experi- 
ence as a machinist? — A. I did. 

Q. Here in New York? — A. In New York. 

Q. Now, in 1943 did you enter the Army of the United States?— A. I did. 

Q. As a private? — A. Private. 

Q. Wlien in 1943 did you go into the Army?— A. April 1943. 

Q. After that did you have basic training? — A. Yes. 

Q. Where was that?— A. Aberdeen, Maryland. 

Q. Were you thereafter assigned to work as a machinist while in the Army?— 
A. I was. 

Q. After that did you go to ordnance school?— A. I went to ordnance school; 
yes. 

Q. AVhat did you do out there? — A. It was a shop 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Out where? 

Q. The ordnance school : where was the ordnance school, Mr. Greenglass?— A. 
In Aberdeen, Maryland. 

Q. I think you said it was a shop? — A. It was a shop. 

Q. And did you pursue your trade as a machinist in that shop? — A. I did. 

Q. How long were you at Aberdeen? — A. Until July. 

Q. That is July of 1943?— A. Yes. 

Q. Now, am I correct in stating that during the next year, July 1943 to July 
1944, you were stationed at various posts, Army posts, throughout the United 
States?— A. I was. 

Q. You were stationed at a number of them? — A. A number of them. 

Q. Different parts of the country? — A. Yes. 

Q. Now, in July of 1944, did you receive a new assignment?— A. I did. 

Q. To what location? At what location?— A. To Oak Ridge, Tennessee, the 
Manhattan Project. 

Q. The Manhattan Project District? 

The Court. When was that? 

The Witness. It was July 1944. 

Q. July of 1944. You were assigned to the Manhattan District Project of the 
United States Army, is that correct? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did you at that time know what the Manhattan District Project of the 
United States Army was? — A. I did not. 

Q. You know now it was the project in charge of construction of the atomic 
bomb, is that correct? — A. I do. 

Q. Now, when you were out at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, in July of 1944, how 
long did you stay out there? — A. About two weeks. 

Q. Now, during that period were you given any security lectures? — A. I was. 

Q. Did they concern the new duties you were to undertake? — A. Yes, they did. 

Q. Were you told anything about the nature of those duties and the nature of 
the work at Manhattan Project? — A. I was. 

Q. What were you told? — A. I was told that it was a secret project. 

Q. AVere you told at that time what was going on at that project, what was 
being constructed? — A. No. 

Q. You were told nothing about that, is that correct? — A. Nothing at all. 

Q. Was the Espionage Act mentioned to you in connection with revealing any 
information as to what was going on in the Manhattan Project? — A. It was. 

Q. After your two weeks' orientation at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, were you then 
assigned to report to some other place in the United States? — A. I was. 

Q. Where was that? — A. Los Alamos, New Mexico. 

Q. How did you go out there? — A. Train all the way. 

Q. /Vbout when did you report at Los Alamos? — A. August 1944. 

Q. When you reported at Los Alamos were you given certain instructions con- 
cerning the duties you were to pursue out there? — A. I was interviewed for a job. 

Q. Did there come a time when you were told that you would work as a 
machinist in the shop? — A. That is right. 

Q. Were you told at that time the nature of the work being done at Manhattan 
Projects? — A. No. # 

Q. Was the fact that it was secret reaffirmed to you? — A. It was. 

Q. Were you told just how much you were to know about what was going 
on at Manhattan Project? — ^A. I was told I was to know as much as was 
necessary to do my job. 



62 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. And nothing more? — A. Nothing more. 

Q. Now, would you tell us at this point when it was that you learned for 
the first time that the Manhattan Project District was the district of the United 
States Army concerned with the construction of the atomic bomb? — A. When my 
wife came to visit me in November 1944, she told me that Julius had told her 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to any conversation between this witness' wife and 
himself outside the presence of the defendant Julius Rosenberg. 

The Court. She is named as a coconspirator. 

Ml-. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

The CoxjRT. Objection overruled. 

Q. Will you tell us again? I think you said the time was November 1944?— < 
A. Right. 

Q. What did your wife tell you? — A. She told me that Julius had said that 
I was working on the atomic bomb. 

Q. And that vpas the first you knew of it? — A. That was the first I knew of 
it. 

Q. You had never been told that by anybody in an ofiicial capacity of the United 
States Government? — A. No, sir. 

Q. Now, going back to August of 

The Court. Will you just slow up the slightest bit because I am trying to 
make some notes. 

Mr. CoHN. I will be glad to. I am trying to get over some of the preliminary 
points. 

Q. In August of 1944, Mr. Greenglass, when you took up your duties at Los 
Alamos, will you tell us 

The Court. Excuse me. When was that conversation with your wife? No- 
vember? 

The Witness. At the end of November 1944. 

The Court. Very well. 

Q. About several months after you first went to Los Alamos ; is that right? — 
A. It was. 

Q. During that first few months you did not know just what was being done 
at Los Alamos? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now, I think you said you were assigned to work as a machinist ?^A. I 
was. 

Q. And where, physically, was your work done? — A. It was at a shop called 
the "E" building shop or the "student shop." 

Q. Where was that located? — A. In "E" building, in the tech. area, at Los 
Alamos. 

Q. By "the tech. area," you mean the technical area? — A. Technical area at 
Los Alamos. 

Q. Out at Los Alamos, this shop was located in one of the buildings out at 
Los Alamos; is that right? — A. That's right. 

Q. You were assigned to work there as a machinist? — ^A. I was. 

Q. Now, you said the "E" shop; did this letter "E" have any significance? — ■ 
A. It was the building I was in. 

Q. That was the building you were in? — A. Yes. 

Q. Now, were you a member of a group out there? Was this building and was 
the machine shop under the jurisdiction of a particular group of the Manhat- 
tan District Project, at Los Alamos? — ^A. It was. 

Q. What was the name of that group? — A. It was the "E" group. 

Q. The "E" group?— A. Right. 

Q. Now, did the "E" group have a head or a leader? — A. It did. 

Q. What was he called? — A. His name was Kistiakowski. 

Q. Is that Dr. George B. Kistiakowski of Harvard University?— A. That's 
right. 

Q. And do you know what his professional standing is, in what field he is 
known? — A. Yes, I do. 

Q. What is that field? — A. Thermodynamics man. 

The Court. Speak up. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I didn't get that, I am sorry. 

The Witness. He is a thermodynamics man. 

". Thermodynamics? — A. Physical chemistry. 

Q. In general terms, what was group "E" concerned with? — A. With high 
explosives. 

Q. High explosives? — ^A. Yes. 

Q. Did you have any other superiors in addition to Professor Kistiakowski? — 
A. I did. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 63 

Q. Will you tell us? — A. The foreman of the shop was a man by the name 
of De Mars", a civilian. I don't know how to spell his name. 

Mr. CoHN. I don't either, your Honor, but we will check it. 

Q You say he was the foreman of the shop?— A. That's right. 

Q. Did you have any 'superiors between the foreman of the shop and Dr. 
Kistiakowski, who was the leader of "E" group?— A. I did. 

Q. Who was that?— A. His name was Fitzpatrick. 

Q. Was he a civilian? — A. He was a GI. 

Q. What was his rank?— A. Well, later on he became a Master Sergeant. 
I don't recall his rank at the time. 

Q. And what was his title?— A. He was in charge of procurement and the 

machine shop of "E" group. .^. ,, <.t^„o 

Q. He was in charge of procurement and this machine shop, this shop E ! — 
A. For the "E" group. 

Q. In other words, the structure was, out in Los Alamos, the "E" group, headed 
by Dr. Kistiakowski and concerned with high explosives ; under Dr. Kistiakowski 
there was Sergeant Fitzpatrick A. That's right. 

Q. In charge of and concerned with procurement, and insofar as the shop 
itself, it had a foreman and that foreman was Mr. De Mars, at the beginning, 
I think you said?— A. That's right. 

Q. And you were one of the machinists? — A. I was one of the machinists. 

Q. About how many machinists would you say were assigned to that shop?— 
A. Oh, there were about — the greatest amount was about 10 machinists. 

Q. Would the number vary from time to time?— A. Yes; it would vary. 

The Court. May I suggest, Mr. Cohn, that you stand back a little bit. 

Mr. CoHN. All right. 

Q. Now, did there come a time when Mr. De Mars was transferred, gave up 
his duties as foreman? — A. He did. 

Q. Did you get another foreman out at the shop? — ^A. I did. 

Q. What was his name? — A. Bob Holland. 

Q. Holland, H-o-l-l-a-n-d?— A. Right. 

Q. Now, after Mr. Holland's assignment, was there any change in your 
duties? — A. I became the assistant foreman. 

Q. You became the assistant foreman? — A. Yes. 

Q. Did there come a time when Mr. Holland left? — A. There was. 

Q. About when was that? — A. Oh, the end of '4.5, beginning of '46. 

Q. After Mr. Holland left, was there any further change in your duties? — 
A. I became tlie foreman of the shop. 

Q. Did you continue to hold that position until you were discharged from 
the Army of the United States?— A. I did. 

Q. When were you so discharged? — A. In the last day of February 1946. 

Q. Were you honorably discharged? — A. I was. 

The CouBT. Then for what period of time were you foreman? 

The Witness. I would say a period of about two, two and a half months. 

Q. Just prior to your discharge from the Army; is that right? — A. That's 
right. 

Q. Will you tell us, were you a noncommissioned oflScer when you were dis- 
charged from the Army?— A. I was. 

Q. What rank?— A. T/4, sergeant. 

Q. T/4, sergeant. — A. Yes. 

Q. Sergeant T/4?— A. Yes. 

Q. Now, going back to the time when you undertook your duties as a machinist 
at this "E" shop out at Los Alamos, would you tell us, tell the Court and jury 
in general terms just what your duties were, what you did over the period 
of time you were working in the machine shop, as a general proposition? — A. 
Well, the shop itself took jobs from various scientists and made apparatus 
whenever they needed it ; and there were two methods of jobs coming througli 
the shop. One was to — when a scientist needed a piece of apparatus, he just 
sent it through procurement and it was sent to either one of the three shops 
in the technical area. 

Q. There were three shops; is that right? — A. There were three shops. 

Q. What were the names of the other two? — -A. "V" and "C" shop, which were 
bigger than mine ; both were bigger than mine. 

Q. Yours was the smallest shop; is that right? — A. Ours was the smallest 
shop. 

Q. Go ahead. — A. That was one way ; and they would be distributed according 
to how much work each shop had. The other way was go directly to Fitz and 



64 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

say, "How about getting this job done?" And usually it was put through, or 
the sketch or piece of paper or the scientist talking to one of us machinists to 
do it. 

Q. In other words, it was your job to machine this particular — —A. Apparatus. 

Q. Apparatus or product that the scientist requirAl in connection with his 
experimentation on atomic energy; is that correct?— A. That is correct. 

Q. Now, did the physical location of your "E" shop remain the same during 
your entire stay at Los Alamos? — A. No, it didn't. 

Q. When was there a change? — A. Oh, it was in the fall 1944, we had a 
building built and the whole pi'ocurement section moved into that building. 
It was called the "Theta" building. 

Q. That building, and the shop under which you undertook your duties was 
known as "Theta" shop? — ^A. Theta. 

The Court. How do you spell that "Theta"? 

The Witness. T-h-e-t-a. 

Mr. COHN. It is a Greek letter. 

The Witness. A Greek letter. 

Q. Was there any change in your duties when you went over to Theta shop? — 
A. They remained the same. 

Q. You were doing the same thing, but the physical location had changed ; 
you had been in the "E" shop before and you were now in the Theta shop? — 
A. That's right. 

Q. Did you continue to work in the Theta shop, in the various capacities you 
have described, until the time that you left lios Alamos? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you continue to do work such as that which you have described to us?^ 
A. That is correct. 

Q. Now, you have told us about the security talks you had at Oak Ridge 
and about what was told you concerning the secret nature of your work when 
you got out to Los Alamos. In addition to these oral instructions, were you 
given any written material containing security regulations and telling you just 
what you were at liberty to disclose and what you should not disclose?— A. I was 
given such a book. 

Mr. CoHN. May this be marked for identification, your Honor? 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 1" for identification.) 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. May we look at it? 

Mr. CoiiN. As soon as I offer it in evidence, Mr. Bloch, certainly. 

Q. Would you just look at this, look through it for a minute, Mr. Greenglass 
[handing to witness], have you examined Government's Exhibit 1 for identifica- 
tion?— A. I did. 

Q. Do you recognize that? — A. It is a photostat of the booklet that I received 
at Los Alamos. 

Mr. CoHN. I offer it in evidence, your Honor. 

Mr. A. Bloch. Objected to on the ground it is incompetent, irrelevant, and 
immaterial, not binding on my defendant. 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. A. Bloch. Exception. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I suppose when Mr. Bloch said his defendant, that means 
all defendants? • 

The Court. That is correct. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Could I see it? 

Mr. Cohn. Yes [handing]. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I will try to be as quick as I can. 

Mr. Cohn. It is all right. 

(Government's Exhibit 1 previou.sly marked for identification received in evi- 
dence.) 

The Court. Are you going to call certain portions to the attention of the jury? 

Mr. Cohn. I am, your Honor. I might read just a few brief portions to the 
jury, pass it around so that they can examine the whole thing, and if any of the 
gentlemen of the defense feel I have omitted anything I should have read, I 
assume they will be at liberty to do that now that this has been received as 
Government's Exhibit 1, your Honor. 

The Court. All right. 

Mr. Cohn. I may say to the jury, the exhibit itself is marked "Restricted." 
The word on the beginning of the first page is "Security." The first two para- 
graphs read as follows : 

"This handbook has been designed to provide members of the technical area 
staff and their families with a concise summary of existing security regulations. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE. 65 

It should be understood that to obey these regulations is a minimum require- 
ment. There is a further obligation on the part of everyone to maintain a 
constant and intelligent interest in the prevention and reporting of all incidents 
whose occurrence endangers the security of the project. It is a basic policy of 
the project that everyone working here should know whatever is required for 
doing his job well. It is therefore of greatest importance for each person tc^ 
understand that he is in a position of trust with regard to all such information 
and also with regard to information which he may accidentally gain about other 
confidential matters." 

There is further descriptive material. On page 2 there is a section entitled 
''Communication." 

"(A) There must be no conversation outside the technical area, or in the 
presence of unauthorized persons, and no information in personal letters, convey- 
ing any of the following kinds of information : 

"1. The purpose of the project. 

"2. The general problems being worked on. 

"3. Technical data connected with 1 or 2 above. 

"4. The scheduling or general progress of the work. 

"5. Any over-all account of the personnel employed on the project. 

"6. The procurement or presence here of essential matei'ials and installations. 

"By 'unauthorized persons' are meant persons whom you do not know to 
have the permission of their group or divisional leaders or the director to 
receive the information in question. 

"(B) There must be no conversation outside the post, or in the presence of 
unautliorized persons, and no information in personal letters, conveying any of 
the following kinds of information : 

"1. The professions or former connections of persons working in the technical 
area. 

"2. The name of the contractor under whom the project is being run. 

"3. Affiliation of this project with other war projects. 

"4. The size of the project or post, or other significant features such as water 
supplies, fire-protection installations, etc. 

"5. The general kinds of work going on in the technical area. We are engi- 
neers ; the technical area should be called only 'the technical area.' 

"By 'unauthorized persons' are meant persons who do not live in or have 
access to the post, or who, living here, have no reason to receive the particular 
class of information. 

"6. Your address, P. O. Box 1663, Sante Fe, New Mexico, may be given to 
family, friends, and in private business dealings. Do not use Los Alamos sta- 
tionery in private correspondence." 

Then there are further restrictions concerning the receipt of mail ; travel — 
the employees are instructed not to establish or maintain social relations vpith 
anyone living in neighboring comminiities ; not to have friends visit them out 
there ; are told not to fill out any questionnaires, licenses, applications or any- 
thing else without first consulting the Personnel Ofiice as to the propriety of the 
detailed information requested by that application ; and to report any people 
without the proper badge 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. By the way, were badges worn out there? — A. They were. 
Q. Having different significance? — A. They were. 
Q. How did they go, by color? — A. By color. 

Q. What did a color represent? — A. A white badge was authorized to go to the 
seminars and be let in on all the information that was available on the bomb. 
******* 

Mr. A. Bloch. Will you read the last answer? 

(Answer read.) 

Q. That was a white badge? — A. That was a white badge. 

Q. Were there any other colors?— A. There was a red badge which allowed 
the bearer to get all the information necessary to be able to do his job ; and 
then there was a blue badge whicli allowed — well, it allowed the bearer to go into 
the tech area to do various jobs like steamfitting or ditch-digging, but not to be 
around any of the equipment or to see any of the experiments. 

Q. Now, I assume that is what this regulation refers to when it says that you 
are to report any person wearing the wrong badge to the authorities? — A. That 
is right. 

Q. When observed in a certain area? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did you yourself have a badge? — A. I did. 



66 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 



y 



Q. Now, specifically, you told us that Dr. Kistiakowski was out at Los Alamos 
and was in fact the leader of Group E? — A. Right. 

Q. And that his reputation is in the field of physical chemistry? — ^A. That is 
right. 

Q. Thermodynamics? — A. That is right. 

Q. While out at Los Alamos did you. come to learn the identity of any other 
scientists who were present and working on atomic energy? — A. That is correct. 

Q. Would you name one or two of those? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Is it contended that this testimony will connect up any of the 
defendants? 

Mr. CoHN. Quite definitely, your Honor. 

The Witness. I did get to know a number of scientists and some of world fame, 
for instance, Dr. Oppenheimer, whom we knew as the head of the project. 

Q. J. Robert Oppenheimer? — A. That is right, and there was Neil Bohr, whom 
I first knew as Baker. 

Q. What do you mean by that? — A. It was a pseudonym to keep his identity 
secret. 

Q. You mean that Dr. Bohr was known at Los Alamos by an assumed name, 
that of Baker?— A. That is right, Mr. Baker. 

Q. And you knew at first that there was a man named Mr. Baker, a scientist? — 
A. That is right. 

Q. Was there a period of time during which you yourself did not know who 
Mr. Baker actually was? — A. That is correct. 

Q. And did there come a time when you found out who he was? — A. That is 
right. 
, Q. And who is he? — A. Mr. Baker was Neils Bohr. He is a nuclear physicist. 

Q. Considered one of the outstanding in the world, is that correct? — ^A. That is 
correct. 

Q. Do you recall whether the fact that Dr. Bohr was out in Los Alamos was 
secret information? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. When was this? Will you fix the time, please? 

Q. Will you tell us the best you remember when you first knew that Mr. Baker, 
a man named Mr. Baker was out there? — ^A. It was about September or October 
of 1944. 

Q. You knew him only as Baker, is that right? — A. That is right. 

Q. Was it shortly thereafter you found out who he really was? — A. That is 
right. 

Q. And you were told he was Dr. Bohr, is that correct? — A. That is right. In 
passing one of my colleagues said, "That's Baker and he is Neils Bohr." 

Q. You knew that the information as to who Dr. Bohr out there was was a 
secret? — A. I did. 

Q. As a matter of fact, I think that this very security pamphlet states that the 
identity of scientists out there and their former occupation was not to be dis- 
cussed by any unauthorized person, is that right? — A. That is right. 

Q. I assume as a practical matter that one's former occupation in a particular 
field of science would be a clue to the particular work he might be doing? — A. That 
is correct. 

Q. Is that the reason for this regulation? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If he knows. 

The Witness. That is the reason for it. 

Q. In addition to Mr. Baker whom you came to know as Neils Bohr and Dr. 
Oppenheimer, may I ask you specifically, did you know that Dr. Harold Urey was 
connected with the Manhattan project? — A. I did. 

Q. About what point after your arrival at Los Alamos did you learn that 
fact? — A. Oh, it must have been about December or so. 

The Court. When did you learn about Dr. Oppenheimer? I do not think you 
told us about that. 

The Witness. That was almost at the beginning of the time I was there. 

Mr. E. H. Block. Your Honor, I will object and am objecting to whether or not 
this particular witness knew some of the most renowned scientists at Los Alamos 
unless this particular information is related to the issues in this case so far as it 
bears upon the guilt or innocence of the defendants. 

Mr. CoHN. I would be glad to state to your Honor that the name of each scien- 
tist which has been spoken by Mr. Greenglass from this stand will be directly 
related to the defendants in this case and specifically to Mr. Bloch's client. 

The Court. Very well. 

Mr. CoHN. I make that representation. 

The Court. Very well. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 67 

Q. And there were other scientists there; is that correct?— A. That is correct. 

Q. Whose identities you had learned? — A. Yes. 

Q. Now, was one of the scientists who was present at Los Alamos and whose 
name and presence you came to know, Dr. Walter Koski? — A. That is correct. 

Mr. CoHN. I believe Dr. Koski is here in court. 

Would you rise, Dr. Koski? 

(A man rises in courtroom.) 

Q. Do you recognize Dr. Koski here in court? — A. I do. 

Q. Did you do any work at any time in connection with apparatus that Dr. 
Koski required in the course of his experimentation on atomic energy?— 
A. I did. 

Q. Did you specifically work on the machining of a flat type .lens mold and 
other molds which Dr. Koski required in the course of his experimentation on 
atomic energy? — A. I did. 

Mr. E. II. Bloch. May I just make a suggestion. I am going to suggest to the 
Court and the Court indirectly to Mr. Cohu that when on subjects whicli have 
been referred to in previous documents that his questions not be leading and 
suggestive and that he try to avoid leading and suggestive questions. 

Q. You say you yourself 

The Court. Just a moment. What was the last question and answer? 

(Question and answer read.) 

(Question read.) 

Q. Now did there come a time when the first atomic explosion took place? — ' 
A. Yes. 

*Q. When was that?— A. July 1945. 

Q. Where? — A. Alamogordo, New Mexico. 

Q. In the course of your employment at Los Alamos did you hear discussion 
concerning this atomic explosion? — ^A. I did. 

The Court. Was that after the explosion or did you hear about the anticipated 
explosion ? 

The Witness. I heard of an explosion to take place at Alamogordo. 

Q. Was that before? — A. I heard that before. Afterwards I heard of the 
atomic explosion that took place at Alamogordo. 

Q. Now am I correct in stating that during the entire period of your stay in 
Los Alamos, 1944 to the time you were discharged in 1946, you worked in the 
machine shop and in the Theta shop on apparatus and equipment in connection 
with experimentation on atomic energy? — A. I did. 

Q. Was that work pursued in the manner you have described here from 
sketches supplied and verbal descriptions by the particular scientists out there 
who required the apparatus? — A. I did. 

Q. I think you have told us, Mr. Greenglass, that your sister Ethel was a 
number of years older than you are ; is that correct? — A. She is. 

Q. Do. you remember in what year she was married to the defendant, Julius 
Rosenberg? 

The Court. How much older is she? 

The Witness. Six years older. 

Q. Do you remember the year in which she was married to the defendant, 
Julius Rosenberg? — A. 1939. 

Q. Had you come to know Julius Rosenberg before your sister married him? — 
A. I did. 

Q. Was he around your house? — A. Yes ; he was. 

Q. And you were 17 years old at the time they were married ; is that correct? — 
A. That is correct. 

Q. Now did you have any discussion with Ethel and Julius concerning the 
relative merits of our form of government and that of the Soviet Union? 

Mr. A. Bloch. Objected to as incompetent, irrelevant, and immaterial, not 
pertinent to the issues raised by the indictment and the plea. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. And upon the further ground that this will obviously lead 
to matters which may only tend to confuse the jury and inject inflammatory 
matter which will make it difficult or almost impossible for the jury to confine 
themselves to the real issues in the case. 

* « :!: * 4; 4: ^ . 

The Court. All right. Objection overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Of course, I am joining in the objection already made. 
(Record read.) 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to the question on the further ground it is leading 
and suggestive. 



68 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Exception. 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. You may now answer. — A. I did have such discussion. 

Q. Over what period of time, roughly? — -A. From about 1935 to about 1946 
or 1946. 

Q. To 1945 or 1946 ; is that right?— A. Yes. 

Q. Were those discussions numerous? — A. At the beginning, yes. 

Q. And at any time in the course of those discussions did the stated position 
of either Ethel or Julius Rosenberg change? Did their views change? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to it. 

Mr. A. Bloch. I object. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to the form of the question. 

The CouuT. You mean we haven't had the views yet and he is asking about a 
change? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Yes. 

The Court. You better ask about the views, first. 

Q. Which system of government did they tell you they preferred ? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. May I again object and ask some clarification? I under- 
stand from this witness' answers that he said that he had discussions with these 
defendants from 1935 to 1944 or 1945. 

The CouKT. 1945 or 1946. 

Mr. E. H. I^LOCH. 1945 or 1946. I am going to ask yoi^r Honor to compel Mr. 
Cohn to detail the time of each discussion so that appropriate objection may 
be made for the record. 

The Court. I thought you didn't want it, but if that is what Mr. Bloch wants, 
all right. If you can remember each time you had such a discussion you can tell 
us, and if you can't remember the exact date or the exact month but you remember 
the year, you can tell us and then tell us what the discussion was. 

Mr. Cohn. I think, your Honor, of course, if Mr. Bloch thought I didn't go far 
enough or he thought anything further was required for his purposes, he could 
clarify it on cross-examination. 

The Court. Yes. 

Mr. Cohn. But if your Honor wants me to — — 

The Court. Let us get as much as we can this way. 

Mr. Cohn. May I still try to keep it brief? 

The Court. Yes. Try to get from him what he can remember at this time. 
Then Mr. Bloch can detail it more for him. 
By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. I think you said these discussions with your sister began in 1935. — A. I did. 

Q. When did they begin, so far as the defendant Julius Rosenberg was con- 
cerned?— A. About 1937. 

Q. All right. Can you remember any specific occasions on which they had 
these discussions with you? — A. Do you mean the early period or later? 

Q. Start with the early period. Mr. Bloch wants everything. Let me ask 
you this: In the early period how frequently would they express their views 
regarding the relative merits of the two countries? — A. I would say two or three 
times a week. 

Q. Two or three times a week. 

Mr. Bloch. Your Honor, I submit on the basis of that I should be required to 
take up the time of the Court and jury 

The Court. No. He has answered that it was two or three times a week now. 
Now let us find out whether the conversations ran along the same line on each 
occasion. 

Mr. Cohn. That is the question to which Mr. Bloch objects. 

Q. Did the conversations run along the same line over a period of years? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to the tonn of the question. It is a question for 
the jury to decide. 

The Court. I will overrule it. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Exception. 

The Court. I am going to give you a chance to go into what you want to 
within the limits that I shall describe if there should be limits. 

Mr. B. H. Bloch. I understand your Honor's orientation, but I still feel that 
proper questions must be asked on direct. If they are improper it is not in- 
cumbent upon me to cross-examine. 

The Court. That is right ; if they are improper, I will be the one to rule that 
they are improper, and I have ruled that they are not improper. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 69 

The Witness. Well, roughly, they did. The conversations on the merits of 
socialism over capitalism I think in the beginning were more vehement. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Mr. Greenglass, please, it is difficult to hear you. 

The Witness. In the beginning tbey were more vehement. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Well now, I object to that. 

The CouuT. Yes, I will sustain tliat. 

Q. Talking about Socialism over capitalism, did they specifically talk about 
Socialism as it existed in the Soviet Union and capitalism as it existed here? — 
A. They did. 

Q. Which did they like better? Did they tell you? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to the question as leading and suggestive. 

The Court. I will sustain the objection on that ground, which they liked better. 
But you tell us whether or not on any occasion they told you that they preferred 
one over another. 

The Witness. They preferred Socialism to capitalism. 

The Court. What type of Socialism? 

The Witness. Russian Socialism. 

Q. Now, you say in the early period these conversations were to your knowl- 
edge two or three times a week? — A. Yes. 

Q. That is your best estimate? — A. Yes. 

Q. Where did they take place? — A. At my mother's home, 64 Sheriff Street. 

Q. What do you describe as the early period? Mr. Bloch wants to know. It 
started in 1935.— A. Well, I would say before 1939. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Then, if the Court please, I move to strike out the testimony 
upon the ground that in addition to the grounds already urged, it is too remote 
to the charges and the issues in this case. 

The Court. You say it started then and continued, didn't it? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I know, but I am now talking about these particular dis- 
cussions which he claims were had between 193.5 and 1939. I object to any 
testimony about any ideas that these defendants are alleged to have had. 

The Court. Did I not understand that these conversations continued up to, as 
you put it, 1945 or 1946? What is this limitation of 1939 that Mr. Bloch 
speaks of? 

Mr. CoHN. Mr. Bloch has been asking me to fix the number of times, where 
the occasions were and all that. Mr. Greenglass spoke, your Honor, about an 
early period at which these discussions took place. I assume by the year 1939 — 
that was before Mr. and Mrs. Rosenberg were married; they took place in the 
home of his mother. I suppose after that they took place some place else and 
after that some place else. 

The Court. But these conversations continued, did they? 

The Witness. Yes, they did. 

The Court. Along the same lines? 

The Witness. They did. 

By Mr. Cohn : 
Q. Up until 1945 or 1946?— A. That is right. 
The Court. We will take a recess. 
(Short recess.) 
(Jury in box.) 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Mr. Greenglass, when you went out to Los Alamos, was your wife out 
there with you?^A. No, she wasn't. 

Q. I think you told us she went out there in August of 1944; is that right? — 
A. That's right. 

Q. When after August of 1944 did you see your wife? — A. She came to visit 
me on our second wedding anniversary. It was November 29, 1944. 

Q. It was in November, November 29, 1944? — A. That's right. 

Q. For how long a period of time was she out in Los Alamos? — A. I got a 
three-day pass plus a two-day week end, which made five days. 

Q. Where did she stay? Was she out at Los Alamos? — A. No, she stayed 
at Albuciuerque. 

Q. Where, at an apartment, hotel? — A. In a hotel. 

Q. In a hotel?— A. That's right. 

Q. You say you got a three-day pass and you worked it in with the week end? — 
A. That's right. 

Q. You had five days off; is that right? — A. That's right. 

Q. You joined your wife at the hotel in Albuquerque? — A. Albuquerque. 



70 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. She remained there for the entire five days? — A. She did. 
Q. Now, was there any time during those five days wlien you had a conversa- 
tion with your wife concerning the atom bomb? — A. I did. 

Q. When during tliat five-day period was that conversation liad? — A. In the 
latter half of the furlough. We went for a walk out on Route 66, past the city, 
Albuquerque City limits, and not yet to the Rio Grande River, and my wife 
started the conversation. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, before the witness gets into the con- 
versation, I want to record our objection to any conversation had between this 
witness and his wife outside the presence of the defendants. 

The Court. Very well. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I assume I am speaking for all the defendants. 

Mr. A. Bloch. I understand this is a general objection to the introduction of 
this kind of testimony and you are taking it subject to connection.? 

The Court. No, I am taking his testimony concerning his conversation with his 
wife on the ground that he and his wife are co-conspirators together with the 
defendants. 

Mr. A. Bloch. If they are co-conspirators. 

The Court. Alleged co-conspirators. Of course, if they are merely having a 
conversation that isn't in furtherance of the objective and does not in any way 
mention the defendants, why, of course there would be no materiality to it. 
That would be the objection, no materiality. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Well, if the Court please, isn't there implicit in the Court's 
mind that there still would have to be that connection whereby the Government 
will prove to the satisfaction of the Court and the jury that there was a con- 
spiracy between this witness, his wife and tlie defendants Rosenberg? 

The Court. Of course. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That is implicit. 

The Court. Of course. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. So in that sense it is being taken subject to connection and 
subject to motion to strike in the event the Government fails to do that. 

Mr. Cohn. May we have the last question, Mr. Reporter, please? 

(Question read by reporter.) 

Q. Will you tell us, Mr. Greenglass, what your wife said and what you said. — 
A. My wife said that while she was still in New York Julius Rosenberg invited 
her to dinner at their house at 10 Monroe Street. She came to dinner and later 
on there was a conversation between the three present, my wife, my sister, and 
my brother-in-law. 

It went something like this : Ethel started the conversation by stating to 
Ruth that she must have noticed that she, Ethel, was no longer involved in Com- 
munist Party activities 

Mr. E. li. Bloch. Now. if the Court please, this is just what I was afraid of, 
and I move to strike it out, any reference to Communist 

Mr. CoHN. I object to it being struck out, your Honor, on the ground that it is 
directly relevant to the charge in this indictment which will emerge as this 
conversation unfolds. 

The Court. I will overrule the objection. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

The Court. The mere fact that the word "Communism" is mentioned does not 
taint all of the testimony and make it inadmissible if it is otherwise relevant. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. But apart from the lack of casual connection between Com- 
munist affiliations and sympathies with the crime in question, the introduction 
of this testimony also introduces an element of proof of another separate and 
distinct crime. 

The Court. Well, you have already stated your objection. You stated it yes- 
terday, and you stated it, I believe, the day before, too. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I think that is so, your Honor. 

The Court. And I have your objection and I have made my ruling. 

Mr. CoHN. May I have the last part of the answer? 

(Record read.) 

Q. Go aliead, Mr. Greenglass.— A. That they don't buy the Daily Worker 
any more or attend meetings, club meetings. And the reason for this is that 
Julius has finally gotten to a point where he is doing what he wanted to do all 
along, which was that he was giving information to the Soviet Union. 

And he then went on to tell Ruth that I was working on the atomic bomb 
project at Los Alamos, and that they would want me to give information to 

the Russians. My wife objected to this, but Ethel said 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to the characterization. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 71 

The Court. Is this what your wife told you? 

Mr. CoHN. Mr. Greenglass is relating what his wife said to him. I assume that 
he is doing his best to recall the words that were spoken. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If she used the word "object" of course I will withdraw 
my objection. 

The Court. Did your wife use the word "object"? 

The Witness. She told me that she didn't think it was a good idea. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. All right. 

The Court. Very well. 

The Witness. And that she didn't want to tell me about it. 

The Court. Proceed. 

The Witness (continuing:). But they told her that I would want to know 
about it and I would want to help, and that at least — the least she could do 
was tell me about it. So that was the conversation. At first — she asked 
me what I thought about that — at first, I was frightened and worried about 
it and I told her 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to his reactions or his state of mind. 

The Court. Strike out his reactions. 

Q. What did you tell your wife?— A. I told my wife that I wouldn't do it. And 
she had also told me that in the conversation Julius and Ethel had told her 
that Russia was an ally and as such deserved this information, and that she 
was not getting the information that was coming to her. So later on that 
night after this conversation I thought about it and the following morning 
I told my wife that I would give the information. 

Q. Does that complete the conversation to the best of your memory that 
took place between you and your wife? — A. That's right. Then when I had 
told her what the conversation was — I mean, I told her I would do it, she asked 
me for specific things that Julius had asked her to find out from me. 

Q. You mean specific information about the Manhattan Project? — ^A. That's 
right. 

Q. Would you tell us as you recall it what your wife asked you? — A. She asked 
me to tell her about the general lay-out of the Los Alamos Atomic Project, the 
buildings, number of people and stuff like that ; also scientists that worked 
there, and that was the first information I gave her. 

Q. You say she asked you for that information, is that right? — A. She asked 
me for that information. When I gave it to her, she memorized the information. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to that. 

Q. Did you have any conversations 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike that out. 

The Court. Tliere was no answer. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. No, what I am objecting to is that she memorized that 
and he is not in a position to know it. 

The Court. Strike it out. 

Q. Did you have any conversations with your wife concerning whether 

The Court. Wait a minute. You gave her the answers to all of these 
questions? 

The Witness. I gave her the answers to all of these questions ; yes. 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Do you know whether she wrote this information down or not? — A. She 
did not write the information down. 

Q. Did you have any conversation with her as to whether she was going to 
write it down or not? — A. She told me that she was instructed not to write 
it down, but to memorize it. 

The Court. Instructed by whom? 

The Witness. Instructed by Julius. 

Q. In giving to your wife the names of the scientists working at Los Alamos 
on that occasion, can you now recall any of the names which you furnished 
to her?— A. I gave her Oppenheimer's name. I gave her Bohr's name, and Kistia- 
kowski's name. 

Q. Did you tell her about this Bohr-Baker situation? — A. I did. 

Q. You say you gave her a general description of the lay-out at Los Alamos, 
is that right? — A. That's right. 

Q. How about the number of people there, the personnel, did you give any 
estimate of figures on that? — A. I gave her an estimate of how many people 
there were in the technical area. 

Mr. A. Bloch. May I ask to have the last answer repeated. 

The Col'rt. Repeat it, please. 

81095—51 6 



72 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

(Answer read.) 

Q. Of course, the repeating of this specific information is forbidden in that 
security book which is in evidence as Government's Exhibit 1, is that correct? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I think the exhibit speaks for itself, your Honor. 

Mr. CoHN. I will withdraw it, your Honor. 

The Court. I was about to overrule the objection because of its unimportance. 

Mr. CoHN. It is unimportant and that is why I withdrew the question. 

The Court. It speaks for itself and the answer would merely have been cumu- 
lative, so it makes no difference. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I agree. 

Q. After you furnished this information to your wife, did your wife return to 
New York?— A. My wife returned to New York and I had told her that I would 
be in New York in January on furlough, so she left for New York, knowing that I 
was going to be there. 

Mr. CoHN. Raise your voice a little because Mr. Bloch has some trouble 
hearing you. 

Q. Did you actually have a furlough in January? — A. I arrived home January 
1st, 1945. 

Q. January 1st? — A. 1945, yes. 

Q. How long was your furlough? — A. It was a 15-day furlough with travel 
time. 

Q. How long was that as a practical matter? — A. About 21 days or 22 days. 

Q. When you say you arrived home, where were you then residing, where were 
you and your wife then living? — A. 266 Stanton^Street, in Manhattan. 

Q. Here in Manhattan? — A. Right. 

Q. After your arrival in New York did there come a time when you saw the 
defendant Julius Rosenberg? — A. Yes, he came to me one morning and asked me 
to give him information, specifically anything of value on the atomic bomb, what- 
ever I knew about it. 

Q. Now, where did this conversation take place? — A. In my home at 266 
Stanton Street. 

Q. Did you say this was in the morning? — A. This was in the morning and 
he told me to write up this information at night, late at night, and he would be 
back the following morning to pick it up. 

Q. About how long after you had arrived in New York did this conversation 
take place?" — A. A few days after I arrived. 

Q. And did he outline to you in any further detail the information he 
wanted? — A. He asked me what I was doing out tliei'e and I told him I was work- 
ing on lenses, H. E. lens molds. 

Q. That is the lens molds in connection with Dr. Kistiakowski's work that you 
told us about? — A. That Is right. 

Q. What else? — A. And he told me to write it up, to write up anything that I 
knew about the atomic bomb. 

Q. Anything else? — A. He gave me a description of the atom bomb. 

Q. Did you do any writing at that time? — A. I wrote up the information he 
wanted that evening. It included sketches on tlie lens molds and how they were 
used in experiments. 

Q. Anything else? — A. Plus a description of it. 

Q. Anything else? — A. Plus a list of scientists who were on the project. 

Q. Do you recall the names of any of these scientists? — A. Yes, I gave him the 
same ones I had given him originally, plus, I gave him a scientist. Baker. I also 
gave him a scientist by the name of — well, there was one Hans Baker. 

Q. Da you know what his field was? — ^A. Yes, his field was theoretical physics. 

Q. Did you furnish that information? — A. I gave that information, too. 

Q. And you say there were some other scientists whose names you do not 
recall? — A. I don't recall at this moment. 

Q. Was this information turned over to Rosenberg? — A. It was, the following 
morning. 

Q. Where? — A. At my home. 

Q. At your home? — A. Yes. 

Q. Up at 266 Stanton Street?— A. That's right. 

Q. Now, you turned that information over to the defendant Rosenberg the 
following morning in your home, is that right? — A. Yes. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 73 

From Stenographer's Minutes of Case 134-245, United States of 
America vs. Julius Rosenlerg^ et al. Before Hon. Irving R. Kauf- 
man, District Judge, United States District Court, Southern District 
of New York, March 12, 1951. 

«♦**•*• 

Mr. CoiiN. We would like Mr. Greenglass back. 

David Greenglass resumed the stand. 

The Court. Now, Mr. Greenglass, will you please remember to speak up? 

The Witness. I will. 

Direct examination continued by Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Now, Mr. Greenglass, I think that on Friday afternoon before we adjourned, 
we were at the point where Rosenberg had returned to your apartment to get 
this information on the atom bomb that he had asked you to write down ; is 
that correct? — A. That is correct. 

Q. Will you tell us again — first of all, did you in fact furnish him with written 
information concerning the atom bomb? — A. I did. 

Q. Will you tell us just what information you furnished him with on that 
day? — A. I gave him a list of scientists who worked on the project. I gave 
him some sketches of flat type lens molds, and I gave him some possible recruits, 

Q. What kind of recruits? — A. For Soviet espionage. 

Ml-. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out the latter part of his answer. 

The Court. I will strike that out and permit you to tell us what Mr. Rosenberg 
said to you about recruiting scientists or recruiting anybody to help. What were 
his words, in substance? 

The Witness. He said he wanted a list of people who seemed sympathetic 
with communism and would help furnish information to the Russians. 

The Court. Vei'y well. 

Q. And you furnished him with such a list; is that correct? — A. I did. 

Q. Now I want to come specifically to these sketches you told us about of this 
lens. Exactly do you remember how many sketches you gave him? — A. I gave 
him a number of sketches, showing various types of lens molds. 

Q. Was this that lens mold in connection with Dr. Caskey, that you told us 
about on Friday afternoon, which had been constructed at the shop, the Los 
Alamos shop in which you were working?— A. That was the same lens mold. 

Q. Now, did you give Rosenberg a sketch of the lens mold ; did you tell him 
how the lens mold was used? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, I am going to ask Mr. Cohn not to be 
leading at this point. 

Q. Tell us exactly what you gave Rosenberg with reference to the lens mold. — 
A. I gave him a sketch of the lens mold. I marked them "A, B, C," the parts 
of the mold, and I detined what these markings meant. 

Q. Where were these definitions contained, on the same sheet of paper? — A. On 
a separate sheet of paper. 

Q. The sketch was on one sheet and the description on another sheet? — A. That 
is right. 

Mr. Cohn. May this be marked for identification. Your Honor? 

(Marked Government's Exhibit 2 for identification.) 

Q. Now, Mr. Greenglass, have you, at our request, prepared a copy of the sketch 
of the lens mold which you furnished to Rosenberg on that day in January? — 
A. I did. 

Q. Would you examine Government's Exhibit 2 for identification [handing] 
and tell me if that is the sketch which you prepared.- — A. That is the sketch that 
I prepared. 

Mr. Cohn. We offer it in evidence, your Honor. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Before I make any objection, may I have a voir dire question 
here? 

The Court. Go ahead. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. When did you prepare this? 

The Witness. During this trial, yesterday. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to its introduction upon the ground it is incompetent, 
irrelevant, and immaterial. The witness is here. He testified orally to things. 
This is not a proper way of corroborating the witness. In fact, it is improper, 
I submit, to corroborate in this way. 

Note. — Counsel for the U. S. Government : Irving Saypol, United States attorney ; Miles 
J. Lane, James Kilsheimer, and Roy Cohn, assistant United States attorneys. Other 
counsel whose names appear in transcript material represent defendants. 



74 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. CoHN. Well, if your Honor wants to hear me on that, I think the jury is 
certainly entitled to see what the witness has testified he gave to the defendant 
in this case, what information concerning the atom bomb and things in connection 
with it he gave to the defendant in this case. 

The Court. In other words, you put this in the same category, as I understand 
it, of chart evidence. After the witness testifies to something a chart may be 
produced for the purpose of enlightening the jury or making it easier for the jury 
to understand. You are not introducing this as the exhibit that was turned over. 

Mr. CoHN. Oh, no; not at all, your Honor. In fact, I will ask Mr. Green- 
glass 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. "When did you last see the very sketch which you turned over to Rosen- 
berg? — A. In January 1945. 

Q. AYhen you handed it to Rosenberg? — A: That is right. 

Q. And you have not seen it since then? — A. No. 

The Court. Objection overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Before your Honor rules, may I ask one more question along 
your Honor's line of thinking, if I may? 

The Court. Go ahead. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. After looking at this Government's Exhibit 2 for identifica- 
tion, are you saying that that paper that you have in your hand represents a 
true copy of the sketch that you turned over to Rosenberg? 

The Witness. To the best of my recollection at this time ; yes. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Well, then, if your Honor please, I renew my objection, 
because I submit that this is not analogous to introducing a chart in evidence. 
A chart is introduced for the purpose of elucidating the jury on matters which 
may be complex, and it is a sort of over-all picture by which the jury may be 
enabled to follow certain details. Here, this exhibit is being introduced because 
it purports, according to this witness, to be a true copy of what he allegedly 
turned over to Rosenberg. Now, I submit that is a violation of the rule against 
corroborating the witness by extrinsic evidence while he is on the stand, and I 
believe it is improper. 

Mr. Satpol. May I address myself to the question? I submit, if the Court 
please, that courusel misunderstands the objective in utilizing this exhibit. It is 
based entirely on the secondary evidence rule. The actual sketch, obviously, 
is not available, as the witness has testified. Certainly there may be made avail- 
able for the use of the jury, in conjunction with the witness's testimony, a 
recently prepared replica which, as he has testified, to the best of his recollection, 
is a replica of that which he furnished to the defendant. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. As far as the best evidence rule is concerned, your Honor, 
I could see the cogency of Mr. Saypol's argument if it would be the contention 
of the prosecution that this document, which they now attempt to introduce 
in evidence, was made at or contemporaneously with or prior to the time. 

The Court. What you are saying does not go to the basic question of whether 
or not a foundation has been laid for its introduction. What you are saying goes 
to the weight to be given to the document. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I think it goes to both, your Honor. I think it goes to the 
fact that no proper foundation has been laid under the present 

The Court. I will receive it. Objection overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 2" in evidence.) 
By Mr. Cohn 



Q. Now, Mr. Greenglass, while it is being marked, I might ask you 

The Court. Just a moment. Let it be marked. 

Q. Now, would you address yourself to Government's Exhibit 2 in evidence, 
Mr. Greenglass ; does that 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am sorry, Mr. Cohn, but now I would like to look at it a 
little more carefully so I may be enabled to follow the witness intelligently. 

Mr. Cohn. Certainly, Mr. Bloch [handing]. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Thank you very much. 

All right. 

Q. Addressing yourself to Government's Exhibit 2 in evidence, Mr. Greenglass, 
does that exhibit contain certain letters, "A," "B," "C"?— A. They do. 

Q. Now, what do those letters have reference to? Do they have reference to 
this other paper? — A. Yes, they have reference to another paper, where I put 
down the meaning of these letters. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE. 75 

Q. Would you tell us now, as best as you remember it, exactly what descrip- 
tive language was contained on this piece of paper you furnished Rosenberg 
along with this sketch? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That is objected to, your Honor, on the same grounds that I 
objected to the introduction of this document. 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

The Witness. "A" refers to the curve of the lens ; "B" is the frame ; "C" shows 
approximately how wide it is. 

The Court. All right, now you had better give us that slowly so we can all 
understand it. 

"A" refers to what? 

The Witness. The curve of the lens, the outside curve; "B" to the frame; 
and "C" to the width. It is a four-leaf clover design like ; it looks something 
similar. 

Mr. E. H. Bloctt. We can't hear the witness, your Honor, I am sorry. 

The Witness. It has four curves on it, and these — it is hollow in the center 
and it was used to pour "H. E." into it. 

Q. What do you mean by "H. E."? — A. High explosive. It then took on the 
shape, the H. E. took on the shape of the mold and the mold was removed and 
you had a high-explosive lens. 

Mr. CoHN. Your Honor, may I pass it to the jury? 

The Court. Yes. 

(Government's Exhibit 2 in evidence passed to the jury.) 

Q. I think you have already told us that this lens, mold, along with other 
things constructed in your shop, were used in connection with experimentation 
on the atomic bomb ; is that correct? — A. They were. 

Q. By the way, did you have any conversation with Rosenberg concerning the 
writing on the descriptive material? — A. I did. My wife 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Will you fix the time, please? 

Q. Will you tell us just when this conversation took place, in relation to the 
time you turned over the material?— A. It took place in the morning after I had 
written this information out. Julius came to the house and received this in- 
formation, and my wife, in passing remark that the handwriting would be 
bad and would need interpretation, and Julius said there was nothing to worry 
about as Ethel would type it up, retype the information. 

The Court. Excuse me a moment. May I have that answer reread? 

(Last question and answer read.) 

Q. Did you have any further conversation with Rosenberg on the occasion 
when you turned over this material? — A. Not at — he asked me to come to dinner, 
my wife and myself, for an evening a few days later — I can't remember — a day 
or two later. 

Q. At his home? — A. Yes; at his home. 

Q. Did you accept the dinner invitation? — A. I did. 

Q. Did there come a time when you and your wife did in fact go to Rosenberg's 
home in response to the dinner invitation? — A. We did. 

Q. About how soon after this meeting at which you turned over the mate- 
rial? — A. It was a day or two later. 

Q. Now, where did Rosenberg live at that time? — A. 10 Monroe Street, in 
Knickerbocker "Village. 

Q. In Knickerbocker Village? — A. Yes. 

Q. Do you remember what time you arrived at his apartment? — A. I would 
say it was about 7 o'clock or so. 

Q. Now, I would like you to tell the Court and the jury exactly what happened 
from the time you entered the apartment on that night, until the time you 
left? By that I mean, tell us who was there, tell us what was said and by 
whom ? 

The Court. What was the date, did you say? 

Mr. CoHN. I believe the date was fixed, your Honor, as two or three days 
or a day or two — two or three days after the meeting in Greenglass' apartment, 
at whicli he turned over the information to Rosenberg. 

The Court. Very well. 

The Witness. When I got to the apartment with my wife, there was Julius 
and Ethel Rosenberg and a woman by the name of Ann Sidorovich. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. What was that name? 

Q. Just stop there for a moment. What did you say that name was? — A. Ann 
Sidorovich. 

Mr. CoHN. May we have this marked for identification, please? 



76 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 3" for identification.) 

Q. Now, had you ever met Ann Sidorovich before? — A. I had never met her 
before ; no. 

Q. Did you know any members of her family? — A. I knew laer husband. 

Q. What was his name? — A. Mike Sidorovich. 

Q. How long a period of time did you know him? — A. I knew him for some 
years. 

Q. I would like you to examine now Government's Exhibit 3 for identifica- 
tion and tell me if you recognize the people on that picture? — A. This is^Iike 
and Ann Sidorovich. 

Mr. CoHN. We offer it in evidence, your Honor. May it be received? 

(Government's Exhibit 3 previously marked for identification received in 
evidence.) 

Mr. CoHN. May I exhibit that to the jury, your Honor? 

The Court. Yes. 

(Government's Exhibit 3 shown to the jury.) 

Q. Now, keep your voice up, Mr. Greenglass, and tell us — you have told us 
who was present, Mr. and Mrs. Rosenberg and this woman, Ann Sidorovich; 
now, would you tell us exactly what happened on that evening, exactly what was 
said and by whom? — A. Well, the early part of the evening we just sat around 
and spoke socially with Ann and the Rosenbergs, and then Ann Sidorovich left. 
It was at this point that Julius said that this is the woman who he thinks 
would come out to see us, who will come out to see us at Albuquerque, to receive 
information from myself. 

Q. What kind of information? — A. On the atomic bomb. And she would 
probably be the one to come out to see us. We then ate supper and after 
supper there was more conversation, and during supper — and during this 
conversation there was a tentative plan brought forth, to the effect that my wife 
would come out to Albuquerque to stay with me, and when this woman Ann or 
somebody would come out to see us, they would go to Denver, and in a motion- 
picture theater they would meet and exchange purses, my wife's purse having 
this information from Los Alamos, and of course, that is the way the information 
would be transmitted. 

Q. Now, was anything said about the reason for Ann Sidorovich being present 
at the Rosenberg's home on that particular night when you were there? — A. Yes; 
they wanted us to meet this Ann Sidorovich, so that we would know what she 
looked like; and that brought up a point, what if she does not come? 

Q. You mean, there was a possibility that somebody else would come? — A. 
That's right. So Julius said to my wife, "Well, I give you something so that 
you will be able to identify the person that does come." 

Q. In other words, if Ann Sidorovich would come, she was up in the apartment 
that night ; you were up in the apartment that night ; she knew what you looked 
like ; you knew what she looked like ; but if somebody else would come, this 
would be mutual identification ; is that right? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Mr. Cohn, please don't repeat the answer. 

Mr. CoiiN. If I do so, your Honor, it is for the purpose of clarity. Strange 
names are coming in. However, I won't do it. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. You know why I don"t want you to do it, because sometimes 
reemphasis 

Mr. Cohn. I will settle it by saying that I won't do it, your Honor. 

May we have the last from the witness? 

(Last answer read.) 

Q. All right, go ahead from there. — A. Well, Rosenberg and my wife and 
Ethel went into the kitchen and I was in the living room ; and then a little while 
later, after they had been there about 5 minutes or so, they came out and my 
wife had in her hand a Jello box side. 

Mr. E. H. Block. Side? 

Mr. Cohn. Side. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. S-i-d-e? 

Mr. Cohn. That's right. 

Q. You mean, the side of an ordinary Jello box — A. That's right. 

Q. About what size Jello box, the small size? — A. The kind you buy in your 
home. 

Q. Right. — A. And it had been cut, and Julius had the other part to it, and 
when he came in with it, I said, "Oh, that is very clever," because I noticed how 
it fit, and he said, "The simplest things are the cleverest." 

Q. Now, let me see if I understand that. Your wife had one side ; is that 
correct? — A. That's right. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 77 

Q. Who kept the other side?— A. Julius had the other side. 

Q. Was there any conversation as to what would be done with these two 
sides? — A. Well, my wife was to keep the side she had, and she was to use it 
for identification with the person who would come out to see us, and at this 
point we discarded the idea, discarded the idea of going to Denver. 

Q. Now, I want to stay with the Jello box for a minute here. Am I correct in 
assuming that the last time you saw the other part— your wife had one part of 
this side of the Jello box?— A. That's right. 

Q. And the last you saw of it on that night was in Rosenberg's hand ; is that 
correct? — A. That's right. 

Mr. CoHN. May this be marked for identification, please? 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 4" for identification.) 

Mr. CoHN. Your Honor, at this point I would like— this will be quite impor- 
tant—to have the witness, as best he remembers it, take this Jello box and cut 
the correct side into two parts, just as he remembers it was cut on that night, 
in January of 1945, and I would like to ask him to indicate to the Court and 
jury which side he kept and which side Rosenberg kept. May I do that? 

The Court. All right. 

Q. Will you take Government's Exhibit 4 for identification and this pair of 
scissors, and address yourself to the appropriate side and cut it into two pieces 
[handing to witness] ? Cut it into two pieces resembling the two pieces you saw 
that night in Rosenberg's apartment? 

(Witness cuts exhibit.) 

Q. The side that was cut was one of the thin sides ; is that correct? — A. That's 
right : this is the side I had [exhibiting]. 

Q. That was the side you had ?— A. That's right. 

The CouuT. Mark that for identification. 

Mr. CoHN. Yes ; and may we have this marked for identification as "Govern- 
ment's Exhibit 4-A"? 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 4-A" for identification.) 

Q. Where did you last see this other side on that night? — A. In Julius' hand. 

Mr. COHN. May we have the other side marked as 4-B for identification, your 
Honor? 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 4-B" for identification.) 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Just to clarify myself, if I may, 4-A 

The Court. 4-A is 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Is the side which the witness kept. 

The Court. That is right. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. And 4^B is the side that Rosenberg is alleged to have re- 
tained. 

The Court. It was, which was last seen in his hand. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Pardon me, which was last seen in his hand. 

Mr. Corn. Right, on that night in January 1945. 

We offer them in evidence, your Honor, 4-A and 4-B. 

(Government's Exhibits 4-A and 4-B previously marked for identification 
received in evidence.) 

Mr. CoHN. May I exhibit them to the jury, your Honor? 

The Court. Yes. 

(Government's Exhibits 4-A and 4-B shown to the jury.) 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Now, I think Mr. Greenglass, we were at the point where you were continu- 
ing with further conversation that was had after this .Jello box incident had been 
effected; would you continue and tell us just what was said and by whom? — • 
A. Well, it was at this point that the plan to meet in Denver was discarded, and 
I suggested the Safeway store, meeting the person we were to meet at a Safeway 
store, outside, outside of the Safeway store, in Albuquerque, and this was thought 
to be a pretty good idea. The exact date was left in abeyance, since my wife 
would follow me out to Albuquerque later and that could be set in that time, I 
mean, between when I left to go back to Los Alamos and when she came out. 

Q. The date was left in abeyance and would be set before your wife joined? — 
A. That is correct. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, I am not interfering with this witness' 
testimony, but very frankly, I am a little confused as to who said what and 
who said other things? 

The Court. All right. 



78 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. And I haven't interrupted. He is putting in "since" and 
giving some of us difficulty in understanding him. 

By the Court: 

Q. You said that the idea of Denver was discarded; was that at that same 
meeting at Julius Rosenberg's home? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now, at this point, that is the point where the Jello box was cut up, did 
I understand that this Ann Sidorovich had already left? — A. Oh, she had left. 

Q. You and your wife and Mrs. Rosenberg and Julius Rosenberg were present ; 
is that right?— A. That's right. 

Q. You are in the living room and they go into the kitchen on this Jello box 
situation? — ^A. That's right. 

Q. You say her husband was not present? — A. Her liusband was not present. 

Q. That is right. Now, at what point — before you left that evening you had 
decided to abandon the idea of meeting in a movie house in Denver? — A. That 
is right. 

Q. Then who suggested the Safeway Store? — A. I did. 

Q. And who said it was a good idea? — A. Julius said it was a good idea. 

The Court. Very well. Let me ask you one other question : Did you say what 
part of the Safeway Store you would meet at? 

The Witness. In front of it, not in the store. 

The CouKT. In front of it. 

The Witness. That's right. 

By Mr. Cohn: 

Q. Now I think the last thing you said was the date, the actual date of this 
meeting was left up in the air until such time as your wife joined you, and 
when she came out she would know the further details? — A. That is correct. 

Q. Now, was there any further conversation between you and your wife and 
the Rosenbergs on that evening? — A. Well, the Rosenbergs told my wife that 
she wouldn't have to worry about money because it would be taken care of — I 
mean, she would be able to get out there and live out there, if she wasn't able 
to work, the money would be forthcoming. 

By the Court : 

Q. Was that in your presence? — A. In my presence. 

Q. Both of them said that? — A. Julius, and Ethel backed it up. Earlier in 
the evening, during these conversations, my wife had remarked to Ethel that 
she had looked kind of tired and she said she was tired because she 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Who said this? — A. My wife had remarked to Ethel that she looked tired. 

Q. Ethel looked tired? — A. And Ethel remarked that she was tired between 
the child and staying up late at night, keeping — typing over notes that Julius 
had brought her — this was on espionage. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out the last. 

The Court. Did she say that? 

The Witness. She said "in this work." She also stated that she didn't mind 
it so long as Julius was doing what he wanted to do. 

Q. During this evening, was any reference made by either of the Rosenbergs, 
to the material which you had turned over to Julius a couple of days before? — 
A. Well, we discussed the lenses — we generally talked shop about what I had 
done at Los Alamos, and we discussed lenses all during this evening, and, you 
Tinow, whatever was going on at Los Alamos, scientists 

Q. Was anything said about A. Scientists, of that nature; things of that 

nature ; and he said that he would like to meet somebody who would talk to me 
more about lenses. 

Q. Did he tell you who this person he wanted you to meet was? — A. He said 
it was a Russian he wanted me to meet. 

Q. Did he give yoi; any further identification on that night? — A. No. 

Q. Now, after the conclusion of this evening, did you return home? — A. At the 
end of this evening I returned home. 

Q. About what time do you think you left Rosenberg's apartment? — A. Oh, it 
was twelve or maybe possibly later. 

Q. Did you and your wife have any further conversation about anything that 
had transpired when you returned home? — A. Well, she showed me the piece, 
the .lello side, the Jello box side, and she put it in her wallet. 

Q. In her wallet?— A. That's right. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 79 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, I am objecting to any conversation be- 
tween this witness and his wife outside of the presence of the defendant Rosen- 
berg and the other defendants, and lilcewise any acts that may have talien place, 
in which the Rosenbergs weren't present. I just want to reserve objection for 
the record. 

The Court. Very well. You know the ruling; you know the reason for my 

ruling. 

Mr. CoHN. Of course, your Honor, I offer them as statements by coconspirators 
in furtherance of the conspiracy. 

Q. Now, did anything further come of Julius's statement that he wanted you 
to discuss this lens with the Russian? — A. Yes. 

Q. Tell us. — A. A few nights later — well, an appointment was made for me to 
meet a Russian on First Avenue, between 42nd and 59th Streets — it was in that 
area. 

Q. Who made the appointment? — A. Julius made the appointment. 

Q. When was it in relation to the dinner meeting in January? — A. It was a 
few days after. I took my father-in-law's car and drove up there. It was about 
eleven-thirty at night. I remember coming up the street. It was quite dark 
and there was a lighted window. I passed that in parking — it was a saloon — 
I parked up the block from it, and in a little while Julius came around the corner, 
looked into the car, saw who I was ; said, "I will be right back" ; brought back a 
man ; introduced the man to me by first name, that I don't recall at this time, and 
the man got into the car with me. Julius stayed right there and we drove 
around 

Q. Let me see if I understand it. When you say "Julius stayed right there," 
was Julius in the car or not? — A. He was not in the car. 

Q. He merely effected the introduction? — A. He just introduced me to him. 

Q. And remained on the street? — A. And remained on the street. 

Q. Where did you drive? — A. Well, we drove all over that area. He just 
told me to keep driving and lie asked questions about lenses. 

Q. Did he ask you specifically about this high explosive lens? — A. He did. 
He asked about high explosive lenses and he wanted to know pertinent informa- 
tion, type of H. E. used. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out "pertinent" as a conclusion. 

The CouKT. Strike out "pertinent." Tell us what he wanted to know. 

The Witness. He wanted to know the formula of the curve on the lens ; he 
wanted to knew the H. E. used, and means of detonation ; and I drove around 

The Court. And what, means of detonation? 

The Witness. That's right ; and I drove around, and being very busy with my 
driving, I didn't pay too much attention to what he was saying, but the things 
he wanted to know, I had no direct knowledge of and I couldn't give a positive 
answer. 

Q. Now, about how long did this drive with the Russian last? — A. About 
twenty minutes or so. 

Q. Where did it terminate ?^A. At the same place that it originated. 

Q. Did you see Julius any more on that night? — ^A. Yes; he came back — I 
mean, he was around there, and the Russian got out and they went off together, 
and I drove back home. 

Q. Did Julius give you any instructions? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Now, if the Court please, just a second. I move to strike 
out the characterization of the man that he met, especially in the last answer, 
as "Russian." 

The Court. That is denied. The testimony, as I understand it, is that Julius 
said he wanted to introduce him to a Russian. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Yes ; but whatever the defendant Rosenberg may have said 
floesn't substitute for the fact, which I contend the prosecution must prove, 
namely, that this man was a Russian or a Russian subject or citizen. 

The Court. We will understand that when he said "a Russian" we will accept 
that the Russian that he is characterizing as such was the man whom Mr. 
Rosenberg had characterized as "a Russian." 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Did Julius give you any instructions as to where you should go and what 
you should do after you concluded this drive with the man whom you "described 
as "a Russian?"— A. He said, "Go home now. I will stay with him." He was- 
going to have something to eat with him. 

Q. Did you in fact return home? — ^A. I went home. 



80 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Did you tell your wife where you had been? — A. Yes; I told my wife where 
I had been. 

Q. Now, I think you told us you arrived in New York on this furlough on 
January 1, 1945; is that correct? — A. That is correct. 

Q. About when did you leave New York and return to Los Alamos? — A. About 
the 20th. 

Q. Did your wife go with you? — A. She did not go with me. 

Q. Did there come a time when she joined you at Albuquerque? — A. She did. 

Q. Will you tell us when that was? — A. That was in the springtime, it was 
about March or April — early — late March, early AprU, I think. 

Q. Of 1945?— A. Of 1945. 

Q. Where did your wife live when she got out to Albuquerque? — A. Well, at 
first she stayed in a fellow GI's apartment, a man by the name of Delman. He 
and his wife had gone east on furlough. Then she stayed at a fellow by the 
name of Spindel's apartment. Then we had oiu" own place. 

Q. Now, when you say you had your own place, was it a house, an apartment, 
or what? — A. It was an apartment at 209 North High Street. 

Q. 209 North High Street. That was in Albuquerque? — A. In Albuquerque. 

Q. Were you able to go home every night? — A. No ; I wasn't. 

Q. AVhen did you go to the apartment? — A. Well, usually Saturday night. 
I would start down and get there sometime Saturday evening. 

Q. When would you return to Los Alamos? — A. Sunday — I mean Monday, 
early in the morning. 

Q. Were you in this apartment — was your wife in this apartment, were you 
in there over the week ends during the month of May and during the month of 
June, in 1945?— A. I was. 

Q. Now, Mr. Greenglass, did Ann Sidorovich ever come out to see you? — A. No ; 
she didn't. 

Q. Did somebody else come out to see you?— A. Yes. 

Q. Was it a man or woman? — A. It was a man. 

Q. And when was this visit? — A. First Sunday in June 1945. 

Q. Did you at that time know the name of this man? — A. I did not. 

Q. Do you now know his name? — A. Yes ; I do. 

Q. What is it?— A. Harry Gold. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Your Honor, again I would like to state for the record that 
I am objecting to anything that happened out in New Mexico, outside the presence 
of the defendant Rosenberg, and more specifically, upon the gi-ound that there is 
nothing in this witness' previovTS testimony to lay the foundation for the intro- 
duction of this evidence, reflected by the last question or by the last two ques- 
tions. 

The CouBT. That last objection is very vague, but there is just no question in 
my mind as to the competence of this evidence, so I will overriale your objection. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

(Government's Exhibit 5 marked for identification.) 

Q. Do you recognize this picture, Mr. Greenglass [showing] ? — A. Yes ; I do. 

Q. Who is that?— A. That is Harry Gold. 

Mr. CoHN. We offer it in evidence, your Honor. 

(Government's Exhibit 5 for identification received in evidence.) 

The Court. Excuse me. Where did he come to see you, in Albuquerque? 

The Witness. In Albuquerque. 

Mr. CoHN. Would your Honor want to take the morning recess at this point? 

The Court. Yes. We will take a recess at this point. 

( Short recess. ) 

( Jury in box. ) 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, may I ask whether the prosecution 
would have any objection to offering for identification the remaining portions 
of the Jello box, from which the witness cut the sides? 

Mr. CoHN. It has already been done, your Honor. 

The CouET. It has already been done. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. It is marked? 

Mr. CoHN. Exhibit 4 for identification and the two parts have been received 
in evidence. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. 4-A and 4-B. I was a little confused about that. Thank 
you very much. 

Mr. CoHN. Did you want to examine it? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. No ; thank you very much. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 81 

Q. When did you say it was that Harry Gold came to your house, Mr. Green- 
glass?— A. It was the third Sunday in June 1945. 
Q. What time of day?— A. It was in the morning. 
Q Who was home? — A. I and my wife were home. 
Q. Would you tell us exactly what happened from the first minute you saw 

Gold? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. My objection still stands, your Honor. 

The Court. Yes ; overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Exception. 

The Witness. There was a knock on the door and I opened it. We had just 
completed eating breakfast, and there was a man standing in the hallway who 
asked if I were Mr. Greenglass, and I said "Yes." He stepped through the door 
and he said, "Julius sent me," and I said, "Oh," and I walked to my wife's purse, 
took out the wallet and took out the matched part of the Jello box. 

Q. That was Government's Exhibit 4-A, is that correct?— A. The Jello box. 

Q. The piece you retained that night? — A. Yes. 

Q. After you produced that did Gold do anything?— A. He produced his piece 
and we checked them and they fitted, and the identification was made. 

Q. In other words, he had A. He had the other part of the box. 

Q. And you had last seen that in Rosenberg's apartment that night in January 
1945?— A. That is right. 

Q. Now, after mutual identification was effected, did you have any conversation 
with Harry Gold?— A. Yes. I offered him something to eat and he said he had 
already eaten. He just wanted to know if I had any information, and I said, 
"I have some but I will have to write it up. If you come back in the afternoon 
I will give it to you." I started to tell him the story about one of the people I 
put into the report, and he 

Q. Who was one of the people you put into the report? — A. A fellow by the 
name of Bederson, and he cut me short. 

Q. What kind of person was he? Why did you put him in the report?— A. Well, 
I considered him good material for recruiting into espionage work. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out the part of the answer with respect par- 
ticularly to the words "espionage work" as reflecting only the operation of this 
witness' mind. 

The Court. No ; I will overrule it. The witness has already testified that Mr. 
Rosenberg had asked him on a previous occasion to send such names of anybody 
whom he considered to be a good recruit, and I am overruling the objection. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Then, if the Court please, may I ask Mr. Cohn to clarify what 
report this witness is referring to? 

The Court. Yes. 

Mr. CoHN. I will be glad to do that, your Honor. 

The Court. Yes. 

Q. In which report had you mentioned the name which you discussed with 
Gold? — A. I mentioned it in that particular report that I gave him that day. 

Q. The report you gave Gold later that day ? — A. Yes. 

Q. You discussed the name before you embodied it in the report? — A. That is 
right. 

Q. Tell us just what was said by you and Gold. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. When was this? Morning or afternoon? 

Q. Mr. Bloch wants to know when was it? — A. This particular time was the 
morning. He cut me short on the business with Bederson. He said he didn't 
want to know about it and he left and I got to work on the report. 

Q. Where did you work on the report? — A. Right in the living room, my com- 
bination living room and bedroom there. 

Q. Tell us exactly what you did. — A. I got out some 8-by-lO ruled white line 
paper, and I drew some sketches of a lens mold and how they are set up in an 
experiment, and I gave descriptive material that gives a description of this 
experiment. 

Q. Was this another step in the same experiment on atomic energy concerning 
which you had given a sketch to Rosenberg? — A. That is right, and I also gave 
him a list of possible recruits for espionage. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out the last two words, "recruits for espio- 
nage." 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. Of course, I don't like to be popping 
up and down, your Honor. I want to make it clear that I am objecting to this 
entire line of testimony with respect to this incident between the witness and 
■Gold in New Mexico as not binding upon the defendant. 



82 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The CotTET. Overruled. 

The Witness. I gave this list of names and also sketches and descriptive 
material. 

Q. What time of day was it that yon gave this material to Harry Gold? — A. It 
was later in the afternoon. He came back about 2 : 30 or 3 o'clock and picked 
it up. 

Q. Did all these sketches and descriptive material concern experimentation 
on the atomic bomb? — A. That is right. 

Q. Tell us exactly what happened when he came back at 2 : 30? — A. Well, 
when he came back to the house he came in and I gave him the report in an 
envelope and he gave me an envelope which I felt and realized there was money 
in it and I put it in my pocket. 

Q. Did you examine the money at that point? — A. No; I didn't. 

Q. Did you have any discussion with Gold about the money? — A. Yes; I did. 
He said, -'Will it be enough?" And I said, "Well, it will be plenty for the 
present." And he said, "You need it," and we went into a side discussion about 
the fact that my wife had a miscarriage earlier in the spring, and he said, 
"Well, I will see what I can do about getting some more money for you." 

Q. Was there any further discussion with Gold? — A. Well, he wanted to 
leave immediately and I said, "Wait, and we will go down with you," and he 
waited a little while. We went down, and we went around by a back road and 
we dropped him in front of the USO. We went into the USO, and he went on 
his way. As soon as he had gone down the street my wife and myself looked 
around and we came out again and back to the apartment and counted the 
money. 

Q. How much was it?— A. We found it to be $500. 

Q. $500?— A. Yes. 

Q. What did you do with the money? — A. I gave it to my wife. 

Q. Going back to these sketches which you gave to Harry Gold, do youi 
remember just what sketches you gave to Harry Gold concerning a high-ex- 
plosives lens mold on that occasion? — A. I gave sketches relating to the experi- 
ment set up; one showing a flat — the face of the flat-type lens mold. 

Q. Face view? — A. Face view of the flat-type lens mold. 

Q. Have you prepared, at our request, a sketch of this face view? — A. I have. 

Mr. CoHN. Let this be marked for identification. 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 6" for identification.) 

Q. Would you examine Government's Exhibit 6 for identification? By the 
way, you prepared that on June 15, 1950; is that correct? — A. I did. 

The Court. Well, 6 for identification, I take it, Is a replica of 

Mr. CoHN. Well, 6 for identification was prepared on June 15, 1950, your 
Honor, last year. 

The Court. Oh, I see. 

Q. In answer to his Honor's question is this to the best of your recollection 
an accurate replica of the face view which you gave Harry Gold in June 
1945?- A. That is right. 

Mr. CoHN. I Avill now offer it in evidence, your Honor. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Before ruling, may I have one question on the voir dire? 

The Court. Go ahead. 

By Mr. Bloch : 
Q. When you made this sketch on June 15, 1950, and I am referring now to 
Government's Exhibit 6 for identification, did you rely solely on your memory? — 
A. I did. 

* * * * ■ * * * 

The Court. Is this to your present knowledge an exact replica of the sketch 
which you turned over even to the extent of the comments on the side? 

The Witness. It is. 

Mr. CoHN. Your Honor, Mr. Saypol reminds me that I did not show the jury 
the picture of Mr. Gold [handing to jury]. 

By Mr. Cohn : 
Q. Will you address yourself to Government's Exhibit 6 in evidence and tell 
the jury what that represents? — A. I showed a high-explosive lens mold. I 
showed the way it would look with this high explosive in it with the detonators 
on, and I showed the steel tube in the middle which would be exploded by this 
lens mold. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 83 

Q. Now, did you prepare on that Sunday in June 1945 and give to Harry Gold 
on that same day any other slcetches concerning this high-explosive lens mold 
for atomic energy? — A. I showed him a schematic view of the lens-mold set up 
in an experiment. 

Q. Now, have you similarly prepared for us a replica as you remember it of 
the sketch which you gave Harry Gold on that day"?— A. I did. 

By the Coukt : 

Q. What do you call this sketch, a schematic view of it? — A. Yes. Well, none 
of those are to scale. So they are all schematic. 

Q. What is the difference between 7 for identification, now being marked, and 
6? — A. Well, this shows an experiment. 

Q. Actually, the mold being used in an experiment?— A. That is right. The 
set-up. 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 7" for identification.) 

By Mr. Cohn : 
Q. Is this the sketch Mr. Greenglass [handing to witness] ?— A. Yes; it is. 
Mr. Cohn. We offer it, your Honor. 
Mr. E. H. Bloch. May I ask a question? 
Mr. Cohn. Surely. 
Mr. E. H. Bloch. To protect the record. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Mr. Greenglass, in connection with Government's Exhibit 7 for identifica- 
tion, can you tell us when you prepared this? — A. I prepared it during this trial. 

Q. When specifically, if you remember? — A. Yesterday. 

Q. And did you rely solely upon your memory in preparing this? — A. I did. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Now, if the Court please, I make the same objection upon 
the same grounds heretofore urged. 

The Court. Same ruling. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. (Continuing). To the introduction of Exhibits 2 and 6. 

The Court. Same ruling. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 7".) 

By the CoTJET : 
Q. Now, the comments on the bottom of No. 7 : Were they the same comments 
you liad on the sketch? — A. No. That is just to identify it. 
The Court. Oh, well. No, no comments. 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. In other words, that is to describe this, but your recollection is you did not 
put such description on the same piece of paper when you gave it to Gold? — A. 
No. 

Mr. Cohn. We have no objection at all if that description is cut off, your Honor. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I can't even answer that, Mr. Cohn, because I am objecting 
to the introduction of the document. 

Mr. Cohn. You don't even want to see it cut off. 

Q. Now, you had better look at this in altered form, Mr. Greenglass. Is this 
the sketch ? — A. That is the sketch. 

Q. Does this slvetch. Government's Exhibit 7 in evidence similarly have let- 
ters such as the first one, A, B, C, and D, and so forth? — A. Yes. 

Q. What do those letters refer to? — A. They refer to the parts of this sketch. 

Q. Were letters such as that on the sketch which you gave to Gold? — A. That 
is right. 

Q. Did those letters refer to descriptive material? — A. They did. 

Q. Where was this descriptive material? — A. On a separate sheet of paper. 

Q. Did you give that descriptive material to Gold? — A. I did. 

Q. Will you tell us the language you used on the separate piece of paper in 
describing this exhibit to Harry Gold? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am sorry. I would like it to be clarified ; has this exhibit 
already been marked in evidence? 

Tlie Court. Yes. 

By Mr. Cohn : 
Q. Now, would you tell us just what you wrote on this other sheet of paper to 
describe this exhibit and the letters contained thereon? 



84 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That is objected to, your Honor. 

I'lie (Joi'UT. Overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Ri.ocH. I respectfxiUy except. 

The Witness. "A" is the light source which projects a light through this tube 
"E"', which shows a camera set up to take a picture of this light source. Around 
the tube it is a cross-section of the high explosive lens "C" and a detonator "B" 
showing where it is detonated, and the course is that when the lens is detonated 
it collapses the tube, implodes the tube, and the camera through the lens "F" 
and the fiim "D" shows a picture of the implosion. 

Q. By the way, Mr. Greenglass, I think you have already told us you knew at 
all times that all of these sketches and descriptive material were secret? — A. I 
did. 

By the Court : 

Q. Were there constant experiments going on? — A. Constant. 

Q. And the sketches in 6 and 7 were what were considered an advance on these 
sketches marked as Government's E.Khibit 2? — A. Yes. 

Q. Well, let us eliminate the word "advance"; they were just another step? — 
A. That is right. 

Mr. CoHN. In line with your Honor's explanation, we have now arrived at the 
point where we have the secured permission of the Court to interrupt the testi- 
mony of Mr. Greenglass and put someone on the stand, concerning these other 
matters. 

Mr. Saypol. Your Honor's remarks were quite pertinent. 

Mr. H. E. Bloch. I object to Mr. Saypol's statement that your Honor's remarks 
were quite pertitient. I think the Court itself spontaneously realized that there 
was a question in your Honor's mind which has not been proved by any evi- 
dence 

The Court. No, I didn't realize anything of the kind. Please don't comment 
on what I have said. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Well. I am objecting to Mr. Saypol's statement. 

The Court. We will strike Mr. Saypol's statement and strike yours, too. 

(Witnes.s! Greenglass tompoi-arily excused.) 

Walter S. Koski, called as a witness on behalf of the Government, being first 
duly sworn, testified as follows : 

Direct examination by Mr. Saypol : 

Q. Dr. Koski, what is your profession? — A. Physical chemistry. 

Q. You have heard us suggest to witnesses that they speak up loudly and to 
keep you in the same category we will ask you to. 

You say you are a physical chemist? Is that what you said? — A. I am. 

Q. Are you engaged in that capacity now? — A. I am. 

Q. Where are you so engaged? — -A. Johns Hopkins University 

Q. Exactly in what capacity are you so engaged at Johns Hopkins? — ^A. I am 
associate professor of physical chemistry. 

Q. Collaterally, do you have any other association in your profession? — A. I 
am consultant at the Brookhaven National Laboratories. 

Q. Consultant in what? — A. I am corroborating in a program which has as its 
objective to measure certain properties of radioactive nuclei. 

Q. Nuclear chemistry? — -A. Nuclear chemistry or nuclear physics. 

Q. What activity so far as is related to your field is conducted at Brook- 
haven V — A. Nuclear chemistry. 

Q. Is that something related to some sort of measui'ements?— A. It relates to 
the measurement of certain properties of radio-active nuclei. 

Q. What has been your education? — A. I have a Ph. D. in physical cliemistry. 

Q. Is that from Johns Hopkins, too? — A. It is. 

Q. When ?— A. June 1942. 

Q. What was your employment from 1942 to 1944? — A. I was a research chem- 
ist at the Hercules Powder Co. 

Q. In 1944 did you become associated with the United States Government? — 
A. I did. 

Q. In what capacity? — A. As an engineer at the Los Alamos Scientific 
Laboratories. 

Q. How long did you continue your work there? — A. Up to about September 
1947. 

Q. That is about the time that you became associate professor of chemistry at 
Johns Hopkins? — A. That was. 

Q. That was also the time when you took on this retainer as consultant at 
Brookhaven Laboratories? — A. It was. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 85 

Q. That is the Brookhaven National Laboratories, to be exact? — A. Correct. 
Q. Referring now to this period between 1944 and 1947 when you wer^e at Los 
Alamos, can you tell me generally what instructions were issued to you, if any, 
concerning the character of the work that was being done there, what your posi- 
tion was to be in respect to pnblicization? 

Mr. A. Bloch. That is objected to on the ground that it is not binding on the 
defendant and it is hearsay. 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. A. Bloch. And therefore incompetent, irrelevant, and immaterial. 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. A. Bloch. Exception. 

The Witness. We were informed that all work done at Los Alamos was of a 
highly classified nature. 

Q. When you say "classified" do you mean that it was restricted or secret? — 
A. Secret. 

Q. Was that knowledge imparted to you in the form of instructions on one or 
more occasions? — A. It was imparted to us verbally and by written material. 

Q. Is that the atmosphere that prevailed in connection with all of the work 
that was conducted there? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to the word "atmosphere." 

The Court. All right. Strike it out. 

Q. Prior to your arrival at Los Alamos in 1944 did you have knowledge of 
the work that was going on there? — A. I did not. 

Q. Did there come a time when you learned the nature of the activities? — A. 
There did. 

Q. (Continuing). That were being conducted there? — A. There did. 

Q. Just reverting for a moment. Doctor, remember, we were discussing se- 
crecy and restriction at Los Alamos : Have you ever seen that before [showing 
paper to witness] ? — ^A. Yes, I have. 

Q. Will you tell us the circumstances under which you saw it and when? — A. 
This was — this is a restricted document that was sent to all people coming into 
the laboratory. 

Q. Did you read it at the time? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you familiarize yourself with the contents? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you observe as well as you could the instructions that were contained 
in Government's Exhibit 1? — A. I did. 

Q. Those related to what? — A. Related to security and the secrecy of all tech- 
nical information. 

Q. Going forward now at the point where you were interrupted, you say there 
came a time when you learned after arrival what the nature of the work was 
that was being done at Los Alamos? — A. Correct. 

Q. What was the knowledge that you acquired as to the nature of the work? — 
A. The objective of the laboratory was to construct a nuclear weapon or atomic 
bomb. 

Q. At this point will you tell us whether you performed any particular phase 
of that work, research, I take it, incidental to the development or incidental to 
the project?— A. I did. 

Q. What did your work involve? — A. My work was associated with implo- 
sion research connected with the atomic bomb. 

Q. So that we as laymen may understand, when you say implosion research, 
does that have something to do with explosives? — A. The distinction between ex- 
plosion and implosion is in an explosion the shock waves, the detonation wave, 
the high-pressure region is continually going out and dissipating itself. In an 
implosion the waves are converging and the energy is concentrating itself. 

Q. I take it, concentrating itself toward a common center? — A. Toward a com- 
mon center. 

Q. In other words, in explosion it blows out ; in implosion it blows in? — A. 
Yes. 

Q. Is implosion one of the physical reactions incident to the over-all action 
in the atomic bomb? — A. It is. 

Q. So, as I understand you, your precise job was to make experimental studies 
relating to this phenomena of implosion? — A. It was. 

Q. Mr. Koski, in the performance of that work did you have occasion to use 
what has been called here a lens, a device called a lens? — A. I did. 

Q. What is the lens as you knew it in connection with your experiments? — A. 
A high-explosive lens is a combination of explosives having different velocities 
and having the appropriate shape so when detonated at a particular point, it 
will produce a converging detonation wave. 



85 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Well, once again, so that we as laymen might understand, I take it our 
common»conception of a lens is a piece of glass used to focus light, is that right? — 
A. Yes, that is right. 

Q. What is the distinction between a glass lens and the type of lens you were 
working on? — ^A. Well, a glass lens essentially focuses light. An explosive lens 
focuses a detonation wave or a high-pressure force coming in. 

Q. What are the physical steps which are involved and which were involved in 
the production of a lens of the type you have described? — A. The procedure 
in general was to first make a design of this lens. Then I would go down to 
the Theta shop which was one of the shops which constructed such material for 
us. 

Q. I take it the desisn for the mold would be prepared by you or under 
your supervision? — ^A. Yes. 

Q. Then by the same token, the design or the sketch, we may call it that, may 
we not? — A. Yes. 

Q. Would then be taken by you or somebody under your supervision, probably 
you, to the Theta shop for mechanical work incidental to its manufacture — 
A. Correct. 

Q. And then the mold having been manufactured in the Theta shop — that 
was a machine shop? — A. That was a machine shop. 

Q. What would you do with the mold in relation to the explosive for the 
component part of the lens? — A. This mold was taken out to our laboratory, 
at a remote site. There this mold was used to cast the high explosive neces- 
sary in this lens. 

Q. You say to test the high explosive? 

The Court. Cast. 

The Witness. Cast. 

Q. That is, to shape the explosive? — ^A. That is right. 

Q. In the course of the conduct of those experiments did you have occasion 
to utilize diiferent and successively changing designs of lenses? — A. We did. 

Q. In other words, as you developed a lens and tested it and experimented 
with it, the results that you obtained would be utilized by you in the develop- 
ment, in the design of other lenses which would make up for any observed de- 
fect in the preceding lenses? — A. They were. 

Q. In this work about that time, that is, around 1945, starting the latter part 
of 1944 into 1945 up to the middle of 1945, did you work particularly on what 
is known as a flat-type lens? — A. I did. 

Q. Was this flat-type lens and your related experiments, were they involved 
in the development of the atomic bomb? — A. They were. 

Q. Now, in the course of your work when you required a lens of your own 
intended design or your idea, will you describe for us the procedure which you 
would follow and which you did follow to the end that you should ultimately 
have a mold for the lens? — A. I went down to the Theta shop and there discussed 
with the people in charge of the shop ■ 

Q. Do you remember their names? — A. Mr. Fitzpatrick and Mr. Marshman. 
They were sergeants at the time. I told them what we needed, gave them rough 
sketches and verbally explained whatever information they needed to construct 
this mold for us. 

Q. About that time did you — do you have a recollection of having seen the 
defendant Greenglass in the Theta shop? — A. I have seen Mr. Greenglass in the 
Theta shop. 

Q. Considering the nature of the work that you had with high explosives, what 
was the physical location of your laboratories and your experimental area in 
relation to, say, the Theta shop or the balance of the project? — A. We had 
ofiices and small laboratories in the same area that the Theta shop was located in. 
Our actual experimental work, however, was done at a remote site. 

Q. Were there reasons for conducting your work at a remote site? — A. The 
reasons were that we were handling large amounts of high explosives and they 
were detonated, and there were very heavy shocks. 

Q. Now you have told us in the course of your experimental' =jever^ i. af- 
ferent models of the flat-type lens were prepared under your . .ictions, is 
that right? — A. That is correct. 

Q. Now, once again will you explain why that was necessary? — A. Would 
you repeat that question? 

Q. I think you have told us already that it was necessary to have different 
models, that is, as you progressed, and as you observed the results of experi- 
ments, and you varied the design of the lens itself; that is the form in which 
the explosive was contained in the lens? — A. Correct. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 87 

Q. Was that work at Los Alamos, your experiments, classified as secret? — A. 
They were. 

Q. — Did that apply to all technical work that was being conducted at Los 
Alamos?— A. It did. 

Q. I show you Government's Exhibit 1 — by the way, just withdrawing that: 
You have been in attendance here and you have heard the witness Greenglass 
testimony, the defendant Greenglass' testimony, have yoii not? — A. I liave. 

Q. I show you Government's Exhibit 2, rather. Will you examine that, 
please? Do you recognize that exhibit as a substantially accurate represen- 
tation — as a substantially accurate replica of a sketch that you made at or about 
the time which you have testified to at Los Alamos in connection with your 
experimentation? — A. I do. 

Q. Is that a reasonably accurate portrayal of a sketch of a type of lens, mold 
or lens that you required in the course of your experimental work at the 
time? — A. It is. 

Q. Would you recognize it as a reasonably accurate replica of the one you 
siibmitted to the Theta machine shop? — A. Yes. 

Q. For processing? — A. Yes. 

Q. In the manner in which you have testified? — A. I do. 

Q. I show you Government's Exhibit 6, as to which you liave heard Mr. 
Greenglass testify, and I ask you whether your answers ai'e the same in respect 
to that exhibit after you have examined it? — A. They are. 

Q. Do you recall that in the course of your experimentation at or about that 
time in 194.1 you obtained from the Theta shop molds of the design indicated 
by those exhibits? 

Mr. E. FI. Btoch. Now if the Court please, I am going to ask that 

The Court. I can't hear you. 

]\Ir. E. H. Rloch. I am going to ask that this be made specific. I think Mr. 
Saypol referred to the year 1945. I want to draw your attention to what Mr. 
Gi-een'jlass testified as to his position from the time he came to Los Alamos to 
work to the time he left. 

Mr. Saypol. Will you suffer an interruption? 

Q. Do you recognize those as depictions 

The Court. I can't hear you, Mr. Saypol. 

Mr. Saypol. I am sorry. 

Q. Do you recognize those exhibits, that is, 2 and 6, as accurate replicas of 
sketches submitted by you in 1944 and 1945 to the Theta shop as the result of 
which molds, lens molds were supplied to you for your experimentation? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Now, if the Court please, I have no objection to the sub- 
stance of this question but I ask that the time be more definitely fixed. 

By the Court : 

Q. If you can remember the approximate month. If you can remember the 
■day, so much the better. If you can remember the approximate months of 
those years when those respective sketches were submitted to the Theta shop, 
let us have it. — A. I cannot. 

The Court. Very well. 

Mr. E. II. Bloch. Then I object to the question as too general. 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

By the Court : 

Q. You do remember that they were some time during the years 1944 and 
1945?— A. They were. 

* ■" * * * * * * 
By the Court : 

Q. Do you vepiember whether it was the latter part of 1944? — A. It was ap- 
proximately ^1 om the middle of 1944 until about the middle of 1945. 

'■■>I?y JV' '.'-^AYPOt: 

Q: You hue listened, you said, to the testimony of the defendant Greenglass 
in relation to Exhibits 2 and 6. Can you tell us whether his testimony is a 
reasonalily accurate description of the devices portrayed in Exliibits 2 and 6 
4ind the functions they had in connection with your experiments? 

Mr. E. H. Blocii. I object to the form of the question. 

The Court. Overrruled. 

# * N: 4r * * * 
81095 — 51 7 



gg SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

By Mr. Satpol: 

Q. Now, in respect to Government's Exhibit 7, will you examine that, please^ 
Dr. Koski? Having examined it, having heard Greenglass's testimony as ta 
what it depicts, will you tell us whether it is familiar to you? — A. It is. 

Q. What does it portray to you?— A. It is essentially— it is a sketch, a 
rough sketch of our experimental set-up for studying cylindrical implosion. 

Q. Did you hear Mr. Greenglass testify as to the description, written descrip- 
tion of that experiment that he delivered to one Harry Gold in June 1945? — A. 
I did. ^ , 

Q. Is Government's Exhibit 7 and the details of the information as testified 
to by Mr. Greenglass that he said he imparted to Gold in June 1945 a reason- 
ably accurate — are they reasonably accurate descriptions of the experiments 
and their details as you knew them at the time? 

Mr. A. Bloch. Objected to upon the ground that it is an attempt to char- 
acterize the testimony of another witness ; not calling for fact. 

(Question read.) 

The Court. I will strike from that question, "as testified to by Mr. Greenglass." 

Now do you understand the question? 

The Witness. I do. 

The Court. Can you answer it? 

The Witness. They are. 

Q. That is the experiment that you yourself were conducting in conjunction 
with the development of the atomic bomb?— A. They are. 

Q. In your special field as you knew it at tlie time, 1944 and 1945, did you 
have knowledge that the experiments which you were conducting and the 
effects as they were observed by you could have been of advantage to a foreign 
nation? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Objected to upon the ground that this witness has not been 
qualified as a political expert; merely as a scientific expert. I object to the 
question as calling for a conclusion. 

The Court. I will overrule it. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

The Witness. I wonder if you would repeat the question. 

(Last question read.) 

The Witness. I did. 

Q. And would that knowledge have been of advantage to a foreign nation? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. The same objection, your Honor. 

The Court. Overruled. 

Q. This question follows my previous question and your answer : In that field 
in which you were engaged do you know whether anywhere else there had been 
similar prior experimentation? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Same objection, your Honor, 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Exception. 

The Witness. To the best of my knowledge and all of my colleagues who were 
involved in this field, there was no information in textbooks or technical journals 
on this particular subject. 

Q. In other words, you were engaged in a new and an original field? — A. 
Correct. 

Q. And up to that point and continuing right up until this trial has the 
information relating to the lens mold and the lens and the experimentation to 
which you have testified continued to be secret information? — A, It still is. 

Q. Except as divulged at this trial? — A. Correct. 

The Court. As far as you know, only for the purposes of this trial? 

The Witness. Correct. 

Mr. Saypol. Will your Honor allow a statement for the record in that respect? 
The Atomic Energy Committee has declassified this information under the 
Atomic Energy Act and has made the ruling as authorized by Congress that 
subsequent to the trial it is to be reclassified. 

The Court. Counsel doesn't take issue with that statement. 
Mr. E. H. Bloch. No, not at all. I read about it in the newspapers before 
Mr. Saypol stated it. 

Mr. Saypol. May I have just a moment, if the Court please? 
(Mr. Saypol confers with associates.) 
Mr. Sa^tpol. You may examine. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Will you bear with me for three or four moments, your 
Honor, since I am not a scientist, I don't want to query about matters which 
might appear asinine. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 89 

Cross-examination by Mr. E. H. Bloch : 
Q. Dr. Koslii, did you turn over any of the sketches requested in Govern- 
ment's Exhibits 2, 6, and 7 to the defendant Greenglass?— A. I did not. 

By the CoxniT: 
Q. Was the defendant Greenglass in a position where by reason of 'his 
employment in the Theta shop he could see the slietches which you turned 
over? — A. He was. 

By Mr. Bloch : 

Q. Mr. Greenglass was a plain ordinary machinist, was he not? 

Mr. Saypol. I object to characterizations. 

The Court. I will permit the characterization. 

The Witness. Correct. 

Q. Now, you heard Mr. Greenglass testify about the E shop, did you not? — ^A. 
Yes. 

Q. Then I believe he testified that there were two other shops similar to 
the E shop in that technical area and finally there came a time when there 
was a new building which was called the Theta building and all the shops 
moved in there, is that correct? — A. That is not correct. 

Mr. Saypol. Well 

The Court. Well, what is not correct? 

The Witness. The Theta shop was a separate shop. All of the shops didn't 
move into this building. 

Mr. Saypol. I want to know what is incorrect. 

By the Court : 

Q. You are not characterizing that Greenglass had testified to that and 
therefore was incorrect? — A. No. 

Q. You are characterizing that the statement of counsel as formulated in 
his question is incorrect. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Well let us clarify it for everybody's sake then. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Was there an E shop? — A. There was. 

Q. And did that E shop at some time move into another building? — A It 
did. 

Q. What was that other or new building called? — A. That was the location of 
the Theta shop. 

Q. Now, was the Theta shop in existence and used for work at the project 
while the E shop was being used for work? — A. There might have been some 
overlapping but I am not sure. 

Q. Now, were there other shops besides the E shop — I believe he characterized 
them as the E. C. shops ; you correct me if I am wrong — that also moved into 
the new building, or the Theta shop at the time that you started to use the 
Theta shop, is that correct? — A. No. The Theta, E and C shop never were in 
the same building. 

Q. Now, when the personnel of the E shop moved into the Theta building 
were the same number of machinists used for the work which you supervised? — 

A. I do not recall the details about the machinists. I usually contacted their 
superiors. 

Q. In fact, you very seldom had any conversations with any machinists, is 
that right? — A. Rarely, but not completely — on occasions we did have. 

Q. It was very rare? — A. It was rare. 

Q. Now, did you know when the defendant Greenglass became an assistant 
foreman? — A. I did not. 

Q. Did you know when he became a foreman? — A. I did not. 

Q. Now, just two more questions. Doctor. Do these exhibits 

The Court. What are the numbers? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am going to mention them. 

Q. (Continuing.) 2, 6, and 7, purport to be a complete picture of these lenses 
in the scientific sense? 

The Court. Do you understand, Doctor, what he means by a complete picture? 

The Witness. I am not clear as to what you mean. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Well, maybe I am a little too vague. 

Mr. Saypol. To preserve accuracy, I think the testimony that 2 and 6 are 
sketches of molds, and 7 is a description of an experiment. 

The Court. That is right. 



90 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. Satpol. Am I correct? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That is correct. 

The Witness. That is correct. 

Mr. Saypol. So counsel's question to the extent that it refers to 7 should 
be corrected. 

Q. Well, let us satisfy everybody. I will tell you wliat I am driving at, Dr. 
Koski : is it not a fact that a scientist would not consider Government's Exhibits 
2. fi. and 7, whether or not two of them relate to a lens and one of them relates to 
some kind of cylindrical apparatus, until the scientists knew the dimensions of 
the lens or the cylindrical apparatus? — A. This is a rough sketch and of course is 
nut quantitative but it does illustrate the important principle involved. 

Q. It does omit, however, the dimensions? — A. It does omit dimensions. 

Q. It omits, for instance, the diameter, does it not? — A. Correct. 

Q. Now is it not a fact that 

The Court. You say it does, however, set forth the important principle involved, 
is that correct? 

The WiT>fEss. Correct. 

The Court. Can you tell us what that principle is? 

The Witness. The principle is the use of a combination of high explosives 
of appropriate shape to produce a symmetrical converging detonation wave. 

Q. Now, weren't the dimensions of these lens molds very vital or at least very 
important with respect to their utility in terms of success in your experiments? — 
A. The physical over-all dimensions that you mention are not important. It 
is the relative dimensions that are. 

Q. Now the relative dimensions are not disclosed, are they, by these exhibits? — 
A. They are not. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That is all. 

Redirect examination by Mr. Satpol: 

Q. The important factor from the experimental point of view is the design, is 
it not? — A. Correct. 

Q. That was original, novel at the time, was it not? — A. It was. 

Q. Can you tell us. Doctor, whether a scientific expert in the field you were 
engaged in could glean enough information from the exhibits in evidence so 
as to le'rn the nature and the object of the experiment that was involved in 
the sketches in evidence? — A. From these sketches and from Mr. Greenglass' 
descriptions, this gives one sufficient information, one who is familiar with the 
field, to indicate what the principle and the idea is here. 

Q. And would I be exaggerating if I were to say, colloquially, that one expert, 
interested in finding out what was going on at Los Alamos, could get enough from 
those exhibits in evidence which you have before you to constitute a tip-off 
as to what was going on at Los Alamos? 

(Last question read as follows : 

"Q. And would I be exaggerating if I were to say colloquially that one expert, 
interested in finding out what was going on at Los Alamos, could get enough from 
those exhibits in evidence which you have before you to reveal what was going 
on at Los Alamos?") — A. One could. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Of course, my ob.1ection still goes. 

Q. Rather than using the preliminary 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am sorry. 

Mr. Saypol. Let me finish the question. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I want to preserve the record. Go ahead. 

Q. Rather than using my former question, as to suggesting that it would be 
an exaggeration, is it not a fact that one expert could ascertain at that time if 
shown Exhibits 2, 6, and 7, the nature and the object of the activity that was 
under way at Los Alamos in relation to the production of an atomic bomb? — 
A. lie could. 

^h•. Saypol. That is all. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Will your Honor bear with me just a moment? No further 
questions. 

Mr. SA-i-poL. May I address one further question? It is technical and it has 
been suggested to me. 

By Mr. Saypol : 

Q. There was a question put to you by counsel regarding the fact that the 
exhibits do not show the dimensions. Then there was some statement as to 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 91 

relative dimensions. Distinguishing between relative dimensions and design, is 
it not the fact that design of the component was the primary fact of importance 
in these sketches? — ^A. It was. 

Q. So that the sketches, particularly 2 and 6, do show relative dimensions in 
that they show the relations of each of the factors in the lens, one to the otlier? — 
A. They do. 

Mr. Saypol. That is all. 

Recross-examination by Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Well, Doctor, when you gave instructions to I believe you said it was 
Sergeant Fitzpatrick — was that the name? — A. Yes. 

Q. And the other gentleman? — A. Marshman. 

Q. Did you detail witli any specificness the measurements of the lens or of 
the component parts of the lens that you wanted constructed? — A. I gave specitic 
instructions. I gave rough sketches, and then while this lens mold was in 
progress we had to send down one of our men to sketch out, to precisely draw the 
shape of this lens on the metal from which it was being cut. 

Q. When you say precisely draw, are you saying now that precision work was 
necessary in the construction of this mold lens? — A. The shape of this lens is an 
Important factor. 

Q. So aside from the shape — I am trying to direct your mind. Doctor, to the 
precision, quality of the work that was entailed and necessary in the construction 
of the lens.— A. It had to be a precision job. 

Mr. E. H. Bmch. That is all. 

By the Coukt: 

Q. While there might have been some other details that might also have been 
of some use to a foreign nation which were hot contained on Exhibits 2, 6, and 
7, the substance of your testimony as I understand it was that there was sufficient 
on Exhibits 2, 6, and 7 to reveal to an expert which was going on at Los Alamos? — 
A. Yes, your Honor. 

Mr. Saypol. That is all. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That is all. 

The Court. It is about twelve minutes of one now. In view of the fact that I 
turned over Court's Exhibits 1 to 5, we will take a rather extended luncheon 
recess. So you may now have an hour and forty-five minutes to examine them, 
and we will return here at two-thirty, ladies and gentlemen. 

(Recess until 2 : 30 p. m.) 

AFTERNOON SESSION 

(Jury not present.) 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. May we approach the bench? 



riv 



(The jury returned to the courtroom at 2 : 40 p. m.) 

The Court. Do you want the witness Greenglass? 

Mr. Saypol. Yes, we have sent for him. 

Mr. CoHN. Yes. 

David Greenglass resumed the stand. 

Direct examination continued by Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Mr. Greenglass, one thing I forgot to ask you about this morning in con- 
nection with the meeting up at Rosenberg's apartment, when you and your 
wife went there for dinner after Ann Sidorovich had left the apartment. Did 
you have a conversation with Mr. and Mrs. Rosenberg? — A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Will you tell us what they said to you at that point? — A. At that point 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, I submit the question has already been 
asked and already been answered. I have no objection if Mr. Colin wants to 
direct the witness to some specific item which you feel — — 

Mr. CoHN. That is precisely what I am doing. 

The Court. All right. 

The Witness. Well 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Let us not have a rehash of the testimony. 

The Witness. Well, at this point Mr. and Mrs. Rosenberg told me they were 
very happy to have me come in with them on this espionage work and that now 
that I was in it there would be no worry about any money they gave to me, it 
was not a loan, it was money given to me because I was in this work and that 
it was not a loan. 



92 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Did they say anything about the source of that money? — A. They said that 
it came from the Russians who wanted me to have it. 

Q. Now you have told us about the visit of Harry Gold to you in June about 
the material that you turned over to him. When after that was the next occasion 
when you saw Julius Rosenberg? — A. It was on my furlough in September 1945. 

Q. Where — you got a furlough in September of 1945. — A. That is right. 

Q. Where did you go on that furlough? — A. I went home, but I no longer 
had the apartment at 266 Stanton Street, so we stayed in an apartment where 
I had been living before I was married, which was in the building that my 
mother lives in, 64 Sheriff Street. 

Q. In other words, you came from New Mexico to New York for the fur- 
lough? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did your wife come with you? — A. She did. 

Q. Now how long after you arrived in New York 

The Court. Which furlough is this? 

Mr. CoHN. September 1945, your Honor. The other one was January 1945. 

The Court. That is right. 

Q. You had not been in New York from January 1945 until September 1945 ; 
is that right? — A. I had not; no. 

Q. And this meeting with Harry Gold took place out at New Mexico? — A. That 
is right. 

Q. Now, in September 1945, after you returned to New York, when was it 
that you first saw Julius Rosenberg? — A. It was the morning after I came to 
New York. 

Q. Now, would you tell us what happened? Where did you see him? — A. He 
came up to the apartment and he got me out of bed and we went into another room 
so my wife could dress. 

Q. Did you have a conversation in that other room? — A. I believe we did. 

Q. What did he say to you? — A. He said to me that he wanted to know what 
I had for him. 

Q. Did you tell him what you had for him? — A. Yes. I told him "I think I 
have a pretty good" — "a pretty good description of the atom bomb." 

Q. The atom bomb itself ?— A. That's right. 

Q. Now at this point, Mr. Greenglass, I want to take you back to your testi- 
mony on Friday afternoon. Did I understand you to say — well, I will be a little 
more specific. I am going to take you back to meeting in January 1945 when 
you had a conversation with Rosenberg at your apartment. Did I understand 
your testimony to be that Rosenberg had given you a description of the atom 
bomb? — A. He did. 

Q. He gave you a description of the atom bomb? — A. That is right. 

Q. Will you tell us the conversation you had with him at the time when he 
gave you this description of the atom bomb? — A. Well, he said to me he would 
have to give me an idea of what the bomb was about so that I would be able 
to know what I am looking for. He then gave me a description of what I later 
found out to be was the bomb that was dropped at Hiroshima. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Now if the Court please, I do not like to interrupt the witness. 
I move that everything after what he subsequently found out 

The Court. Yes, Mr. Bloch. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Be deleted from the answer. 

The Court. Strike it out. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. And I also request at this time in connection with this very 
specific inquiry that the witness be cautioned against using the word "descrip- 
tion" but let us have specifically what the description was. 

Mr. CoHN. I intend to come to that directly, your Honor. I can't do every- 
thing at one time. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am sorry, I did not mean by way of criticism. 

Mr. CoHN. I am sure of that, Mr. Bloch. 

Your Honor, I object to striking the remainder of that an.swer. I think it is 
important, and I don't see why the witness is not able to give us knowledge that 
he gained in the course of his ofiicial duties at Los Alamos. 

The Court. You haven't brought out what he subsequently learned, and I 
don't know from whom. 

Q. All right, tell us under what circumstances you subsequently learned that 
this bomb was the type atom bomb dropped on Hiroshima? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to that as not binding on the defendant. 

The Court. Now, of course, I take it you are bringing into force his knowl- 
edge of a particular project and from what he learned there so that he could 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 93 

apply what was told by Rosenberg to him to the knowledge that he learned and 
•concluded that that was the bomb on Hiroshima. 

Mr. CoHN. Yes, your Honor. 

The Court. Very well, I will overrule that. 

******* 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. At any rate, my objection stands. 

Q. You say in the course of your work? — A. In the course of my work at 
Los Alamos I came in contact with various people who w^orked in different 
parts of the project and also I worked directly on certain apparatus that went 
into the bomb, and I met people who talked of the bombs and how they operated. 

Q. And on the basis of that knowledge and information? — A. I gave the 
sketches and these reports. 

Q. Right ; and was it on the basis of that same knowledge and information that 
you learned that this bomb which Rosenberg had described to you was the tyi)e 
of atom bomb that was dropped on Hiroshima? — A. That is right. They 

Q. All right. Could you tell us, as you remember, in exactly what words 
Rosenberg described this type atom bomb to you? — A. He said there was fission- 
able material at one end of a tube and at the other end of the tube there was 
a sliding member that was also of fissionable material and when they brought 
these two together under great pressure, that would be — a nuclear reaction 
■would take place. That is the type of bomb that he described. 

Q. Was that the first time you had ever heard a description of that type atom 
bomb? — A. That is right. 

Q. Or of any type atom bomb, is that right? — A. That is right. 

Q. Now did Rosenberg tell you at that time why he was describing this type 
atom bomb to you? — A. He was describing it to me so that I should know what 
to look for, what I could 

The Court. He told you that? 

The Witness. That is right. 

Q. After he gave you that description, the Hiroshima type, did you, in ensuing 
months, gather information concerning the atom bomb?— A. I did. 

Q. Will you tell us just how you went about that?— A. I would usually have 
access to other points in the project and also I was friendly with a number of 
people in various parts of the project and whenever a conversation would take 
place on something I didn't know about I would listen very avidly and 
question 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out the word "avidly." 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Exception. 

Mr. CoHN. May we have the last few words? 

(Record read.) 

The Witness (continuing). And question the speakers as to clarify what they 
had said. I would do this surreptitiously so that they wouldn't 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike that out. 

The Court. You would do it, I take it, so that they wouldn't know it. 

The Witness. I would do it so they wouldn't know. 

The Court. Strike out '"surreptitiously." Go ahead. 

Q. Now, in addition to that fact, you yourself were working on various things 
used in connection with the experimentation used on the atom bomb? — A. That 
is correct. 

Q. Is that correct? — Yes, sir. 

Q. Such as this high explosive lens? — A. High explosive lens molds were made 
in my shop and I got — as a matter of fact, there were molds used on the atom 
bomb. 

Q. Was it on the basis of this knowledge which you had accumulated over 
those months that you told Rosenberg you thought you had a pretty good 
description of the atom bomb itself? — ^A. I did. 

Q. Did you at a later time give to Rosenberg a description of the atom bomb 
itself ?— A. I did. 

Q. Now, was this atom bomb which you described to him the same type atom 
bomb he had described to you in January? — A. It was not. 

Q. Would you explain that to us? — A. One type of bomb, the one that he 
described to me, was dropped at Hiroshima, and it was the only type bomb of 
that nature that was made. The one I got most of my knowledge on, got the 
knowledge — the information on, was of a different nature. It was a type that 
worked on an implosion effect. 



94 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. It was a different type atomic bomb? — A. That is right. 

Mr. E. H. Block. If the Court please, I move to strike out the answer upon 
the ground that this witness has not been qualified as an expert. 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I except. 

Q. Was this type atom bomb a type which was manufactured at Los Alamos 
to your knowledge, after the Hiroshima bomb was no longer in process of 
manufacture? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did you give Rosenberg the description at that time? — A. No. It was later 
in the afternoon. 

Q. All right. Now, I believe we are at the point where Rosenberg — you told 
Rosenberg you had a pretty good description of the atom bomb. What did he 
say to you at that point? — A. H3 said he would like to have it immediately, as 
soon as I possibly could get it written up he would like to get it. 

Q. He wanted it written up? — A. Yes. 

Q. Now, would you tell us what you did? — A. Oh, besides that, during this 
conver.sation he gave me $200 and he told me to come over to his house. I then 
went to see my — well, he then left and I was there alone with my wife. 

Q Did you have any discussion with your wife? — A. My wife didn't want to 
give the rest of the information to Julius, but I overruled her on that. I told 
her that 

Mr. E. H. Block. I object to this, not only because it was not in the presence 
of the Rosenbergs, but because the witness is stating conclusions. 

Q. Tell us what you said to her.— A. I have said that "I have gone this 
far and I will do the rest of it, too." 

Q. How about the money, what did you do with the $200? — A. I gave that to 
my wife. 

Q. What happened after this conversation between you and your wife? — -A. We 
went down and had 

By the Court : 

Q. Before you get to that point, when did you turn over Exhibits 2 and 6? 
Mr. COKN. 2 and 6, your Honor, are the first two exhibits on the high-explosive 
lens. 

The Court. They are replicas of it. When were they turned over? 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. When did you give the first sketch, the first lens mold sketch? — A. That 
was in January 1945. 

The Court. What about the second one, 6? 

Mr. CoKN. Do we have the exhibit hei'e? 

Q. This is Exhibit 2. His Honor's question was. When did you turn that over? — 
A. That was in January 194.5. 

Q. To whom did you give it? — A. I gave that to Julius Rosenberg. 

Q. Now, Exhibit 6?— A. I gave that to Harry Gold. 

Q. In June of 1945 at Albuquerque? — A. In June 1945, at Albuquerque. 

Mr. Cohn. Does that clarify it, your Honor? 

The Court. How about 7? 

Q. Exhibit 7. Am I correct in stating you gave Exhibit 7 to Gold at the same 
time you gave him Exhibit 6? — A. I gave that too; that is right. 

The Court. Very well. 

Q. Now tell us what you did after you had this discussion with your wife? — A. 
Well, we went down — -it was late in the morning — we had a combination break- 
fast and lunch, and I came back up again and I wrote out all the information 
and drew up some .sketches and descriptive material. 

Q. Did you draw up a sketch of the atom bomb itself? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you prepare descriptive material to explain the sketch of the atom 
bomb? — A. I did. 

Q. Was there any other material that you wrote up on that occasion? — A. I 
gave some scientists' names, and I also gave some possible recruits for espionage. 

Q. Now about how many pages would you say it took to write down all of 
these matters? — A. I would say about 12 pages or so. 

Q. About what time did you complete preparing this report? — A. It must have 
been about 2 in the afternoon. 

Q. Now, tell us what you did after you prepared these 12 pages of written 
material, including the sketch of the atom bomb and a description of tlie sketch? — 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 95 

A. My wife and myself got into my father-in-law's car and we drove around ta 
Julius's house. "We went up to the house and I gave Julius the information 
which 

Q. Gave him all of this written information? — A. That is right. 

Q. Including this sketch? — A. That is right. 

Mr. CoiiN. May we have this marked for identification, your Honor? 

(Marked Government's Exhibit 8 for identification.) 

Q. Have you prepared for us, Mr. Greenglass, a replica of the sketch — I believe 
it is a cross-section sketch of the atom bomb — a replica of the sketch you gave to 
Eo.senberg on that day? — A. I did. 

Q. I show you Government's Exhibit 8 for identification, Mr. Greenglass, and 
ask you to examine it and tell us whether or not that is a replica of the sketch, 
cross section of the atomic bomb? — A. It is. 

Q. And how does that compare to the sketch you gave to Rosenberg in Septem- 
ber 1945? — A. About the same thing. Maybe a little difference in size ; that is all. 

Q. Except for the size? — A. Yes. 

Q. It is the same? — A. Yes. 

Q. By the way, who was present when you handed the written material includ- 
ing this sketch over to Rosenberg? — A. IMy wife, my sister, Julius, and myself. 

Q. By your sister you mean Mrs. Rosenberg? — A. That is right. 

Mr. CoHN. We ofiier this in evidence, your Honor. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to it on the same ground urged with respect to 
Government's Exhibits 2, 6, and 7, and I now ask the Court to impound this ex- 
hibit so that it remains secret to the Court, the jury, and counsel. 

Mr. Saypol. That is a rather strange request coming from the defendants. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Not a strange request coming from me at the present. 

Mr. Satpol. We have discussed that with the Court, as counsel knows, and I 
think nothing else need be said. If I had said it or my colleague, Mr. Cohn, had 
said in, there might have been some criticism. 

The Court. As a matter of fact, there might have been some question on appeal. 
I welcome the suggestion coming from the defense because it removes the question 
completely. 

Mr. Saypol. And I am happy to say that we join him. 

The Court. All right. It shall be impounded. Let me see it. Do you have any 
objection to the descriptive words on the bottom wherein it is stated, cross section 
A-bomb, not to scale? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I haven't seen the exhibit itself, your Honor. 

The Court. Show it to counsel. 

(Handed to Mr. E. H. Bloch.) 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. No, I have no objection to that. 

Mr. Corn. May the exhibit be received in evidence, your Honor? 

The Court. Yes. 

(Government's Exhibit 8 for identification received in evidence.) 

Tlie Court. It will be sealed after it is shown to the jury. 

]\Ir. CoHN. Yes, your Honor. I would like to interrogate the witness on the 
basis of it for a moment. Mr. Saypol calls my attention to the fact that all defense 
counsel have not joined in this request that this document be impounded. I 
wonder if the defendant Sobell's counsel cares to join? 

The Court. I thought it was understood that where one counsel spoke and the 
other one didn't object to what he said, by his silence he acquiesced in what the 
other counsel was saying. 

Mr. Kuntz. I thought your Honor made that a rule throughout this trial. 

By Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Now, Mr. Greenglass, address yourself to that sketch and tell us, if you will, 
just what you wrote as best you remember of the descriptive material you gave to 
Rosenberg in September 1945, the descriptive material in that sketch. — A. Well, 
I had this sketch marked A, B, C, D, E, F, and those referred to various parts 
of the bomb. 

Q. Now tell us exactly what you wrote in this descriptive material. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Before you answer the question, may we come up to the 
bench, your Honor? 

******* 

(The following proceedings were resumed in the presence and hearing of the 
jury:) 

The Court. Now, there is a matter of some concern to me i)ersonally that 
the witness is about to testify to, and the concern I have is as to the method 
that this testimony should be handled. 



96 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Now, Mr. Saypol, Mr. Cohn was about to take detailed proof on certain 
descriptive matters concerning the atom bomb which the witness contends 
was turned over to the defendant, Julius Rosenberg ; that while it might not 
be in the best interests of the country, was yet a matter that is necessary in 
the trial of a case and under our democratic form of government. 

Mr. Bloch, I understand that you are willing to concede the testimony con- 
cerning that particular phase of it, is that correct? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I was willing to do this, your Honor — I want to restate it 
very clearly. I thought that in the interest of national security any testimony 
that this witness may give of a descriptive nature concerning the last Govern- 
ment exhibit might reveal matters which should not be revealed to the public. 

The Court. Therefore? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. And therefore I felt that his testimony on this aspect 
should be revealed solely to the Court, to the jury, and to the counsel, and 
not to the public generally. 

The Court. Well, now, Mr. Saypol, do you wish to say something? 

Mr. Saypol. Yes. I feel free to address myself to the subject in the light 
of the fact that the situation as it exists is not of my creation but that of one 
of counsel for the defendants. The character of the proof has been offered, 
this witness and the preceding one, has been the subject of very grave considera- 
tion by my colleagues, myself, by agencies of the Government, including the 
Department of Justice, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the Joint Con- 
gressional Committee on Atomic Energy. 

We are cognizant that there had to be balanced on the one hand the dis- 
closure of the type of information that has come out and is about to come out 
in order to supply the requirements of the Constitutional Rights of defend- 
ants to full confrontation. That subject has been expended upon by our courts. 
That weighed against the national security. The matter is of such gravity 
tJhat the Atomic Energy Commission held hearings, at wliich I was represented, 
as did the Joint Congressional Committee, and representatives of tlie Atomic 
Energy Commission have been in attendance here at the trial, as your Honor 
knows, have been in constant consultation with me and my staff on the subject. 

At least one of the counsel for the defendants made the offer to preserve 
the confidential character of this information. I think I stated before that 
solely for the purposes of this trial, the Atomic Energy Commission had released — 
had authorized the release of this information so that the Court and the jury 
might have it. If all counsel for the defendants had joined in Mr. Bloch's 
suggestion, it would have been ideal. In the presence of a conflict amongst the 
defendants as the prosecutor, my view is that of my colleagues, where I say 
frankly that the decision is not one that I would freely care to make myself, 
although I am not unequipped to do so, nor am I hesitant, but it has unanimity 
amongst us. Since there is no concurrence among counsel for the defendants, 
it is my view that we should go forward with the proof as it has proceeded, 
unless the Court of its own volition, bearing in mind, as I know it will, the 
Constitutional factors as they relate to the defendants, itself chooses to make 
an appropriate direction. 

The Court. Ladies and gentlemen, in as plain and simple language as I can 
I)ossibly put it to you, under our form of government we do not have what 
has been characterized as "star-chamber proceedings," whei'e a defendant is 
not permitted to hear the testimony against him or only a portion of testimony 
is given and certain portions are withheld. When the defendant is put on 
trial, under our form of government, I am happy to say, he is entitled to full 
confrontation, and that means confrontation of all the evidence which the Gov- 
ernment contends to prove the guilt of the defendant or defendants. 

Now, there are some courses open to the Court and I am about to pursue one of 
these courses reluctantly, but necessarily so. I am going to ask spectators in 
the courtroom to please leave the courtroom during the course of the taking 
of these proceedings on the balance of this testimony. 

Wlien the court reconvened the room had been cleared of spectators 
except that representatives of the press were present. The court re- 
porter transcribed what then was said but copies of this portion of the 
transcript have tlius far been circulated only among counsel for both 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 97 

sides. However, next day's New York Times (March 12, 1951), car- 
ried an account of what happened and the following is an extract: 

Reading from the sketch, Greenglass described 30-6' high-explosive lenses, each 
of which carried two detonators. He explained that two detonators were used 
to make sure the lenses fired if one detonator proved defective. He introduced 
the word "implosion" to describe an explosion focused inward instead of out- 
ward. He said 72 condensers were used to fire the detonator. 

Greenglass then described a "barium plastic sphere" which he said acted to 
protect the high explosive from the plutonium constituting the bomb core. In- 
side the barium sphere, he said, a plutonium sphere was placed. 

Inside the plutonium sphere, he said, a beryllium sphere provided a source of 
neutrons to discharge into the plutonium. At this stage, he said, the plutonium 
was "highly sensitive" becau.se of the pressure concentrated against it. As the 
neutrons discharged, he added, "nuclear fission takes place." 

On completion of the description. Judge Kaufman ordered the court stenog- 
rapher not to transcribe that testimony. He said the stenographer would read 
it from his notes to any defense lawyer, but that the court did not want the tes- 
timony made permanent in vpriting. 

Greenglass added, under Mr. Cohn's questioning, that the bomb switch was 
set off by a "barometric pressure device" and that the bomb itself was dropped 
by parachute. The latter state:r.ent went unchallenged. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, would this be an appropriate time 
to take a recess? 

The Court. We will take a short recess. 

(Short recess.) 



if * * * * 

(The following took place in the presence of the jury:) 



By Mr. Cohn 

Q. Now will you tell us just wl.at happened, Mr. Greenglass, after you handed 
this sketch and the descriptive material concerning the atomic bomb to Rosen- 
berg? What did he do? What did the others there d;)? — A. Well, he stepped 
into another room and he read it and he came out and he said, "This is very 
good. We ought to have this typed up immediately." And my wife said, "We 
will probably have to correct the grammar involved," because I was more in- 
terested in writing down the technical phases of it than I was in correcting the 
grammar. So they pulled — they had a bridge table and they brought it into 
the living room, plus a typewriter. 

Q. What kind of typewriter? — A. A portable. 

Q. Then what? — A. And they set that up and each sentence was read over 
and typed down in correct grammatical fashion. 

Q. Who did the typing, Mr. Greenglass? — A. Ethel did the typing and Ruth 
and Julius and Ethel did the correction of the grammar. While this was going 
on, sometimes there would be stretches where you could do — there wasn't too 
much changing to be made, and at this time Julius told me that he hsid stolen 
the proximity fuse when he was working at Emerson Radio. 

Q. He gave you that information on that occasion, is that right? — A. Yes. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, I move to strike that out, the reference 
to stealing the proximity fuse, upon the ground that it is not related to the 
charge here. It imputes to the defendants the commission of a separate crime. 
I think it injects inflammatory and prejudicial material into this trial, and I 
ask that it be stricken. 

By the Court : 

Q. Did he tell you what he did with that proximity fuse? — A. He told me that 
he took it out in his brief case. That is the same brief case he brought his 
lunch in with, and he gave it to Russia. 

The Court. All right. Strike out "stealing" and we will let this latter part 
Stand. 

Mr. E. H. Bi.ocH. I respectfully except to your Honor's niling. 
******* 

Q. Did you know that Julius had been working at the Emerson Electric Com- 
pany?— A. Yes, I did know it. 

Q. Did you know what type of work he had been doing? — A. Yes, he was an 
engineer and insi)ector out there. 



98 SOVIET ATOlVnC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Do you know whether or not he had any connection with Government 
work? — A. He worked for the Signal Coii:)s, actually. 

Q. He was actually in the employ of the Signal Corps?— A. That's right. 

Q. Now, about how long a period of time would you say was consumed in this 
process of the typing by Mrs. Rosenberg of the information that you had 
furnished to Mr. Rosenberg? — A. Oh, I would say it took most of the afternoon, 
about 5 o'clock, I guess, when we got done with it. 

Q. Did you have any further conversation before you left the apartment on 
that occasion? — A. Well, that 

Q. Go ahead. I was going to ask jou specifically about one thing. Did you 
have any conversation with Rosenberg about how long you were going to remain 
in the United States Army at Los Alamos? — A. Oh, I just stated that as soon as I 
could possibly get out, I was going to go out of the Army, get a discharge. 

Q. What did he say? — A. He said he'd want me to stay up in Los Alamos if I 
could get a job up there as a civilian, stay there as a civilian. 

Q. Did he tell you why he wanted you to stay there? — A. Well, he said that he 
wanted me to stay there so I could continue to give information. 

Q. What did you say? — A. I said I would like to leave the place, I would like to 
come home. 

Q. Now, about how long did this furlough last in September? Was it a long 
furlough or a short one? — A. It was fairly long. The dates on this occasion — 
I don't know exactly when I got back to Los Alamos. 

Q. By the way, you turned — I think you have told us on several occasions that 
you turned over this sketch and descriptive material to Rosenberg, is that 
right? — A. I said that before. 

Q. And that it was typed by INIrs. Rosenberg? — A. That's right. 

Q. Do you know what happened to the original notes after the typing was com- 
pleted? — A. The original notes were taken and burnt in the frying pan and then 
flushed down the drain. 

Q. Who did that?— A. Julius did that. 

Q. Pardon me? — A. Julius did. 

Q. Now, did you return to Los Alamos In September? — A. I did return to Los 
Alamos in September ; yes. 

Q. Did there come a time when you obtained a discharge from the Army of 
the United States?— A. I did. 

Q. When was that? — A. In February 1946, last day in February. 

Q. Where were you discharged? — A. El Paso, Texas, Fort Bliss. 

Q. Did you go from Los Alamos to El Paso? — A. That's right. 

Q. Did you receive an honorable discharge? — A. I did. 

Q. After you were discharged from the Army at the end of February 1946, 
where did you go? — A. I went back to New York City. 

Q. Where did you take up residence? — A. First at my mother's home, with 
an aunt, at 64 Shei'iff Street, in the same building that my mother lives, and 
then at 265 Rivington Street. 

Q. And you have resided at 265 Rivington Street up to the time of your con- 
finement on this charge? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now, after your discharge from the Army and after you returned to New 
York, did you go into business? — A. I went into business with JuTius Rosenberg 
and my brother and a man by the name of Goldstein. 

Q. Which brother of yours do you refer to? — A. Bernard. 

Q. Bernard Greenglass ; is that correct? — A. That's right. 

Q. How long did you remain in business with Rosenberg and your brother? — 
A. Till August 1949. 

Q. In that three-year period, from 1946 

The CouET. What business was that? 

The Witness. It was two businesses, G. & R. Engineering. 

By Mr. Cohn: 

Q. Is that Greenglass and Rosenberg or Goldstein? — A. Greenglass, Goldstein 
and Rosenberg. 

Q. Tlie "G" covered two partners whose names began with "G" and the "R" is 
for Rosenberg? — A. That's right; and then the Pitt Machine Products Corpora- 
tion. 

The Court. Until when did you say that was in business — until when? 

The WiTNKSs. I was in business until August 1949. 

Q. Now, what type of businesses were these, just in general terms? — A. Ma- 
chine shops. 

Q. Machine shr)ps? — A. That's right. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 99 

Q. You continued to work as a machinist ; is tliat correct? — A. That's right. 
Q. Now, during those three years from February or March 1946, until August 
of 1949, did you see Rosenberg at business from time to time? — A. We did— I 
did. 

Q. Did you have any conversations w^ith him? — A. I did. 

Q. Am I correct in stating you saw him very frequently in business? — ^A. YeS; 
every day almost. 

Q. Did any of these conversations relate to espionage activities? — A. They 
did. 

Q. Would you tell us those conversations which you recall? Try to tell us 
as best you can when 

Mr. A. Bloch. I object to it unless the time is fixed. 

Mr. CoHN. I am just trying to get him to state it. 

Q. Try to tell us as best you can, if you can remember, when or around when 
each conversation tooii place. — A. Well, in '46 or '47 Julius Rosenberg made an 
offer to me to have the Russians pay for part of my schooling and the GI Bill of 
Rights to pay for the other part, and that I sliould go to college for the purpose 
of cultivating the friendships of people that I had known at Los Alamos and 
also to acquire new friendships with people who were in the field of research 
that are in those colleges, like physics and nuclear energy. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am sorry, may I inquire if the witness is now stating what 
Rosenberg said to him. 

The Court. So I understood. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Are these the words? 

The Witness. Approximatelv the words. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. All right. 

Q. Did he mention any particular institutions which he desired to have you 
attend? — A. Well, he would have wanted me to go to Chicago, University of 
Chicago, because there were people there that I had known at Los Alamos'and 
it was a well-known institution and it was doing a lot of good work in the field 
of nuclear physics. 

Q. Did he mention any other institutions? — A. M. I. T., and then later on 
when N. Y. U. had a nuclear engineering course he wanted me to take that. 

Q. Did he give you the name of any scientists with whom he desired you to 
build up friendsliips? — A. No; he told me that at Chicago University there were 
some people that I had gone to school with, I mean, I had been at Los Alamos 
with, and that I sliould cultivate their friendships. 

Q. Did he specify how much of this money would be furnished by the Rus- 
sians?— A. He specified that the GI Bill of Rights would pay for my schooling 
and they would give a certain amount of money for living of the student, and 
he said the Russians would pay additional money so I could live more comfortably. 

Q. Now, did you ever agree to go to any of these schools? — A. I said I would 
try, but I never bothered. 

Q. l"ou never, in fact, did go; is that right? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now, did Rosenberg tell you anything about activities of this kind in which 
he had engaged? — ^A. Well, he had told me tliat he had people going to schools 
in various places. 

Tlie Court. Will you fix the time when he told you this. 

Tlie Witness. It was during this period of 1946 to 1949. 

The Court. All right. 

A. (Continuing.) He told me that he had people going to school in various up- 
State institutions. He never made mention of the institutions, but he said that 
he was paying students to go to school. 

Q. Did he tell you anything else concerning his activities along these lines? — 
A. He told me that he had people giving him information in up-State New 
York and in Ohio. 

Q. Did he tell you why they were giving him that information? — A. They 
were giving information to give to the Russians. 

Q. Did he mention any particular place in up-State New York from which 
he was getting information? — A. He mentioned the fact tliat he was getting 
information from General Electric at Schenectady. 

Q. General Electric in Schenectady? — A. That's right. 

Q. I think you told us he also mentioned he was getting some information 
from someone in Cleveland ; is that right? — A. That's right. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am sorry. I think he said Ohio. 

Mr. CoHN. I think he did. 

Q. Well, I will ask you, as a matter of fact, did he say anything to you about 
getting information from someone in Cleveland? — A. Well, once in the course of 



100 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

the conversation in which we were talking about turret lathes, and where they are 
manufactured, he told me that he had seen the huge Warner-Swasey turret 
lathe plant at Cleveland, Ohio, and when later I asked him how come he was in 
Cleveland, Ohio, he stated to me that he was out there to see one of his contacts. 

Q. He did not tell you this contact worked at Warner-Swasey? — ^A. No, he did 
not 

Q. He said he had been out to see one of his contacts in Cleveland and while 
there to see the contact he had gone to this plant? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did he mention anything to you about a man named Joel Barr? — A. There 
was a Joel BaiT that used to come around to the place and work on certain of 
his own work and this Joel Barr subsequently went to Europe. 

Q. Did Rosenberg ever 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out the latter part of his answer unless this 
witness can positively tell this Court and jury that he knows about that fact. 

The CotJRT. Or unless he was told it by Rosenberg. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Or, of course, unless it was part — that is not the way he 
stated it though, your Honor. 

Q. Did you ever have any conversation with Rosenberg about Joel Barr 
leaving this country? — ^A. Rosenberg once told me that Joel Barr was leaving 
this country to study music in Belgium. 

Q. That was in the 1946 to 1949 period? — A. It was in the end of the year 
1947. 

Q. End of the year of 1947?— A. That is right. 

Q. Now, don't tell us what the conversation was at this time, but tell us, as a 
matter of fact, did you, in the year 1950, have another conversation with Rosen- 
berg about Joel Barr's trip to Europe? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did Rosenberg mention to you any Government projects concerning which 
he had obtained information from any of his contacts? — A. Well, once in the 
presence of my brother, he mentioned a sky platform project. 

Q. A sky platform project?— A. Yes. 

Q. Which brother do you refer to? — A. Bernard Greenglass. 

Q. He was present when Rosenberg mentioned that? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did you have any conversation with Rosenberg about the sky platform 
project? — A. Yes ; I had a conversation with him later. I asked him in privacy. 

Mr. A. Bloch. Can you fix the time 2 

Q. Can you tell us about when this conversation occurred, the period of years, 
or months, however you can do it? — ^A. I would say this was '47, late '47. He 
told me he had gotten this information about the sky platform from one of the 
boys, as he put it. 

Q. Did he tell you just what information had been given to him by one of the 
boys concerning the sky platform project? Did he describe it to you at all? — A. 
Yes ; he did. He described it in front of my brother, too, 

Q. How did he describe it? — A. He said that it was some large vessel which 
would be suspended at a point of no gravity between the moon and the earth 
and as a satellite it would spin around the earth. 

Q. Did he tell you from what part of the country that information had been 
obtained, where the contact was? — A. I don't recall that. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I did not get that last answer. 

(Answer read.) 

Q. Did Rosenberg tell you anything about his own dealings with the Rus- 
sians? — A. Yes; he did. 

Q. What did he tell you? — ^A. He told me that he — if he wanted to get in touch 
with the Russians he had a means of communicating with them in a motion- 
picture theatre, an alcove where he would put microfilm or messages and Rus- 
sians would pick it up. If he wanted to see them in person he would put a message 
in there and by prearrangement they would meet at some lonely spot in Long 
Island. 

Q. Did he mention anything else along those lines? — A. Well, he 

Q. Let me ask you this, did he mention any other projects, Government proj- 
ects concerning which he had obtained information? — A. He once stated to me in 
the presence of a worker of ours that they had solved the problem of atomic 
energy for airplanes, and later on I asked him if this was true, and he said that 
he had gotten the mathematics on it, the mathematics was solved on this. 

Q. Did he say from where he had gotten this? — ^A. He said he got it from one 
of his contacts. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, that last answer, I wonder whether the 
witness could clarify who was meant by him when he said "they." 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 101 

The Witness. "They" meaning scientists in this country. 

Q. Now, what did you do in August 1949 when you terminated your business 
association with Rosenberg? — A. I got a job. 

Q. Where did you obtain that work?— A. I got a job at Arma Engineering 
Corporation in research and development, model shop. 

Q. Did you continue to see Rosenberg and your sister from time to time 
socially? — A. I did. 

Q. Mr. Greenglass, do you remember the month of February 1950, last year? — 
A. I do. 

Q. Did you see Rosenberg in your apartment on the day in February 1950? — 
A. I did. 

Q. Now before I ask you for the conversation on that date 

Mr. CoHN. Your Honor, I might say I have one more topic left which I do not 
think I can complete this afternoon ; I think I can complete it fairly early in the 
morning. I do have one or two things which I omitted in the course of mv 
examination today. I wonder if I can go back and go over them before recess? 

The Court. Go ahead. 

Q. You told us on Friday afternoon, Mr. Greenglass, about the atomic explo- 
sion that took place at Alamogordo, New Mexico, is that correct? — A. That is 
correct. 

Q. In July of 1945?— A. That is right. 

Q. Did you ever furnish any information concerning that atomic explosion 
to Rosenberg or to Gold? — A. Yes; I furnished information to Gold. I stated 
to Gold 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Could we have the time fixed, please? 

The Witness. June 1945. 

Q. You say you stated to Gold. Did you state it verbally or was it part of the 
written report you gave Gold? — A. Part of the written report. 

Q. Will you tell us what you put in that report concerning this explosion? — 
A. I had told him that the explosion at Alamogordo was to be an equivalent 
amount of H. E., as they thought the atom — the nuclear fission would amount to ; 
in other words, I had thought at the time that it was going to be an H. E.' 
explosion at Alamogordo. 

Q. Did you put that information in this report? 

The Court. By "H. E." you mean heavy explosive? 

The Witness. High explosive. 

Q. Did you put that information in this report? — A. That is right. 

The Court. That was before the explosion had taken place? 

The Witness. T^hat is right. 

The Court. How long before the explosion? 

The Witness. About a month before — it was a little more than a month before. 

Q. Now, did Rosenberg ever say anything to you about any reward that he 
had received from the Russians for the -work that he had been doing? — A. He 
stated that he had gotten a watch as a reward. 

Q. Did he show you that watch? — A. He did. 

Q. Did he tell you that he had received that watch? — A. I don't recall that. 

Q. Did he mention anything else that he or his wife received from the Rus- 
sians as a reward? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Now, Mr. Cohn, I was wondering whether you would fix 
the time of this last watch incident. 

Mr. Cohn. I will try to do so. 

Q. Can you remember when Rosenberg told you about the watch? — A. I believe 
it was in January 1945. 

Q. During your furlough in January 1945? — A. Yes. 

Q. Now, did he ever mention anything else that he or his wife had received 
as a reward from the Russians? — A. His wife received also a watch, a woman's 
watch, and I don't believe it was at the same time. 

Q. Your recollection is that she received that at a different time? — A. Later, 
at a later date. 

Q. When were you told about a watch that Mrs. Rosenberg had received, do 
you remember that?— A. I don't recall when that was but I do recall that my 
wife told me of it. 

Q. You got that information from your wife, is that right?— A. That is 
right. 

Q. Now, was there anything else that they received which they told you 
about? — A. I believe they told me they received a console table from the Russians. 



102 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. A console table? — A. That is right. 

Q. When did they tell yon about that? — A. That was after I had gotten out of 
the Army. 

Q. Did you ever see that table? — A. I did. 

Q. At their home?— A. I did. 

Mr. CoHN. I think this would be a very good stopping point, your Honor. 



From stenographer's minutes of Case 134-245, United States of 
America v. Jidius Rosenherg et al. Before Hon. Irving R. Kaufman, 
district judge, United States District Court, Southern District of New 
York, March 13, 1951. 

David Greenglass resumed the stand. 

Direct examination continued by Mr. Cohn : 

Q. Mr. Greenglass, I think yesterday afternoon you told us that Rosenberg 
told you that he had received a watch from the Russians; is that correct? — A. 
That is correct. 

Q. Now, did he tell you he received anything along with that watch? — A. He 
said he received a citation. 

Q. Did he describe the citation at all? — A. He said it had certain privileges 
with it in case he ever went to Russia. 

Q. Mr. Bloch, Sr., would like you to keep your voice iip. — ^A. I will. 

Q. Now, I asked you yesterday afternoon if you rememliered a visit you 
received from Rosenberg in February of 1950. Do you remember such a visit? — 
A. I do. 

Q. How do you fix the date of that visit? — A. Well, it w^as a few days after 
Fuchs was taken in England. 

Q. A few days after the news of Dr. Fuchs' arrest in England appeared in the 
papers ; is that rigfit? — A. That is right. 

Q. Where did this conversation with Rosenberg occur? — A. Partly in my home 
and partly on the street and in a park. 

Q. Did it begin at your home? — A. Yes ; it did. 

Q. Will you tell us just what happened when he arrived there and what hap- 
pened after that ; what he said and what you said? — A. He came up to my apart- 
ment and awakened me. It was about in the middle of the morning. I slept 
late because 1 work at night. He said that he would like me to go for a walk 
with him and we went down the street, down Sheriff Street, toward the Hamilton 
Fish Park, and we walked around the park, and in the park, and during this 
walk he spoke to me of Fuchs. He told me, he said, "You remember the man 
who came to see you in Albuquerque? Well, Fuchs was also one of his contacts" ; 
and this man who came to see me in Albuquerque would undoubtedly be arrested 
soon, and if so, would lead to me. 

The Court. You mean this is what Rosenberg told you ? 

The Witness. That is right. 

And Rosenberg said to me that I would have to leave the country ; think it over, 
and we will make plans to go. Well, I told him that I would need money to pay 
my debts back so I would be able to leave with a clear head, and Rosenberg said 
that he didn't think it was necessary to worry about it. But I insisted on it, 
so he said he would get the money for me from the Russians. He then went on 
to say — I protested further 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out the word "protested." 

The Court. Tell us what you said. 

The Witness. I said, "I wouldn't be able to" — "I didn't think it was wise to 
go right to the Consulate here and ask for a passport," and he said, "Oh, they 
let other people out who are more important than you are," and I said, "Is that 
so?" And he said, "Yes. W^ell, they let Barr out, Joel Barr, and he was a mem- 
ber of our espionage ring." 

Q. Was this the Joel Barr you told us yesterday that Rosenberg had told you 
had gone to Europe at the end of 1947?— A. That is right. 

Q. Go ahead. — A. Well, the conversation continued for a little while, and he 
said, "You'll just have to leave, and I want to" — oh, I also said to him, "Why 
doesn't this other guy — fellow leave, the one who came to me in Albuquerque?" 
And he said, "Well, that's something else again," and I went back home after 
that. 



Note. — Counsel for the U. S. Government : Irving Saypol, United States attorney ; Miles 
J. Lane, James Kilslieimer, and Roy Cohn, assistant United States attorneys. Other 
counsel whose names appear in transcript material represent defendants. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 103 

Q. Now, did you have any fui-thei- conversations with Rosenberg at later 
times? — -A. Yes. 

Q. About leaving the country? — A. Yes; I did. 

Q. Will you tell us when the next conversation took place? — A. "Well, my wife 
was in the hospital ; she had been badly burned in an accident, and it was about 
the middle of April, it was just about after — before she came out of the hospital, 
Julius came to see me, and he said I would have to leave the country, and — well, 
that was about the gist of the conversation. 

Q. He told you again that you were to leave; is that right? — A. Yes; and that 
he wanted me to go. Then again there was 

Q. Had he given you any money up to this point ? — A. No ; no money was given 
to me up to this point. 

Q. When was the next conversation? — A. The next conversation was after my 
wife had gotten out of the hospital about May or just before — it was probably 
a little before May, and he came up to my apartment in order to get some stocks 
from me, some shares that I had for a business enterprise I was in with him, 
and he at this time told me that I would have to leave the country as soon as 
possible, he would get the information for me to leave. Then 

The Court. Was there any discussion of the country you were to go to? 

The Witness, It came — he said I would have to go via Mexico, but he didn't 
give me the complete information as to that until a little later. 

The Court. All right. 

Q. Now when was the next conversation with Rosenberg on this subject? — 
A. Well, it was after my wife came out of the hospital after giving birth to our 
youngest child. 

Q. About when was that?— A. It was May— it was May 22nd or 23rd, something 
like that. 

Q. In that vicinity? — A. In that vicinity. 

Q. Yes? — A. It was the next day after she came out of the hospital that 
Rosenberg came to see me. 

Q. Up at your apartment? — A. At my apartment. 

Q. Tell us what he said and what you said. — A. And he came into the apart- 
ment and he had a Herald Tribune in his hand with a picture of Harry Gold 
on it and he said, "This is the gentleman who came to see you in Albuquerque." 

Q. Is that the copy of the Herald Tribune carrying the case of Harry Gold's 
arrest for espionage? — A. That is right. 

Q. What did he say? — ^A. He said, "This is the man who saw you in 
Albuquerque." 

I looked at it and I said I couldn't tell from that picture, and he said, "Don't 
worry, I am telling you this is tlie man and you will have to go out — you will 
have to leave the country," and he gave me a thousand dollars then and said 
he would give me $6,000 more. We then went for a walk. 

Q. Where did you walk, do you remember? — A. We walked down to Delancey 
Street and down the Drive. 

Q. Did you meet anybody you knew during the course of this walk with 
Rosenberg"? — A. Not on this walk. 

Q. Go ahead. — A. We walked down Delancey Street to the Drive, the East 
River Drive and walked along the Drive, during this time he hold me what was 
necessary to — how I was to leave the country. 

Q. Tell us exactly. 

Mr. A. Bloch. I move to strike that out. It is not a conversation. It is simply 
a conclusion of the witness how he was to leave the country. 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. A. Bloch. Exception. 

Q. Will you tell us exactly what Rosenberg said to you on that subject? — ^A. 
Well, he said that I would have to get a tourist card 

Q. For what country, did he tell you? — A. To go to Mexico. 

Q. In other words, the first place you were to go to was Mexico? — A. That is 
right. First I was to go to the border area and at the border area get a 
tourist card. In other words, not to get the tourist card at some Mexican 
Consulate in this city but to wait till we get to the border. 

Q, Yes? — A. He told me that in order to get the tourist card you have to have 
a letter or you have to be inoculated again at the border — a letter from the 
doctor saying you were inoculated. 

Q. For what, did he tell you? — A. For smallpox. 

Q. Did he tell you how he found that out? — A. He said he went to see a doctor 
and a doctor told him about it and I said I would attend to that. He then told 
me I would have to have passport pictures made up. 

81095—51 8 



104 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Passport pictures? — ^A. Of myself, my wife and my family, and also he 
gave me a certain form letter to memorize and sign "I. Jackson" at the end of 
the letter. This letter was to be used when I get to Mexico City. I was to 
write to the Secretary to the Ambassador of the Soviet Union and state in that 
letter — I don't recall completely right now but something to the effect about 
the position of the Soviet Union in the U. N. 

Q. Something favorable or unfavorable? — A. It was favorable. 

Q. Yes. How were you to sign the letter? — ^A. I was to sign the letter "I. 
Jackson." 

Q. "I. Jackson." — A. Then I was to wait three days at some place — first, of 
course, to get a place to stay, some place away from the center of town. Then 
I was to go with a guide to the city in my hand 

Q. A guide? — A. A guide. 

Q. I see. A. (Continuing.) To the city in my hand, with my middle finger 
in the — between the pages of the guide — go to a place called Plaz de la Colon 
and look at the statue of Columbus there — and this would be about 5 o'clock in 
the afternoon, three days after I had sent the letter. 

Q. In other words, you would write a letter and three days after that at 5 : 00 
in the afternoon you were to be in front of the statue of Columbus in Mexico 
City with this travel guide in your hand, is that right?— A. That is correct. 

Q. All right. — A. I was then to wait until some man was to come up close to me 
and then I would say, "That is a magnificent statue," and that I was from Okla- 
homa and I hadn't seen a statue like it before, and this man was to say, "Oh, 
there are much more beautiful statues in Paris." That was to be our identifi- 
cation. 

Then he was to give me my passports and additional money so that I could go 
on with my trip. I was then supposed to continue on probably via Vera Cruz 

Q. Vera Cruz? — A. Vera Cruz. 

Q. A seaport in Mexico? — A. That is right. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, the witness said "probably." Now I 
want to make certain that he is speaking of his own knowledge. 

The Court. Yes, he used the word "probably." 

A. (Continuing.) Well, I was to continue on to Vera Cruz and then to Sweden 
or Switzerland, one or the other. I would— in Sweden I was to go to the statue 
of Linnaeus in Stockholm and repeat- — after sending a letter to the Ambassador of 
the Soviet Union — to the Secretary of the Ambassador of the Soviet Union, with 
the same type of letter and also "I. Jackson" as the signature again. 

I would then go three days later to the statue of Linnaeus and with a guide in 
my hand, with my finger in the place, and a man would come up to the statue 
about the same time in the evening, about 5 o'clock, and I would repeat that it 
was a beautiful statue, a magnificent statue — something to that effect, and the 
man would say, "There are much more beautiful ones in Paris," and that was 
to make our contact. 

Then he was to give me my means of transportation to Czechoslovakia, and that 
is where I was to go. 

Q. Was that to be your permanent place? — A. Supposedly that was where 
I was supposed to go ; so far as what went after that I didn't know. 

Q. Did Rosenberg tell you what you were to do when you arrived in Czecho- 
slovakia? — A. Yes, he did. 

Q. What did he tell you? — A. He told me to write to the Ambassador of the 
Soviet Union and say that I was here. 

Q. Were you to sign "I. Jackson" this time? — A. My full name was to be 
signed, "I. Jackson." 

Q. All right. Now, did you write down these instructions or did Rosenberg 
write them down?— A. Nobody wrote them down. I was told to memorize them 
at this time and I did memorize them. 

Q. Did you have any further conversation with Rosenberg on that day? — A. 
Well, that was the end of the conversation on that day except that — he said that 
he probably — that he had to leave the country himself and he was making plans 
for it, and I said, "Why you?" He said that he was a friend— that he knew Jacob 
Golos, this man Golos, and probably Bentley knew him. 

Q. And that he himself was going to leave the country, is that right? — A. And 
that he himself was going to leave the country. 

Q. Now was there any further conversation with Rosenberg on that occasion? — 
A. Only that he asked me to memorize it and get everything attended to — the 
passport photographs. 

Q. What did he tell you about the passport photos ; he wanted you to get those 
yourself, is that right?— A. That is right. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 105 

tj. Did he tell you exactly what he wanted to know with regard to the pass- 
port photos? — A. Yes ; he wanted five copies, five pictures, each with myself, 
iby myself, my wife, and then my wife and the children and then myself wnth 
the children, and then I think all of us together, the family altogether. 

Q. In other words, these five different poses, he wanted five copies of eacli 
one? — A. That is right. 

Q. What were you to do vdth those passport photos after you had obtained 
them? — ^A. I was to give it to him later on. 

Q. Did he say anything to you about a lawyer? — ^A. Earlier, up in the apart- 
ment, he said that he had gotten a lawyer himself, that I should get one but I 
never did get one. 

Q. Now ^A. He said, in case you are picked up before you leave the countiT. 

Q. Now, was there any furtlier conversation with Rosenberg on that day, 
or did that complete it?— A. That completed the conversation on that day. 

Q. All right, what happened next with relation to this subject? — ^A. Well, 
the following Sunday was the first time the baby had ever come down. 

Q. This was the baby that was born a short time before? — A. Yes. 

The Court. The baby had come down where? 

The Witness. In the street. 

The Court. I see. 

The Witness. Before that it was in the house. 

The Witness (continuing). So we took the whole family and went over to 
a photo shop on Clinton and Delancey Street ; it is near the Apollo Theatre. 

Q. Near the Apollo Theatre?— A. Yes. 

Mr. JE. II. Bloch. I just want to clarify this. Is it the contention that the 
Sosenbergs were along? 

Mr. CoHN. No, I don't think he said so. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I wanted to clarify it. 

Q. The Rosenbei'gs weren't with you, were they? — A. No. 

■Q. Just you, with your wife and the two children, the people who were sup- 
posed to be in these passport photos; is that right? — A. That is right. 

Q. Go ahead. — A. We went over to the shop and we had these pictures taken ; 
and later that evening I picked the pictures up after they were done ; and it 
was during the week— it was Memorial Day, and I remember I was oft that night, 
Julius came over, and I gave him the pictures in the hallway, because there were 
people in my house and I didn't want the people to see Julius coming to visit me. 

Q. Now I think you told us that he had asked you to have five sets of pictures 
taken; is that right? Five poses, five sets each? — A. That is right. 

Q. How many, in fact, did you have taken at this passport photo shop? — 
A. I had six sets of pictures taken. 

Q. How many did you give to Julius? — A. Five sets. 

Q. What did you do with the sixth set? — A. I kept it in the drawer. 

Q. Was that set after your arrest given to the FBI? — A. I gave it to the FBI. 

Mr. CoHN. May we have these marked for identification, please. 
(Marked "Government's Exhibits 9-A and 9-B" for identification.) 

Q. By the way, I think you gave four of the five to the FBI; is that right? — 
A. That is right. 

Q. Would you look at Government's Exhibit 9-A for identification and 9-B 
for identification, Mr. Greenglass, and tell us if those are four of the passport 
pictures you had taken on that Sunday in May of 1950 [showing to witness]. — A. 
That is correct ; these are the pictures. 

******* 

Q. Now, I think you told us you handed five of the six sets over to the de- 
fendant Rosenberg; is that correct, Mr. Greenglass? — A. That is correct. 

Q. What else happened on that occasion? I J hink you said that was in the hall 
outside of your apartment. — A. That was in the hall. He said that he would 
come back and give me the additional money. 

Q. Well, had he given you any money up to that point?— A. He had given me 
a thousand dollars. 

Q. When had he given you the thousand dollars? — A. When he first came into 
the apartment and showed me that Harry Gold had been arrested. 

Q. He had given you a thousand dollars in cash; is that right? — A. That is 
right. 

Q. What did you do with that thousand dollars?— A. I gave it to my wife, 
who paid bills with it and spent it, generally. 

Q. Now, go ahead, from the time when you gave him the passport photos he 
told you he would give you the additional money? — A. That is right. 



106 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Any further conversation at that time? — A. No, he just left. 

Q. All right, when was the next conversation on this subject? — A. He came 
back the following week, I believe it was, and it was in the morning, and he came 
into the apartment, woke me out of bed and put $4,000 in a paper, brown paper 
wrapping, on the mantelpiece in the bedroom, and he then told me. "Let's li'o for 
a walk," because he wants to have me repeat the instructions he had given me. 

Q. Instructions he had given you and told you to memorize? — A. That is 
right. I then went down Columbia Street to Delancey Street, and on the way 
I met two friends. 

Q. What are their names? — A. Hermle and Dianne Einsohn. 

Q. Tell us the circumstances of your meeting them. — A. They were across the 
street from us and Julius said to ignore them but I said I couldn't do that be- 
cause they are friends of mine and they would wonder why I walked by without 
saying anything. I crossed the street and Dianne said, "Here is the $40 I owe 
you." and she paid me by check $iO. 

Q. Which they had owed you; is that right?— A. That she had owed me; 
and Julius had crossed the street, walking a little ahead of us. and I then caught 
up to Julius again. We went down the drive again and he asked me to repeat 
to him the various instructions he had given me ; and I repeated the instructions 
to his satisfaction. 

Mr. A. Block. I object to the last part of the answer, "to his satisfaction." 

The Court. Yes ; strike out "to his satisfaction." 

A. (Continuing.) I repeated the instructions, and he said that was fine. 

Q. Yes? — A. I then — well, that ended the conversation, and he went his way 
and I went back to my apartment. Later, he came back. I was under surveil- 
lance at the time and 

Q. You thought the FBI 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike that out. 

The Court. I will strike that out unless you tell us how you knew. 

Q. Did you think you were being followed at that time? — A. I did think 
I was being followed. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I object to it upon the ground that it is not binding on these 
defendants. 

The Court. Oh, no, no. 

Q. All right, let us go to this. You say you had another conversation with 
Rosenberg; is that right? — A. I had another conversation with Rosenberg. 

Q. Tell us what you said and what he said — well, tell us again when did 
that take place in relation to the last meeting with him? — A. It was — I would say 
it was — let's say it was like — it is hard to do without saying that I was being — 
that I noticed some people following me on a Sunday evening; and he came 
back 

The Court. Who is "he"? 

The Witness. Julius came back during that week, which wa.s — oh, I would say, 
about May — it was June, the 2nd or 3rd or maybe even the 4th ; I can't place it 
exactly, and as he came into the apartment he said, "Are you being followed?" 
I said, "Yes ; I am." He said, "I just came back from up-State New York to see 
some people, and I was going to Cleveland, Ohio, but I am going — I am not going 
to go there any more"; and he said to me, "What are you going to do now?" I 
said, "I am not going to do anything. I am going to sit — I am going to stay 
right here," and he left. 

Q. Did you see him again after that? — A. Only in court here. 

Q. Shortly after that, I believe, on June 15, were you arrested by agents of 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation? — A. I was. 

Mr. COKN. May I have this marked for identification, please. 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 10" for identification.) 

Q. Now, get back to this $-4,000 for a minute, Mr. Greenglass. In what form 
was that when Rosenberg gave it to you? Was it in paper or something like 
that? — A. It was in tens and twenties, cash paper. 

Q. Was it wrapped in any container of any kind? — A. It was wrapped in brown 
paper. 

Q. Brown paper; is that right? — A. That is right. 

Q. Will you look at Government's Exhibit 10 for identification and tell us 
whether or not you can recognize that as the brown wrapping paper in which 
the $4,000 was contained [showing]? — A. That is the brown paper, wrapping 
paper it was contained in. 

Mr. CoHN. We offer it in evidence, your Honor. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 107 

The Court. As I understand it, the testimony was that it was in this brown 
wrapping paper that Mr. Rosenberg delivered the $4,000. 

The Witness. That is correct. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I will withdraw my objection if I just get one clarification. 
Will the Court ask the witness whetlier it is the contention or tlie testimony 
of the witness that Rosenberg came with this money wrapped in this bag, thai 
Rosenberg actually carried this bag? 

The Court. Was the money right in that wrapping paper? 

The Witness. Right in that wrapping paper. 

The Court. Very well. 

Mr. CoHN. May I show this to the jury, your Honor? 

The Court. Yes. 

Q. There are some initials on there, Mr. Greenglass. As far as you know, 
those were not there — there was no writing on this paper when Rosenberg 
gave it to you as a container for the money ; is that right? — A. No ; there wasn't. 

(Government's Exhibit 10 shown to jury.) 

Q. Now, wbat did you do with the $4,000? — A. Well, at first I had intentions 
of flushing it down the ■ 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike that out. 

The Court. Yes, stricken. 

A. (continuing) I started to flush it down the toilet bowl. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike that out as not binding upon the defend- 
ant Rosenberg, not in his presence. 

The Court. I sustain that. Strike it out. 

A. (Continuing) I gave it to my brother-in-law, Louis Abel, to keep for me, 
and I told him to use it whenever he needs it, take whatever he might need 
from it, but also that I might need it myself and in such case he would hand 
it over. 

Mr. A. Bloch. I object to anything he said to his brother-in-law in connec- 
tion with this money, as pure hearsay. 

The Court. I am going to sustain that objection. 

Mr. CoHN. So the testimony stands, your Honor, he gave it to his brother-in- 
law, Louis Abel, and any conversation between him and Abel is stricken? 

The Court. Yes. 

Mr. CoHN. Very well, your Honor. 

Q. Now, following your arrest by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investiga- 
tion in June you liad occasion to talk to them frequently? — A. I did. 

Q. Have you had occasion to talk to Mr. Saypol, to me, members of Mr. Say- 
pol's staff?— A. I did. 

Q. At any time, in any of those conversations, has any promise of any kind 
ever been made to you as consideration or anything else for your testifying on 
this witness stand or telling the facts to any agency of the United States 
Government? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Before you answer, please, I object to it upon the ground 
that it is improper direct. I also object to the form of the question. 

Mr. CoHN. I withdraw it. 

The Court. Pardon? 

Mr. Cohn. I will withdraw the question, your Honor. 

The Court. All right. 

Mr. CoHN. Mr. Bloch may examine, your Honor. 

Cross-examination by Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Did you just testify that you didn't see your brother-in-law, Julius Rosen- 
berg, from the time that you told him that you were going to stay here and you 
weren't going to leave the country, until you appeared here in court? — A. I did. 

Q. Was that the truth?— A. Well, I had seen him. 

Q. Was it the truth ?— A. That was not the truth. 

Q. You did see him, didn't you, between that period? — A. I did. 

The Court. Where did you see him? 

The Witness. I saw him in jail. 

The Court. Did you talk to him? 

The Witness. No. 

The Court. You mean you just saw him ; you looked at him and you saw him? 

The Witness. They brought us into a room together, the authorities at West 
Street, and told us to stay apart and I didn't say anything to him and he said 
nothing to me. 

The Court. All right. 



108 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Now Mr. Greenglass, I believe you testified that your wife came out to> 
visit you in New Mexico on November 29, 1944, which was at or about the date 
of your second wedding anniversary ; is that correct? — A. I testified that slie 
came out around that date. 

Q. Around, about that. When is your wedding anniversary? — A. November 
29th is my wedding anniversary. 

Q. And when did your wife arrive at Albuquerque, New Mexico? — A. I can't 
tell exactly when. 

Q. When did you first see her at or about that time? — A. It was during a 
five-day vacation, furlough, and I did not know exactly the date that I got into 
Albuquerque. 

Q'. At any rate, there came a time when you met your wife on that five-day 
furlough— A. That is correct. 

Q. Was that the first time that you heard from anybody's lips an invitation, 
to you to engage in spying?— A. That is correct. 

Q. And that invitation came from the mouth of your wife ; is that not so? — 
A. That is correct. 

Q. There was nobody else present besides you and your wife at that time? — 
A. That is correct. 

Q. Is that correct? — A. That is correct. 

Q. I believe you testified you took a walk with her — A. That is correct. 

Q. And that is when she told you about spying ; is that right? — A. That is right. 

Q". The Rosenbergs weren't around, were they? — A. No. 

Q. Were the Rosenbergs there? — A. They were not. 

Q. And I believe you testified — you correct me whenever you think I am 
quoting your testimony or paraphrasing your testimony incorrectly — that you be- 
came frightened and you told your wife that you would not do it ; is that correct? — 
A. That is right. 

Q. And then I believe you testified further the following morning you told 
your wife that you would do it? — A. That is right. 

Q. And you not only told your wife that you would do it, but right there and 
then when you told her that, you disclosed information concerning some of the 
personnel at the Los Alamos project; is that coi'rect? — A. It was not right then 
and there. It was out in the street. 

Q. Well, how long after you indicated to your wife that you were willing to 
engage in this illegal work did you tell her the names of some of the personnel 
at Los Alamos? — A. It was not long after ; during the same day. 

Q. It was part of the same conversation, was it not? — A. Almost. 

Q. Now, during the time 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. AVithdrawn. 

Q. From the time that you told your wife that you were not interested and 
that you wouldn't do this work, to the following morning when you told her 
you would, did you consult with anybody? — A. I consulted with memories and. 
voices in my mind. 

Q. Physically, did you consult with anybody? — A. No. 

Q. Did you see the Rosenbergs during that period? — A. No. 

Q. Did you talk to the Rosenbergs by telephone during that period? — A. No. 

Q. How old were you at this time? — A. 22. 

Q. And when you finally said to your wife the following morning after she 
invited you to engage in spying, you did this and said this and then disclosed 
information of your own free will; isn't that correct? — A. That is correct. 

Q. You knew at that time, did you not, that you were engaging in the com- 
mission of a very serious crime? — A. I did. 

Q. You had been briefed and indoctrinated, had you not, in Oak Ridge, Ten- 
nessee, when you first came there, and during your stay there, and also at Los 
Alamos, when you were transferred from Oak Ridge, about espionage; is that 
not correct ? — A. That is correct. 

Q. And you were briefed to the extent of having read to you the espionage 
law ; is that correct? — A. Parts of the espionage law. 

Q. Do you remember which parts?^ — A. I haven't the slightest recollection^ 

Q. Were you told by your instructors at Oak Ridge, Tennessee or at Los- 
Alamos about the penalty for committing espionage? — A. Most likely I was 
but I don't remember it. 

Q. Did it occur to you on November 29, 1944 or November 30, 1944 — and I don't 
want to quibble about the date — at any rate, did it occur to you at the time 
that you finally said to your wife "I will do this" and then transmitted to her 
certain information, that there was a possible penalty of death for espionage? — 
A. Yes. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 109 

Q. You knew that?— A. I did. 

Q. When you said to your wife "Yes, I will do it" — is that correct? — A. That 
is correct. 

Q. Are you aware that you are smiling? — A. Not very. 

Q. Now how long had you been in the Army when you were assigned to Los 
Alamos? — A. I had been in from April '43 to July — August '44. 

Q. That is approximately a year and five months. — A. That is about it. 

Q. Is that rough enough? — A. Yes. 

Q. Had anybody prior to the time that your wife came down to Los Alamos 
and invited you to spy, ever made any overture to you to steal information 
from the military authorities? — A. No one. 

Q. And from the time in the latter part of November 1944 until your entire 
career or during your entire career in the Army, you continued to spy, did you 
not?— A. I did. 

Q. And you received money for that, did you not? — A. I did. 

Q. You received $500 from Harry Gold in Albuquerque, New Mexico, for that, 
did you not?^ — A. I did. 

Q. Did you ever offer to return that mop.ey? — A. I did not. 

Q. Did you use that money for your own personal use or the use of your 
wife and the other members of your family? — A. I did. 

Q. What did you do with the $500 that you received from' Gold? — A. I gave it 
' to my wile and slie used it to live on. 

Q. Did she deposit it in the bank?— A. She did. 

Q. Now Mr. Greenglass, you had been to various camps prior to the time 
that you were assigned to Los Alamos, isn't that correct? — A. That is correct. 

Q. And your wife had visited you at camps before you had been assigned to 
Los Alamos, is that correct? — ^A. That is not exactly correct. 

Q. Did your wife ever visit you at any of the camps at which you were stationed 
prior to the time you were assigned to Los Alamos? — A. One camp. 

Q. And what camp was that? — A. Pomona, California — Pomona Air Base. 

Q. And your wife at that time lived in New York, did she not? — A. She did. 

Q. And she took a trip from New York out to California to see you? — A. That 
is right. 

Q. Now when was this? — A. This was the late winter or early spring of '44. 

Q. And how long did your wife stay? — A. About two, three months. 

Q. And did she have an apartment? — A. Yes. 

Q. And did you live with her at that apartment?— A. I did. 

Q. And did your wife work? — A. She did. 

Q. In or about the camp, in order to sustain herself? — A. She worked away 
from the camp. 

Q. I said in or about the camp. — A. She did. 

Q. She didn't work in the camp proper but she worked in some enterprise 
in the vicinity of the camp? — A. That is right. 

Q. And after this incident in the latter part of November 1944 did your wife 
visit you at any other of the camps — I withdraw that, I am sorry. 

Q. You were stationed at Los Alamos, continuously after you had ibeen assigned 
there up to and including the date of your discharge, is that correct? — A. No; 
the date of my discharge I was discharged from 

Q. El Paso, Texas?— A. El Paso, Texas. 

Q. But otherwise you were always at the Los Alamos project? — A. That is 
right. 

Q. Now, did your wife visit with you and live with you at or about the Los 
Alamos project or in or about the City of Albuquerque after your five-day fur- 
lough was up in the latter part of November 1944? — A. As I said before, in the 
early spring of 1945 she came to live with me. 

Q. And how long did she live with you? — A. She stayed with me until I came 
home. 

Q. And did she work? — A. She worked part of the time; part of the time 
she was unable to work. 

Q. And you were advanced from time to time, weren't you, in your gradings 
in the Army?^ — A. I was. 

Q. And your salary was increased? — A. That's right. 

Q. And that made it easier economically, isn't that correct? — A. To a degree. 

Q. Now let me ask you this: You have testified you got a thousnnd dollars 
from Rosenberg in 1950. 

Q. And you insisted upon that money to pay your debts, isn't that correct?— 
A. That is correct. 



110 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Did you pay your debts? — A. I did not. May I clarify that? 

g. No. 

The Court. Yes. 

******* 

The Witness (to the Court). The thousand dollars I speut paying debts of 
household type — ■ — • 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. For household type. 

The Witness (continuing). I mean payments on furniture and things of that 
nature. The debts I was referring to, when I said about paying debts to Rosen- 
berg, were personal debts incurred liecause of a business enterprise I was in 
that I had never even borrowed in the first place. 

The CouuT. Excuse me, this thousand dollars that you got in 1950, I want you 
to get this clear in my mind, was that in payment of information which you 
had at or about tliat time turned over to Rosenberg or was that in anticipation 
of your trip out of the country? 

The Witness. In anticipation of the trip out of the country. 

Q. All right. Now it is your testimony now that you used those thousand 
dollars to pay off certain debts on the household, is that right? — A. That is right. 

Q. That was for your own use, was it not? — A. That is correct. 

Q. And tliat was for the use of your family, is that right? — A. That is correct. 

Q. When you, as you testified, finally told Rosenberg that you were not going 
to leave the country and you were going to stay right here A. Yes. 

Q. Did you ever offer to give him back that thousand dollars? — A. I did not. 

Q. Now then, I think you testified further that you received an additional 
$4,000 from Rosenberg sometime in June, is that right — sometime in June 1950? — 
A. That's right. 

Q. Wrapped in that brown bag which is now Government's Exhibit 

The CouKT. 10. 

Q. 10?— A. That's right. 

Q. When you told Rosenberg, as you testified, that you were not going to leave 
the country, did you offer to return that $4,000? — A. I did not. 

Q. And I believe you testified that you turned those $4,000 over to a brother- 
in-law? — A. That's right. 

Q. Do you know now that that $4,000 or a major part of that $4,000 went to 
pay your lawyer? 

Mr. CoHN. Your Honor, I merely comment that I was halted in my attemi^ts 
to develop the history of that $4,000 and where it went, which is quite relevant 
to the rest of the Government's proof. If Mr. Bloch wants to go ahead and do it, 
all right. 

The Court. I will let him go ahead if he is 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I have a different purpose in doing it. 

The Court. If he is going to open the door, I will let him. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am perfectly willing to open the door. 

Mr. CoHN. Very well. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Do you know now that that $4,000 or a major part of it went to pay your 
lawyer? — A. I do. 

Q. Have you been told how much of that $4,000 went to pay your lawyer? — 
A. Yes. 

Q. All of it?— A. All of it. 

Q. When did you know that you had a lawyer representing you subsequent 
to the time of your arrest in June 1950?— A. The FBI said that I could have a 
lawyer. I called up my 

The Court. Speak louder, please. 

Q. Up, up, up. — A. The FBI agents told me that I could have a lawyer, so I 
called up my brother-in-law and told him to get in touch with O. John Rogge. 

Q. That was your suggestion — A. At my suggestion. 

Q. All right. And then after that did Mr. Rogge come down to see you? — 
A. He sent his partner, Mr. Fabricant and subsequently Mr. Rogge came himself. 

Q. Now how long after you had somebody communicate with your brother- 
in-law to hire Mr. Rogge did Mr. Fabricant come down to see you? — A. The next 
morning — I should say the same day because it was morning when I got in touch 
with my brother-in-law. 

Q. Do you remember when you were arrested? — A. I do. 

Q. You were taken, were you not, from your place of employment and brought 
down to this building? — A. I was not. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 111 

Q. Were yoii apprehended in your home? — A. I was in my home making a 
formula when they arrested me. 

The Court. Making what? 

Mr. E. I-I. Block. A formula. 

The Witness. A fornuila lor the baby. 

Q. And what day did the FBI come aroimd to arrest you? — A. It was in the 
daytime, in the middle of the week, just before I was going to work. 

Q. Do you remember what date in June? — A. It was the loth, I believe, of 
June. 

Q. And after some of the representatives of the FBI came into your home 
did they tell you that you were under arrest?— A. No. 

Q. Did they ask you to accompany them some place? — A. Tliey did. 

Q. And where did they ask you to go? — A. I came to this building. 

Q. How many repi-esentatives of the Federal Bureau of Investigation came 
around to your house at the time that you were apprehended? — A. Four. 

Q. And at what time was this? — A. In the afternoon about 2 o'clock, I suppose. 

Q. Now, do you now know the names of the four FBI representatives who 
arrested you? — A. I do. 

Q. And will you name them, please? — A. John Harrington, Leo Frutkin 

Mr. A. Bloch. I can't hear him. 

Q. Counsel at the table cannot hear you. — A. John W. Lewis, and Bill Norton. 

Q. You know their first names too, don't you A. I do. 

Q. By now. And what time did you get down here in this Federal Building? — 
A. I would say it was about 8 o'clock at night. 

Q. Eight at night?— A. Yes. 

Q. Maybe I misunderstood you. What time did the FBI men come to your 
home to arrest you ? — A. They came at 2 o'clock. 

Q. And after they were in your home did they stay with you in your home? — 
A. Yes. 

Q. How long did they stay with you in your home? — A. Till about, I would 
say, 7 : 30 or so. 

Q. And were you questioned during those five hours at your home? — A. On 
and off. 

Q. Well, when you say "On and off" did some FBI man stay with you during 
that entire period? — A. No ; I ate my lunch, I made the formula 

Q. No, listen to my question, please. Did some FBI man stay with you during 
this entire five or five and a half hours ? — A. No, not all the time. 

Q. Did they all leave at one time? — A. They were in other rooms of the 
apartment. 

Q. Now when I talk about your home I am including every room in your 
apartment. I am going to ask you again, did the FBI men who came down at 
or about 2 o'clock stay with you in any of the rooms of your apartment for about 
five or five and a half hours? — A. That is correct. 

Q. All four of them? — A. At first there was two and then two more came up. 

The CotTRT. Out of that five and a half hours about how much time would 
you say was taken up in questioning? 

The Witness. Maybe an hour. 

Q. And what did they do the rest of the time? — A. They were searching my 
apartment. 

Q. Do you know what they took from your apartments? — A. I do. 

Q. You watched them search? — A. I did. 

Q. Did the FBI man take from your apartment any writing, any document, 
any paper, any memorandum in the handwriting of Julius Rosenberg? — A. Yes, 
they did. 

Q. What? — A. Some notes that he had from college days. 

Q. Anything else? — A. Well, there was 

Mr. CoHN. I might say here if the witness knows, your Honor. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I am asking him. I tried to lay the foundation. 

The Witness. There was a trunk full of letters, and I don't know what was in 
there exactly, and if there was stuff in there, they did take that. 

Q. Letters in the handwriting of Julius Rosenberg? — A. Well, I don't know. 

Q. Well, I am trying to direct your attention specifically and exclusively ^A. 

There were letters 

Q. Now just listen and try to follow me — exclusively to this, and it is very 
simple: Did you see the FBI men who came to your apartment on the date they 
arrested yon, take from your apartment any writing, whether in the form of a 
document or a note or a memorandum in the hand of Julius Rosenberg outside 
now of the college notes that you say were in his handwriting? — A. No. 



112 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. And did the FBI men take from your apartment any writing, whether in the 
form of a document or memoranda or any scrap of paper of any kind in the 
handwriting of your sister Ethel? — A. I didn't see it. 

Q. Well, if you didn't see it you don't know.— A. But it might have been 
inside that trunk full of letters. We couldn't open the trunk. That is the only 
reason I didn't see it. 

Q. Did the FBI men finally open the trunk? — A. Yes — not there, though; not 
in my presence. 

Q. Did you see them open the trunli? — A. No, I did not. 

Q. Did they take the trunk away from your apartment? — A. They did. 

Q. Now, so far as I know, outside of the college notes that were made by 
Julius Rosenberg — when you say ''college notes" I am assuming you mean notes 
made by Rosenberg when he was attending college, is that right? — A. That's 
<x)rrect. 

Q. Outside of that writing do you know whether there was in your liouse 
on or about June 16, 1950, or June 15, 1950, any writing or written matter in 
the handwriting of either Julius Rosenberg or Ethel Rosenberg? — A. I didn't 
know, no. 

The GoTiRT. We will take our recess at this point. 

(Short recess.) 

Q. Now, Mr. Greenglass, when were you inducted into the United States 
Army?— A. April '43. 

Q. Do you remember the date? — A. The 12th. 

Q. April 12th. Where?— A. In New York City. 

Q. And specifically where in New York City? — A. At the induction center at 
Orand Central Palace. 

Q. Were you drafted ? — A. I was. 

The Court. Speak up please, Mr. Greenglass. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I am going to stand all the way back here, your Honor; 
maybe that will help. 

(Mr. E. H. Bloch steps farther back to the railing.) 

Q. At that induction center in April 194S did you take an oath? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you raise your right hand and together with the other citizens who 
were inducted into the Armed Services with you swear to certain things?— A. I 
did. 

Q. Do you remember the oath you took? — A. I don't. 

Q. At any rate, you know that you violated that oath, don't you? — A. I know 
it. 

Q. And you knew when you said to your wife "Yes, I am going to give you 
the information," that took place somewhere in the latter part of November 
1944, that you were violating the oath that you took here in New York City at 
the time of your induction — did you know that? — A. I did. 

Q. Did it enter your mind? — A. Violation of that oath did not enter my mind. 

Q. Did you know that you were besmirching the name and the reputation 

Mr. CoHN. Well, I will object to this characterization. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I haven't finished. 

The Court. He hasn't finished. I want to hear the question. 

Of the uniform of the soldiers of the United States. 

Mr. CoHN. I will object now, your Honor, to the conclusory terms used in the 
•question. That is clearly improper. 

The Court. I will overrule the objection. 

The Witness. I did not think so at the time. 

Q. The Espionage Act — withdrawn. You had been briefed on the Espionage 
Act, had you not? — A. I did — I was. 

Q. You knew at that time that it was a crime for anybody who had intent or 
reason to believe that it would advantage a foreign power to communicate any 
information relating to the national defense of the United States? — A. I knew 
that. 

Q. To somebody else who was unauthorized, particularly a foreign nation or 
the citizen or subject of a foreign nation? You knew that much about the Es- 
pionage Act, didn't you? — A. Yes. 

Q. And you knew it was a crime to conspire to violate the Espionage Act in 
the latter part of November 1944, didn't you? — A. I did. 

Q. And you say now that you did not know at that time that when you were 
giving your wife unauthorized infoi"mation you were besmirching the uniform 

The Court. I do not believe 

Q. Of the United States Army? 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 113 

The CofiTRT. I don't believe the question was whether he knew — whether he 
Rbelieved, wasn't that the question? 

Mr. E. H. Block. I will change it to "believe." 

The Witness. I did not believe that. 

■Q. You did not believe that. 

The Court. Did you 

Q. Did you believe you were 

Mr. E. H. Block. I am sorry, your Honor. 

The CouKT. Go ahead. 

Q. Did you believe you were doing an honorable or dishonorable thing? — A. 
I didn't even think of it that way. 

Q. All right. 

The Court. How did you think of it? 

The Witness. I thought of it from what I had — on the basis of the philosophy 
I believed in. I felt it was the risht thing to do at that time. 

Q. Ton felt it was an honorable thing to do ; is that what you are trying to 
tell us? — A. The right thing to do according to my philosophy at that time. 

Q. All right, I will accept the word "philosophy." You felt it was the right 
thing to do? — A. That is right. 

"Q. And did you continue to think that what you were doing after November 
29, 1944, and up to and including the time that you got out of the Army, that you 
were doing the right thing? — A. I was having my doubts. 

Q. When did you begin to have doubts? — A. Almost as soon as I started to 
do it. 

Q. And tell me, if you can — and I want you to fix the time as exactly as you 
can, what you meant in terms of time when you began to have doubts as to the 
lightness of what you were doing. — A. I don't understand your question. 

The Court. I do not understand it either. 

Q. All right, let me make it easier. Did you begin to have doubts in December 
1944? — A. I started to have doubts 

Q. Now will you answer my question? 

The Court. Wait a minute. Let him answer it. It is not an easy question 
(to answer. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I want him to give me the exact date. 

The Court. So let him answer it 

Mr. E. H. Block. All right. 

The Court. And please, Mr. Bloch, don't interrupt me while I am talking. 

Mr. E. H. Block. All right. 

The Court. You have a bad habit of doing it. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I am sorry, I don't mean to do it. 

The Witness. I started to have doubts almost as soon as I said that I was 
-going to give the information. 

Q. And that was in the latter part of November 1944, but you did give informa- 
tion, did you not A. I did. 

Q. From that time on right through 1945? — A. That's right. 

The Coxtrt. Now you saw Mr. Rosenberg in January 1950, within a short 
period of time after you had tliese doubts that you speak of ; did you relate 
to him on that occasion that you had doubts about the propriety of it? 

Ml-. COHN. Your Honor said "January 1950." 

The Court. I am .sorry — 1945. Did you say anything to him about your doubts 
on the propriety of what you were doing? 

The Witness. No, I did not say anything to him because 

Mr. E. H. Block. I move to strike out everything after "because." 

The Court. No, let me have it. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I respectfully except. 

The Witness. Because, as I said, when I first started to do it it was one of the 
•motivating factors for doing it. 

Q. I am sorry, I cannot hear that at all. — A. I had a kind of a hero worship 
there and I did not want my hero to fail, and I was doing the wrong thing by 
him. That is exactly why I did not stop the thing after I had the doubts. 

Q. You say you had a hero worship. — A. That is right. 

Q. Who was your hero? — A. Julius Rosenberg. 

Q. I see. Now tell me, did you have doubts when you passed information to 
Harry Gold in Albuquerque, New Mexico. — A. I did. 

Q. Some time in 1945?— A. I did. 

Q. And you say that was in June 1945 ; is that correct? — A. That's right. 

Q. Did you consider at that time that you were passing to him very important 
information? — ^A.. I did. 



1]4 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. And did yon consider tliat that information was secret? — A. I did. 
Q. And you knew that that information was unauthorized? — A. I did. 
Q. To be communicated to any person outside of the camp itself; isn't that 
right?— A. That is right. 

Q. And did you have any doubts when you took $500 from Mr. Gold for passing 
that information? — A. I still had doubts. 

Q. You still had doubts, but you took the money and you handed it to yotir 
wife?— A. I did. 

Q. And that money was used for your house and the use of your wife ; is that 
correct? — A. That's right. 

Q. And did you have any doubts when you, as you state, got $200 from Julius 
Ro.senberg in September 1945 in New York City"? — A. I did. 
Q. You took the money? — A. I did. 
Q. Did you give that to your wife? — ^A. I did. 

Q. And that was used for your benefit and the benefit of your wife and your 
family ; is that correct? — A. That is correct. 

Q. bid you have any doubts when you, as you testified, got a thousand dollars 
from Mr. Rosenberg in June 1950? — A. I did. 

Q. But you took that money and you used it to pay off household debts ; isn't 

that correct?— A. Well 

Q. Did you or didn't you? — A. I did take that money for that reason. 

Q. Did you have any doubts when you took that 

The Court. Are you finished with your answer? 
The Witness. I would like to answer. 

The Court. Well, we are not going to know when you are finished or not unless 
you say you want to answer. — A. (Continuing:) About that thousand dollars, I 
felt that I was giving nothing for this thousand dollars ; I had plenty of headaches 
and I felt the thousand dollars was not coming out of Julius Rosenberg's pocket, 
it was coming out of the Russians' pocket and it didn't bother me one bit to 
take it, or the $4,000 either. 

Q. You had no qualms at all about taking the $1,000 or the $4,000, did you?— 
A. Not at all. 

Q. Even though that money, as you say, was given to you for purposes of 
flight?— A. That is right. 

Q. You never offered to return that money? — A. I certainly did not. 
Q. Even though you had $4,000 of it left and you had determined not to flee? 
The Court. Wait a minute. Wait, wait. 
Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am sorry. 

The Court. Your question is a very clumsy question. It is several questions. 
It is summation, it is everything all mixed up. Let's break it down. 
Did you offer to return the $4,000? 

Q. Did you have any qualms about not returning the $4,000 after you had 
determined not to leave the country? — A. I had no qualms at all. 

Q. All right. Now let's go back to the end of your Army career for one 
moment. You testified on direct examination, did you not, that you received an 
honorable discharge? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you consider that the services that you rendered to the United States 
during your Army career warranted an honorable discharge? 
Mr. CoHN. I object to that. 
The Court. I will overrule it. Go ahead. 

The Witness. I did my work as a soldier and produced what I had to produce 
and there was no argument about my work, and since the information went 
to a supposed ally at the time, I had no qualms or doubts that I deserved the 
honorable discharge. 

Q. And you felt at that time you were entitled to an honorable discharge; is 
that right?— A. That is right. 

The Court. Do you feel that way today? 
Q. Do you feel that way now? — A. No ; I don't. 

Q. When did you change your mind as to whether or not you were entitled 

to an honorable discharge? — ^A. I never thought about it until this moment. 

Q. Now that you have thought about it, do you believe that you were not 

entitled to an honorable discharge? — A. In the light of today's events, I was 

not entitled to an honorable discharge. 

Q. Your honorable discharge has never been revoked, has it? — A. It has not. 
Q. And so, on the record you still have an honorable discharge from the 
United States Army? — A. I have. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 115 

Q. Feeling as you do now, that you were not entitled to the honorable dis- 
charge, do you intend as of this moment, to ask the United States Government 
to revoke that honorable discharge? 

Mr. CoHN. I object to that, your Honor, as incompetent, irrelevant, and 
immaterial. 

The Court. I will sustain it. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

By the Court : 
Q. Now, do you know, Mr. Greenglass, of your own knowledge, whetlier it 
is tlie policy of tlie Army not to move with respect to court martial or revolving 
of honorable discharges, wliile thei'e are criminal proceedings pending in a 
court? — A. I have never lieard of the Army taking a discharge, an honorable 
di-scharge, away from a man unless it was during the time, that it was brought 
out during the time of the service in the Army. Tliat is my knowledge. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Mr. Greenglass, you now know A. That is my knowledge. 

Q. I can't tell when you finish. I don't want to interrupt. — A. Go ahead. 

Q. You know now, don't you, that that honorable discharge was procured 
from the United States Government by you tlu'ough fraud, because you con- 
cealed your illegal acts; isn't that correct? 

Mr. CoHN. Your Honor 

The CouKT. I think we have gone into the subject enough. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That was the last question on this. 

The Court. I will sustain the objection. 

Mr. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

Q. Now, tell me, Mr. Greenglass, when did you first meet your wife? — A. 1 
don't remember exactly when I met my wife. 

Q. Can you give us the year? — A. I can't give you the year. 

Q. Did you meet your wife in New York City? — A. I did. 

Q. Do you remember where you met your wife for the first time? — A. We 
lived in the same neighborhood together for many years and I just don't remem- 
ber when she started to go with our crowd. 

Q. Well, is it a fair statement, then, that you have known your wife since 
childhood days? — A. I do. 

Q. Did there come a time when you proposed marriage to her? — A. I did. 

Q. When was that?— A. I 

Q. Approximately? — A. I don't believe I ever proposed marriage. It just was 
understood we were to be married. 

Q. All right, when was there an understanding between you that you were 
going to get married? — A. I can't give you the year of that, either. 

Q. All right. At any rate, when you began to see your wife in a fiance and 
fiancee basis, did you love her? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you love her when you married her? — A. I did. 

Q. And do you love her today? — A. I do. 

Q. And you have loved her during that entire time that we have mentioned 
in the last question; isn't that right? — A. I do. 

Q. You love her dearly, don't you? — A. I do. 

Q. Do you love her more than you love yourself? - 

The Court. Oh, I think 

The Witness. I do. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am satisfied with the answer. 

Q. Do you love your children? — A. I do. 

Q. Very much'/ — A. Yes. 

The Coukt. I dare say that would be a difficult question for any of us to 
answer. 

Mr. E. II. Bloch. I think so. 

The Court. Do we love somebody more than we love ourselves? 

Mr. Bloch. I could retort, but I am refraining. We are dealing with a peculiar 
kind of a witness. 

Mr. Saypol. I object to that. 

Mr. Cohn. I move that be stricken. 

The Court. Y'es ; that will be stricken. I suppose all the Government witnesses 
are peculiar in the eyes of the defense. 

Mr. CoHN. Yes, and vice versa. 

Mr. U. H. Bloch. Now, I could say something but I am refraining. 

The Court. All right. 



116 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Do you bear any affection for your brother, Bernie? — A. I do. 

Q. Do you bear any affection for your sister, Ethel? — A. I do. 

Q. You realize, do you not, that Ethel is being tried here on a charge of coni- 
spiracy to commit espionage? — ^A. I do. 

Q. And you realize the grave implications of that charge? — A. I do. 

Q. And you realize the possible death penalty, in the event that Ethel is con- 
victed by this jury, do you not? — A. I do. 

Q. And you want to tell 

The Court. Do you realize also that the matter of penalty is a matter entirely 
within my jurisdictioii, not within the jurisdiction of the jury? 

The Witness. I understand that, too. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That is why I used the word "possible," your Honor. 

Q. And you bear affection for her? — A. I do. 

Q. This moment? — A. At this moment. 

Q. And yesterday? — A. And yesterday. 

Q. And the day before yesterday ? 

The Court. Well now, how far are you going to go? 

The Witness. As far back as I ever met her and knew her. 

Q. I am sorry, I can't hear you. 

Mr. CoHN. Mr. Bloch can't hear, your Honor, because he keeps interrupting: 
the witness' answer. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Maybe you are right. 

The Court. Well, let's not take this day by day. Let's ask the general question.. 

Q. At any rate, at present you bear an affection for Ethel? — A. I do. 

Q. Do you bear an affection for your brother-in-law Julius? — A. I do. 

Q. Now, you testified, I believe, that you had two brothers and one sister. — 
A. That is "right. 

Q. Who is the other brother? — A. Samuel. 

Q. Is Samuel a full brother of yours? — A. As far as I know. 

Q. From the same mother and the same father? — A. That is right. 

Q. And Bernie is from the same and mother and same father V — A. That is- 
right. 

Q. And Ethel is from the same mother and the same father? — A. That is- 
right. 

Q. And were you and Ethel brought up in your parents' home together? — 
A. Certainly. 

Q. In New York City?— A. That is right. 

Q. Sheriff Street?— A. That is right. 

Q. And did you continue to live in that same house together with your par- 
ents until Ethel was married? — A. That is correct. 

Q. And how old was Ethel at the time she was married to Julius? — ^A. It wa&: 
1939 ; it is 10, 11 years ago. I guess she was about 22. 

Q. And how old were you at the time? 

The Court. Well, you said she was six years older. You must have been 16.- 

The Witness. No, I was about 17, I guess. 

Q. You were about 17? — A. Yes. 

Q. And after your sister Ethel 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Withdrawn. 

Q. Now, after your sister Ethel married Julius, did she move out of your- 
mother's house? — A. She did. 

Q. And the house where you resided? — A. She did. 

Q. And did you continue to see Ethel and your brother-in-law Julius after 
Ethel moved out of the house? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you visit them at their home? — A. I did. 

Q. Now, do you remember when your sister Ethel and Julius moved into an. 
apartment at Knickerbocker Village? — A. Do I remember the date? 

Q. Yes. — A. I don't remember the exact date. 

Q. Do you remember the year? — A. I don't. 

Q. If i told you in 1942, would that refresh your recollection? — A. It still 
wouldn't refresh my recollection. 

Q. All right. After you were married to your wife, did you and your wife see- 
Ethel and Julius at your mother's house about once a week? — A. I wouldn't 
say that. I know 

Q. About? — A. I wouldn't even say that, because I worked 

Q. Did you continue 

The Court. Let him finish. 

The Witness (continuing). Because I worked nights at the time, and I saw 
very few people at the time, but I did see them frequently. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 117 

Q. You did see them frequently? — A. Yes. 

Q. Did they visit you at your house after you were married ? — A. No. 

Q. Hardly at ail; isn't that right?— A. That's right. 

Q. Did you come to their house to visit them? — A. I did. 

Q. Frequently?— A. I did. 

Q. Now, will you describe to the Court and jury the type of apartment that 
Ethel and Julius lived in, in Knickerbocker Village? — A. Well 

The Court. When ? 

Q. From 1942 on?— A. It was ■ 

Q. Let me clarify it for the Court. Is it not a fact, from your own knowledge, 
that Ethel and Julius lived in that same apartment in Knickerbocker Village 
from 1942 right down to and including the date of your arrest in June 1950? — 
A. That is correct. 

Q. Now, will you describe to the Court and jury the kind of an apartment it 
was, in terms of number of rooms, kind of furniture, and any other matters that 
you would care to describe about that apartment? — A. Well, as to the furniture, 
the furniture changed from time to time; she bought extra pieces and stuff of 
that nature, so I don't recall all the different ways the furniture was set. 

The Court. First tell us about the rooms? 

The Witness (continuing). The I'ooms themselves — the apartment was at the 
end of a long hall, on the 11th floor, in Knickerbocker Village ; G-11 is the number. 

Q. 10 Monroe Street? — A. 10 Monroe Street. You come through the door; 
there is a small foyer ; you turn to the left. It opens up into a living room, 
much longer than it is wide, and on the right is a door at the entrance to the 
living room — I should say, at the foyer to the right there is a door to the bath- 
room, and in this doorway there is a bathroom, and then through the doorway is 
a bedroom, and at the end of the living room, on a line with the wall, the wall 
where the windows are at, is a kitchen. 

Q. All right, so that the apartment consisted of a living room, a bedroom, a 
kitchen, and a bathroom? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now, in connection with the kind of furniture that you saw in that apart- 
ment, did you notice or did you ever make any remark to Ethel or Julius about 
the fact that their furniture was second-hand furniture? — A. I never mentioned 
it to them, but I was in the presence of people who did. 

Q. And from your own observation, could you tell this Court and jury whether 
or not the furniture in their apartment was second-hand furniture, in the main? — 
A. Some of it was new. 

Q. And some of it was second-hand? — A. Some of it was second-hand. 

Q. Did you ever know how much rental Julius and Ethel paid for that apart- 
ment? — A. I believe I knew, but it slipped my mind. I can't recall it, right 
now. 

Q. Well, if I told you that for many years they paid $45 a month rental, would 
that refresh your recollection? — A. Yes; that is probably the number, the price. 

Q. And, as a matter of fact, while you were in business with Julius, first in the 
G & R Engineering Company and later in the Pitt Machine Products Co., Inc., 
there was talk between you and Julius and Beruie about how you were going to^ 
get along and survive".' — A. That's right. 

Q. Isn't that right?— A. That's right. 

Q. And in the course of that conversation some talk was made about the vari- 
ous expenses that each of you had to pay, rent, food, and so forth; is that 
right "^ — A. That is correct. 

Q. Now, does it refresh your recollection as to how much rental Julius and 
Ethel paid for that apartment at 10 Monroe Street? 

The Court. He said he thought you were approximately right. 

Mr. E. H. Block. All right. 

Q. Do you feel any remorse now for what you did down at Los Alamos? — A. I 
do. 

Q. Did you feel any remorse, or were you contrite or i)enitent at or subsequent 
to the time you did the things you said you did down at Los Alamos? — A. I was. 

Q. Is there a change in the quality of your feeling of remorsefulness? 

The Court. Oh, I will sustain that. 

Q. Or has there been? 

The Court. I will sustain that objection. 

The Witness. I don't understand what you mean. 

The Court. Ju.st listen to me. I have sustained the objection. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I understand. I am not asking it. 

Q. Did you feel more remorseful now than you did down at Los Alamos, with, 
respect to the things you did? 



118 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The Court. I will sustain that objection. 
Did you have different degrees of remorse? 
The Witness. Keniorse is remorse. 
The Court. All right. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. You had remorse at that time? — A. I did. 

Q. That is right, and you are remorseful now? — A. That's right. 

Q. Is'ow, let's come back to the first time the FBI men came down to see j'ou 
in June of 1950 ; was that the first time that you had been interviewed by any of 
the representatives of the United States Government, including representatives 
of the FBI, with respect to your activities at Los Alamos? — A. No. 

Q. When was the first time after your discharge from the Army that the FBI 
came around to talk to you about your activities at Los Alamos? — A. In 1950, 
February. 

Q. Was that before or after there was any discussion, as you stated in your 
direct, about your getting out of the country? — A. I can't place it as to whether 
it was before or after. 

Q. Where did these FBI representatives see or speak to you in February 
1950? — A. One man called me up on the phone and he said ho would like to see 
me. He came to my house ; he sat down at my table ; I offered him a cup of 
coffee and we spoke — he did not say to me that he suspecttd me of espionage 
or anything else — he just spoke to me about whether I had known anybody at 
Los Alamos, and that was the gist of the whole conversation. He walked out of 
the house maybe an hour later, and that is all there was to it. 

Q. All right now, let's see. Did he introduce himself as a member of the 
FBI?— A. He did. 

Q. Did he ask you any questions, either directly or indirectly, with respect to 
your Ivuowledge of any illegal activity that occurred at Los Alamos while you 
were there? — A. I don't recall exactly what the whole conversation was about. 
It made very little effect on me, because it didn't — I mean, it didn't seem like 
anything — I mean 

The Court. Were you asked to sign any paper of any kind? 

The Witness. No : not at all. 

Q. You say you were together with that FBI man for an hour? — A. There was 
also my wife in the room and my little boy, and I think maybe a conversation 
might have gotten off on a couple of tangents. 

Q. Well, at any rate, whether your wife and children was there, he stayed an 
hour, did he not? — A. Yes. 

Q. Did he tell you what he came for? — A. Well he wanted to know 

Q. Did he tell you what he came for? 

]\[r. CoHN. He is trying to answer, ycur Honor. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. It is either a "yes" or "no." I will follow it up. 

The Court. Mr. Bloch is a very impatient young man and he wants his 
answer fast. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Thanks for the compliment, for calling me young. 

The Court. If you will just wait a little while you will get an answer. 

The Witness (continuing). He discussed with me — when he came into the 
house it was very difficult to find out what he wanted. He didn't come out and 
say that he wanted some information. He just talked around the point. I 
didn't get what he really wanted to find out. 

Q. Was Los Alamos discussed? — A. Oh, yes. 

Q. Did he say he was looking for people who might have conducted illegal 
activity in Los Alamos? — A. No; he just wanted 

Q. He didn't say that? — A. No; he didn't say anything of that kind. 

Q. What was the name of that FBI man? — A. I can't remember that FBI 
man's name. 

Q. Did you ever see that FBI man since? — A. I have not seen him since. 

Q. Were you frightened at the time that FBI man came down to see you in 
February 1950? — A. Well, I wasn't exactly calm. 

Q. You were frightened, were you not? — A. Not very frightened: no. 

Q. I want to ask you again, was Los Alamos mentioned at that first interview 
that yon had with that FBI man in February 1950? 

The Court. He did say "yes," it was. 

The Witness. Yes. 

Q. You didn't tell that FBI man at that time that you had engaged in any 
illegal activity at Los Alamos, did you? — A. I didn't tell him, but I was pretty 
well on the verge to tell him. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 119 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out the latter part of the answer as not 
responsive. 

Tlie Court. No ; it will stand. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

Q. Did you mention to him anything about the fact that you had given secrets 
of the Los Alamos project to any unauthorized person? 

The Court. Don't answer that. He has already answered it. 

Q. Did you mention the name of your sister Ethel Rosenberg to that FBI man 
in February 1950?— A. I don't believe I did. 

By the Coum : 
Q. Was there any discussion about Ethel Rosenberg?— A. I don't think she 
came into the conversation. 

Q. I believe you said you weren't asked anything about espionage, were you?— 

A. No. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except to your Honor's question, and I hesitate 
to ask the following questions because they are on the same line, and if the 
Court wants, I will make an offer of proof. I am going to ask him 

The Court. No ; you go ahead. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. All right. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Was the name of Julius Rosenberg mentioned by you at that interview with 
the FBI man in February 1950?— A. I don't believe that there was. I don't 
remember the conversation that well. 

Q. Was your wife's name mentioned? — A. She was sitting right there. 

Q. In connection with any activity of an illegal sort, to that FBI man, in 
February 1950, by you?— A. Of course not. I didn't mention anything like 
that to the FBI man. 

Q. All right. Now then, when was the next time you were interviewed by the 
FBI? 

The Court. And you say that you didn't make any written statement and 
you weren't asked to sign one? 

The Witness. No, nothing ; no. 

Q. When was the next time you were interviewed by the FBI? — A. When I 
was arrested, June 15th. 

Q. Now, you say that four FBI representatives came around to your house 
on or about June 15, 1950, at or about 2 9'clock in the afternoon ; is that right? — 
A. That's right. 

Q. And they stayed in your house until about 7: 00 or 7: 30 that evening? — A. 
That's right. 

Q. And during that time they conducted a search of your house? — A. They 
did. 

Q. And during that 5- or 5i/^-hour period they asked you questions, did they 
not? — A. They asked me some questions ; yes. 

Q. Did all of them ask you questions at some point or another? 

Mr. Bloch. I will withdraw that. 

Q. Did all participate at some point or another in asking you questions during 
your five- or five-and-a-half hours interview? — A. Well, I don't remember them 
all standing around me and asking me questions. I just remember that once 
in a while one of them would ask me a question while they were doing their work. 

Q. Now, when they first came in, do you remember who was the first FBI 
representative to speak? — A. Well, I believe it was John W. Lewis was the 
first one. 

Q. And what did he say, the first words, when he came in? — A. I can't remem- 
ber, probably "Hello" or "How are you?" Or "Is your name David Greenglass?" 

Q. Aside from these preliminaries, what did he tell you about why they 
came? — A. He said they came— well, this isn't the first words they said. He said 
they came in connection with leak of information in the security of their — of 
the United States Government, and they would like to find out what I know about 
it. 

Q. Was the name Harry Gold mentioned during that five- or five-and-a-half- 
hour interview? — A. No. 

Q. Not once. When was the first time that any United States representative 
brought in the name of Harry Gold? — A. He didn't bring in the name. He 
, just told me of a man that came to,see me. 

Q. And did he mention where the man came to see you? — A. In Albuquerque. 

Q. Did he mention the month he came to see you? — A. Yes; he did. 
81095—51 9 



120 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Now, as a matter of fact, Mr. Greenglass, you had read in the newspapers 
prior to June 1950 about the arrest of Harry Gold, had you not? — A. I had. 

Q. And when you read that information in the newspapers, did you recognize 
the person who "was mentioned as Harry Gold in the newspapers, as the person 
whom you transferred information at Allniquerque, New Mexico, in June 1945? — 
A. I did not remember his face at the time. 

Q. Now, you said that Harry Gold came to your apartment in Albuquerque, 
New Mexico, one morning in the early part of June 1945; is that correct?^ 
A. That's right. 

Q. Is that right?— A. That's right. 

Q. Your wife was there? 

The Coi'KT. I think you said it was a Sunday morning. 

The Witness. He said "some morning in early part of June." O. K., it was a 
Sunday morning. 

Q. A. Sunday morning? — A. Yes. 

Q. And then you told us about how there was an identification through the 
Jello box cut : is that correct? — A. That's right. 

Q. Then you had a conversation with Harry Gold after that identification had 
been completed; is that correct? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now, where did this conversation take place, in your living room? — A. Yes. 

Q. About what time of the morning would you say it was?— A. About ten 
o'clock, I suppose. I can't place it accurately. 

Q. How long did Harry Gold stay in your apartment that morning? — A. Not 
very long. 

Q. Aliout how long? — A. Altogether the whole meeting was about 20, 25 minutes, 
including the walk, so it couldn't be very long. 

Q. At any rate, you were with him for 20 or 25 minutes that- June Sunday 
morning in 1945, both in your apartment and outside in the street ; is that right"? — 
A. Yes. 

Q. You had a very good chance to look at his face, didn't you? — A. "Very good. 

Q. You did look at his face?— A. I did. 

Q. During that entire 20 or 25 minutes"? — A. That is right. 

Q. "Was there any attempt on his part, so far as you could observe at that 
time, to conceal his face? — A. No. 

Q. It was sunlight, was it not"? — A. A bright day. 

Q. And Albuquerque usually is a very bright town, is it not? — A. Yes. 

The Court. Don't go into all these details. He said he could have seen it 
and so forth. You can go on. 

Q. Now, that afternoon you also saw Harry Gold, did you not? — A. I did. 

Q. That was after you had written down certain information? — A. That's 
right. 

Q. Then he came back and you gave it to him? — A. I did. 

Q. That is the time he gave you the $500 in the envelope; is that right? — 
A. That is right. 

Q. Did you have an opportunity to look at his face in the afternoon? — A. 
I did. 

Q. Did you read any account in the newspaper concerning this Harry Gold 
prior to June 15, 1950, which led you to believe that the person with whom you 
had dealings was already apprehended and under arrest by the Government 
authorities? — A. I never would have noted from the newspapers. Julius Rosen- 
berg came and told me that that was the man, and after that I read the news- 
papers, because I hadn't seen him even when he came up and showed it to 
me. 

Q. Now, ,vou hadn't read the newspapers? — A. Until he had showed it to me. 

Q. Until he came around ; is that the idea? — A. That is right. 

Q. Now, when did you say Julius Rosenberg came around to tell you about 
the fact that Harry Gold had been arrested — A. It was in the morning. 

Q. Do you rememlier wlien? — A. It was tlie day after my wife got out of the 
hospital with her baby. 

Q. And when was that? — A. That is the way I place it. It can be found out. 
I just don't remember. 

Q. Now look A. I can place it that way. 

Q. Now look, your wife gave birth to a baby A. That's right. 

Q. June 16th ; six days later she was out of the hospital. The next morning 

A. It was May 16th. 

Q. Your child was born when? — -A. May 16th. 

Q. And how long did your wife stay in the hospital after your child was 
born? — A. Six days. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 121 

Q. So that would bring us down to about May 22nd; is that correct?— A. And 
the next mornins is when he brought the paper in. 

Q. So you would say that that is about May 23rd?— A. Right. 

Q. And you had read nothing A. I read nothing. 

Q. In the newspapers? Let me finish my question — you had read nothing 
in the newspapers prior to ISIay 23, 1950, concerning the arrest of Harry Gold, 
or any accounts concerning his activities? — A. I had read nothing about it. 

Mr. Bloch. All right, that is an answer. 

Q. Now, then, in this interrogation at your home on June 15, 1950, by these 
four FBI representatives, did you mention your wife as one of the people who 
conspired with you to commit illegal acts? — A. I mentioned no one at my home. 

Q. You denied, did you not, at that time, to the FBI at your home, that you 
were guilty of any crime, or that you had engaged in any illegal activity? — A. 
I denied nothing. They didn't ask me direct questions and I gave answers to 
the questions they did ask. 

Q. Well, let's hear, let's hear some of the questions that they asked and 
let's find out whether they were directed A. It was later at night. 

Q. No. no. We will come to the night ; we will come to the night. Let's stick 
to the afternoon for a little bit. — A. They wanted to know things, when I had 
been in the Army, where I had been. 

Q. Did you tell them?— A. I did. 

Q. All right, what else? — A. What I was doing in the Army. 

Q. Did you tell them — A. I did. What I worked at, where I worked. 

By the Court: 
Q. Well, did you answer all the questions that were put to you, truthfully? — 
A. Truthfully, yes. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. You didn't lie about a single question during that five and a half hour 
interval? — A. No. As a matter of fact, I volunteered information. 

Q. Not one 

The Court. He didn't say it was a five and a half hour interview. He didn't 
say it was five and a half hour interview. Be careful about that. He said he 
was only questioned for about an hour. 

Mr. Bloch. But the interval was from 2 to 7 :30. 

The Court. I don't like the implication. 

Mr. Bloch. I didn't mean to leave any implication, your Honor. 

The Court. All right. , 

Q. They were there for five, five and a half hours?— A. That is right. 

Q. During part of that period they questioned you? — A. Yes; it was the 
type of questioning that was "Oh, by the way," while they were doing their 
work. 

Q. Now, when they searched your apartment, did you realize that you were 
a suspect? — A. I woiUd have to be awful dumb not to. 

Q. Did j"ou mention during that period any names of people, that you men- 
tioned in your direct testimony here in court? — A. I don't recall that I did, 
except that at one point they found this paper, Julius's notes from high school, 
and they asked me what it was. 

Q. Is it from high school or college? — A. College, I mean. And they saw some 
math, and they said to me, "What is this? Is this some secret material?" 
I said, "No, that is notes that my brother-in-law did in — wrote about while he 
was in college." 

Q. In other words, they asked you about some of the notes that Julius Rosen- 
berg had made in college and sp'ecifically asked you whether or not that was 
secret material? — A. They didn't put it that way. 

Q. That is, I am using your words.— A. They said, "What is this?" In 
other words, they wanted an explanation of what the paper was. 

Q. Did you give them an explanation? — A. Yes; I told them what it was. 

Q. Did you, during that five or five and a half hour period, ask them to give 
you an opportunity to consult with coiuisel"? — A. I didn't ask them; no. 

Q. Did you ask your wife to try to get you counsel? — A. My wife was in the 
hospital. 

Q. Did you call up anybody ^A. I did not. 

Q. Wliether it be a relative or a friend A. My 

Q. To ask them to procure counsel for you? — ^A. No, I didn't. 

Q. During that five and a half hour period"? — A. I did not. 



122 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Then, as I understand it, you were taken by these four FBI representatives 
down to the Federal building here? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did you come down here by automobile? — A. That is correct. 

Q. Whose automobile? — A. I suppose it belonged to the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, I don't know. 

Q. It was a private automobile, looked like a private automobile; is that 
right? — A. Well, it had a radio in it. 

Q. All right. Finally you got down here. Where did you go when you got 
down to this building? — A. I went up to the FBI headquarters. 

Q. And what lloor is that on? — A. It is in the 20's, I guess it is the 29th floor. 

Q. 29th floor?— A. Yes. 

Q. You have been up on the 29th floor on many occasions, haven't you? — A. 
Twice. 

Q. Now, the first time was this time that we are talking about now. When 
was tlie next time? — A. Some weeks ago. , ^^ 

Q. Did these four FBI representatives go up to the 29th floor with you? — A, 
They did. 

Q. Did you have dinner that night ?^ — A. They let me eat my supper before I 
left. 

Q. Would you mind talking a little louder, please? — A. I said, they let me eat 
my dinner before I left. 

Q. Now, after you had your dinner at your home, about what time was 
it? — A. It was about four, five o'clock in the afternoon. 

Q. Did you have anything further to eat that evening? — A. About — I guess, 
about nine, ten o'clock at night I had some more. 

Q. Did any of the FBI representatives in your apartment make any notes or 
memoranda while you were talking? — A. I can't say for sure whether they did 
or didn't. 

Q. Now, when you got down here to the Federal building in the evening, did 
you notice whether in the course of the interview any of the FBI representatives 
made any notes or memoranda? — ^A. Yes. 

Q. Was a stenographer present? When I say a stenographer, I include a 
stenotypist or anybody who will take down words in a short-cut way. Was any 
stenographer present during that interview that evening with the FBI repre- 
sentatives? — A. Wlien I told them I would give them a statement, then a 
stenographer came in. 

Q. Now. what time did you tell them that you were going to give them a 
statement? — A. I don't know exactly what time it was. 

Q. Did the room in which you were interviewed tiave a clock? — A. You have 
got me there. I don't know either. 

Q. Let's see whether we can refresh your recollection. You said you had 
something to eat around nine or ten o'clock; is that right? — A. I suppose it 
must have been around that time. 

Q. Approximately? — A. I heard some 

Q. If you don't have a clock, we don't expect you to know. — A. No ; there is 
a bell outside that rings certain chimes, I mean, I thought it was about 9 or 
10 o'clock. 

Q. That is your best understanding. Now, did you tell the FBI that you were 
going to give them a statement after you had had this repast, at about 9 or 10 
o'clock? — A. I don't know when I gave them the statement, when I started to 
give the statement. 

Q. No ; when you said to them that you would give a statement? — A. You 
can't pin point me on when I said I was going to give a statement, because I 
don't remember those things. 

Q. You don't remember that? — A. No. 

Q. Were you frightened at the time? — A. No. 

Q. Did you ask them to give you an opportunity to get counsel? — A. No. 

Q. Did you make any attempt to get counsel? — A. Not until. about 2 o'clock 
in tlie morning, 1, 2 o'clock in the morning. 
By the Coukt : 

Q. Did they tell you that you could have counsel?^ — ^A. Oh, yes. 
By Mr. Bloch: 

Q. Did any of those FBI representatives tell you that you were under ar- 
rest? — A. No. 

Q. In the course of your questioning, did you at any time ask them whether 
you were under arrest? — ^A. No, I didn't. 



I 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 123 

Mr. Bloch. I don't know whether I asked this, your Honor. My mind is a 
little fuzzy. 

Q. Did you make any attempt to procure counsel that evening? — A. I don't 
believe so. 

The Court. Did I understand you to say not until 1 or 2 that morning? 

The Witness. That's right — well, you can consider that "evening." 

Q. Well, outside of the time consumed in taking this repast, about 9 or 10 
o'clock, would you say that you were continuously questioned by these FBI 
representatives, from the time you got down here, about 7 or 7 :30, to the wee 
hours of the morning? — A. Some of the conversation was just window dressing; 
it had nothing — it wasn't pertinent. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike that out, your Honor. 

The Court. No ; it will stand. 

By The Court: 
Q. What do you mean by that?— A. I mean, the man asked me how I felt, "Do 
you want a cigarette?" Things like that. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. They were very affable, is that right, they were very polite? — A. That's 
right. 

Q. Is that what you meant by "window dressing"? — A. Also, that he would — I 
mean, that they would talk about other things, other than what was on hand. 

Q. Did those interspersions about other things take very long? — A. Five, ten 
minutes some time. 

Q. Now, outside of this five or ten minutes A. I said "sometimes." By 

that I mean that during the conversation it would be broken by these little • 

Q. But is it fair to say that outside of these indulgences in the social ameni- 
ties, you were continuously questioned from the time you came down here at 
7 to 7:30 until the wee hours of the morning? — A. Well, if you can consider 
giving a statement, questioning, yes. 

Q. That evening, did you at any time mention your wife's name to the FBI 

as being one of those who was engaged with you in this illegal work? A. I 

did. 

Q. And did you mention the name of your sister Ethel at that time? — A. I be- 
lieve I did mention her name, yes. 

Q. Are you sure? — A. I can't remember now what I gave in a statement then. 
In subsequent statements, I have. 

Q. No, no ; we will come to subsequent statements. Now please try to concen- 
trate and fasten your mind on this particular A. Since I haven't read that 

statement 

Q. On this particular evening. — A. I haven't read that statement since and I 
certainly don't know exactly what I put into it. 

By the Court: 

Q. Well, did you conscientiously withhold any facts that night? — A. No, I did 
not conscientiously withhold those facts. 

Q. And did you conscientiously tell substantially what you have told in court 
these past few days? — A. That I did, and in other statements, because I couldn't 
remember at once. 

Q. Well, when you left that evening, was there any understanding that you 
you would make a subsequent statement? — A. I suppose there was. 

Q. I don't want to know whether you suppose. — A. Yes ; there was an under- 
standing to that effect. I said to them, "That is to the best of my knowledge at 
this time." 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Now, let me ask you, so that there will be cpmplete clarification here, and I 
am confining myself solely to this particular evening of June 15th 

The Court. Yes ; and I wish you would make a little haste with it, because I 
think you are taking much too long on this subject matter. I haven't inter- 
rupted you ; I have let you go ahead. I think you ought to make more haste on 
it, because if yoi; are going to take every one of those incidents — and I think I 
know what you are leading up to — and you are going to go through it in that 
detail 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am not going to go through it in that detail insofar as sub- 
sequent statements are concerned, but I would like to know particularly about 
this first statement, the first few days after his apprehension and arrest. 

The Court. Very well. 



124 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Are you now stating that you did not witbliold conscientiously any informa- 
tion concerning your illegal activities at Los Alamos and elsewhere to the FBI 
authorities on the evening of June 15, 1950, and the early hours of the moruing 
of June 16, 1950? — A. That is substantially what I mean. 

Q. All right. Now, after you finished with FBI representatives, you were 
taken away from this building, were you not? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now, what time were you taken away? — A. Oh, that was — it was 4 o'clock 
the following afternoon. It was 2 o'clock in the morning that we got through — 
I mean, so that we could sleep. 

Q. Now, where did you sleep that night? — A. I slept in this building, in the 
nurse's quarters. 

Q. Now, by 2 o'clock in the morning had you already given a statement to the 
FBI?— A. Yes, I had. 

Q. Had you signed that statement? — A. Surely. 

Q. You did?— A. Yes. 

Q. How long in all would you say it took to prepare that statement and 
have you sign it? — A. I remember remarking that the stenographer was an 
awful — the typist was an awful slow typist. 

Q. And did the stenographer go to another room and type it, or did she type 
it right there and then did you sign it? — A. I remember her typin? something in 
that room and typing in another room, too, I suppose. 

Q. AVell, was there one — more than one stenographer or typist? — A. I don't 
know— no, only one, I believe, just one. 

Q. Let us see whether we understand. At any rate, you were asked questions ; 
you gave certain answers ; there were a stenographer and a typist there, and what- 
ever you said was put down in writing, is that right, was put down in print? — ■ 
A. It took quite a while, because I wrote it out in longhand. 

Q. Oh, I wanted to get that. You wrote out a statement in your own hand- 
writing? — ^A. That's right. 

Q. Did you sign that statement? — A. I signed that statement. 

Q. And did the statement that you wrote out and signed in your own hand- 
writing precede or come subsequent to the time when the stenographer came 
into the room? — A. I really don't know how she took it. I think maybe she 
read my notes and typed it off the notes. 

Q. You are not sure of that? — A. I am not sure of that. 

Q. At any rate, at 2 o'clock in the morning you were all through? — A. Yes. 

Q. Aud you slept in this building? — A. That's right. 

Q. Did you stay in this building the following day? — A. Up until I was 
arraigned and taken over to West Street. 

Q. And when were you arraigned? — A. Do you mean the time? It was in the 
afternoon, I believe. 

Q. And that was on June 16th A. That is right. 

Q. 1950. Was that down in the Commissioner's office in this building? — A. 
That's right. 

Q. Did you have counsel at that time? — A. I did. 

Q. Who was your counsel? — A. O. John Rogge. 

Q. And was Mr. Rogge there personally? — A. He was. 

Q. Had you seen any members of Mr. Rogge's firm prior to the time that you 
saw Mr. Rogge on Jiuie 16, 1950? — A. I did. 

Q. And who of Mr. Rogge's firm did you see? — A. Mr. Fabricant. 

Q. And when did you see Mr. Fabricant? — A. It was in the morning of June 
16th. 

Q. About what time? — A. I suppose it was during business hours, between 
9 and 12 sometime. 

Q. Now, did you make a request for counsel at any time after you were 
taken down here to the Federal Building on June 15, 1950? — A. At about one 
o'clock or so somebody said to me, "You ought to get a counsel — you ought to get 
a lawyer." 

Q. Was that after you had written out your statement and signed it? — A. Yes. 

The Court. Let me ask you, were you advised before that you had the right 
to have a lawyer? 

The Witness. Sure. 

The Court. Were you advised of that fact when you were taken to the build- 
ing for the fii'st time? 

The Witness. No. 

The Court. When were you advised of that fact, before you made the state- 
ment or during or just when? 

The Witness. Just about when I started to make the statement. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE , 125 

Q. Now, when you started to make that statement you knew that Gold had 
put his linger on you, didn't you? — A. I don't get what you mean. 

Q. Never heard that expression "put the linger on you"? 

The Court. No ; don't answer that. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. All right, I will withdraw it. 

Q. During the course of your interrogation at the Federal Building here 
that evening on February 15, 1950, did any of the FBI representatives or any 
representatives of the United States Government tell you that Harry Gold had 
charged that you were conspiring with him or that you were a conspirator 
with him in committing espionage? 

Mr. CoHN. ]\Ir. Bloch said "February." I believe he meant "June." 

The Court. He means June, that is correct. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. "June" — I am sorry, that is correct. — A. Nobody told me 
that. 

Q. What?— A. Nobody told me that. 

Q. You knew A. They said 

Q. Just a second. You knew when you came down here to the Federal Build- 
ing on June 15, 1950, that Harry Gold was already under arrest? — A. I did. 

Q. Now, in the course of your interrogation on the evening of February 15 
of 1950 — I am sorry 

The Court. June. 

Q. June 15, 1950, here, did you mention the name Harry Gold first or did 
somebody representing the Government mention the name Harry Gold first? — 
A. I don"t recall that. 

Q. But his name was mentioned? — A. I told — I can't even recall that. 

Q. Did anybody tell you at that time that a complaint had either been made 
or was being made charging you with conspiring with Harry Gold to commit 
espionage? — A. Nobody. 

Q. Now, the following morning you say Mr. Fabricant saw you? — A. He did. 

Q. Did you call any relative on the evening of June 15th or in the early morn- 
ing hours of June 16th from this building, telling him or them that you wanted 
counsel? — A. I did. 

Q. And to whom did you speak? — A. I spoke to my brother-in-law, Louis 
Abel. 

Q. Was that after the stenographer or typist had taken down what you re- 
sponded to A. That was after I signed the statement. 

Q. The questions propounded to you by the FBI? — A. That was after I signed 
the statement. 

Q. Now, when you were arraigned before the Commissioner on .Tune 16, 1950, 
in the afternoon, did you know then that you were accused by the United States 
Government of conspiring with Harry Gold to commit espionage? — A. Repeat 
that. 

The Court. Read that, IMr. Stenographer. 

(Question read.) — A. Nobody ever read it to me until I got in front of the 
magistrate. 

Q. Now, when you got in front of the Commissioner down here in the base- 
ment of this building, did somebody read to you the complaint? — A. The Dis- 
trict — the U. S. Attorney read the complaint. That is the first I heard of it. 

Q. Did Mr. Fabricant of Mr. Rogge's office tell you what the United States 
Government was charging you with on that day? — A. I 

Q. Pardon me? — A. I don't believe that I can remember that part of the con- 
versation at all. 

Q. Was the name Harry Gold mentioned in the conversation you had with 
your lawyer, Mr. Fabricant, on the morning of June 16, 1950? — A. I can't tell 
and I don't remember. 

Q. You don't remember? — ^A. No. 

Q. And was Harry Gold's name mentioned to you by Mr. Rogge when you saw 
Mr. Rogge later that day, at the time of the arraignment? — A. You are asking 
me about a period that was very confused for me, and it is a wonder that so 
much stayed with me about it. 

Q. You don't remember that A. No, I don't remember that. 

Q. What happened in June 1950?— A. No. 

Q. But you do remember everything that your wife told you back on Novem- 
ber 29th 

The Court. I will sustain the objection. 

Q. 1944? 

The Court. Don't answer that. 



126 ' SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. E. H. Block. I respectfully except. 

The Court. You know it is argumentative, counselor. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I am not at all sure of that, your Honor. 

The Court. Well, I am sure of it and I don't want any further argument on it. 

]Mr. E. H. Bloch. You asked me a question, your Honor, and I tried to respond. 

The Court. All right. 

Q. At any rate, the Commissioner or Mr. Saypol or somebody before the 
Commissioner at that arraignment did have read to you or read to you the com- 
plaint?— A. That is right. 

Q. And that complaint charged you and Mr. Gold, did it not, with conspiring 
to commit espionage in that you delivered to Harry Gold confidential information 
from the Los Alamos project and received a sum of money for it in the early 
part of June 1945? — A. I didn't pay much attention to what the complaint said 
and you can — I — I don't even believe I heard the words in the complaint. 

Q. You didn't hear the words? — A. No. 

Q. Were you excited at the time? — A. No, I was just dull. 

Q. You were dull? — A. Yes. 

Q. Were you dull because you didn't sleep very much the previous evening? — ^A. 
It could be one of the contributing factors. 

Q. How about now; do you feel sharp? — ^A. Sharp enough. 

Q. Yes. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I wonder, if the Court please, if this might be a convenient 
place to stop? 

* * 4: * * * * 

We will recess until 2 :25. 
(Recess to 2 : 25 p. m.) 

afternoon session 

David Greenglass resumed the stand. 

* * i^ * * * * 

(The following in open court, in the presence and hearing of the jury:) 
Cross-examination continued by Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Now, Mr. Greenglass, let's come back, for a moment to the night of June 15, 
1950, and the early morning of June 16, 1950. How many statements did you 
sign that evening and the following morning? — A. I signed one statement that 
evening and the following morning, I mean in this period. 

By the Court : 

Q. You mean one each time or one? — A. It was one statement. There must 
have been some copies or something but it is the same statement. 
Q. One statement was signed by you? — A. That is right. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. And that was the one that you wrote out in your own handwriting ; is that 
correct? — A. That is correct. 

Q. Now, in that statement did you refer to the incident in Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, in the latter part of November 1944, in which you had a conversation 
with your wife and in which she invited you to commit espionage? — A. I referred 
to it, yes. I also, in that statement, I gave a general outline of everything I 
was to say- 



Mr. Bloch. Now, if the Court please- 



The Witness (continuing). And later statements. I just made that state- 
ment as I remembered it then, and any subsequent statements, I had. more mem- 
ory of what I had done and I filled in more. 

Q. Now, I understand that, but please, Mr. Greenglass, we are trying to find, 
out specifically just what you said to the FBI. 

The Court. Yes; and I don't think you ought to go into such minute detail. 
Now, I thought we were going to have this long recess for the purpose of trying 
to shorten this a bit, but instead I notice you are going back again, going back 
over the thing more minutely than you did before. 

Mr. Bloch. All right. I want to make myself clear to the Court. I know that 
the Court understands the purport of these questions. If I don't ask them in 
this form, then I may very well have waived my rights to lay the foundation for 
the introduction of certain documents. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 127. 

The CoTiKT. Yes, but don't you think you are laboring the point, really? 

Mr. Bloch. I honestly don't, Your Honor. I feel in good conscience that it 
is my duty to asli these questions. Otherwise, I assure you that I wouldn't ask 
them. This is not going to take long, Your Honor. 

By Mr, E. H. Bloch : 
Q. Did you, in that statement of — we will call it June 15th or June 16th, it 
doesn't make any difference — down here in the Federal building, mention the in- 
cident where Julius Rosenberg is alleged to have come to your house a few days 
after your first furlough here in New York, in January 1945, and asked for cer- 
tain information, and you later that evening wrote out that information? — A. I 
did. 

Q. You did mention that? — ^A. Yes. 

Q. And did you mention the fact that the following morning Julius Rosenberg 
came around and picked up that written information? — A. I don't remember if 
I did it or not. 

Q. You don't remember. And did you mention in that first statement any- 
thing about being introduced by Rosenberg to a man on First Avenue, somewhere 
around January 8th or January 10, 1945? — A. I didn't place the time but I did 
introduce — say I was introduced to a man. 

Q. That answers it. And did you in that first statement detail either roughly 
or with precision the incident which allegedly occurred in the Rosenberg home 
in September 1945 on your second furlough where your wife and Ethel, your 
sister-in-law, and Julius, your brother-in-law — your sister — were grammatically 
changing your verbiage of the report? — A. I did not make such a statement. 

Q. And did you mention in your statement of June 15, 1950, or June 16, 1950, 
anything with relation to the Jello box incident? — A. I did. 

Q. You did. And did you mention in your statement anything about the 
fact that sometime later — and here I am relying on my memory — whether it 
is 1946 or 1947 or 1948 — at any rate, while you were in business with Julius, 
that you got an offer to go to college? — A. I don't know if I made it in that 
statement or not. 

Q. You are not sure of that? 

The CouET. You say in that statement, did you make it? 
The Witness. I made it in subsequent statements ; yes. 

The Court. Is there anything that you testified to here today that you 
baven't made in the previous statement? 
The Witness. There isn't ; no. 

Q. At any rate, you are not sure as to whether or not you mentioned this 
invitation to go to college? — A. In the first statement? 

Q. I am only talking about the first statement now. — A. That is correct. 
Q. Is that your answer, you don't remember? — A. I don't remember. 
Q. Did you mention to the FBI that you got $500 from Gold out in Albuquerque 
in June 1945? — A. I believe I mentioned money ; yes. 

Q. No — you mentioned money. Did you mention this specific sum of $500? — 
A. It is — I didn't remember the exact sum of money at the time. 

Q. You knew on June 15, 1950, didn't you, precisely how much money you 
had gotten from Gold? — A. No; I didn't. I had forgotten it and it was just in 
the subsequent times when I thought it over I remembered how much money 
it was. 

Q. But before June 15. 1950, and during the intervening period from June 
1945 — that is about five years — did you at any time know precisely how much 
Gold gave you in the early part of June 1945?— A. At certain times a man's 
mind is funny. Sometimes I will remember it and sometimes I won't later on. 
There was no reason to recall it in that period. 

Q. You weren't a rich man in June 1945, were you? — A. I have never been 
a rich man. 

Q. No: and $500 was a big sum to you, wasn't it?— A. Pretty big. 
Q. And it enabled you and your wife to live and have some luxuries, didn't 
it? — A. It enabled us to live. 

Q. All right. And you want to say now that you did not remember the 
precise sum of money that Gold gave you in the early part of June 1945?— A. 

I did not remember the precise sum of money and 

Q. All right, that is an answer? — A.— later times I did remember it and I 
did put it down. 

Q. Now, did you mention to the FBI about $200 being given to you by Rosen- 
berg in September 1945 in his apartment? — A. I did not. 



128 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. And did yon mention to the FBI on Jnne 15th and 16th that you had 
received a thousand dollars from Rosenberg in February 1950? — A. I did not say 
that at all. 

Q. And did you mention to the FBI A. Because it was not February 1950 

that I received the thousand dollars. 

Q. I heg your pardon — I am sorry, you are richt. It was June, was it? — A. It 
was June — -it was May 1950 I received it. 

Q. Did you mention anything about that thousand dollars? — A. I mentioned it; 
yes. 

Q. That you got a thousand dollars from Rosenberg? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did you mention it A. I did not. I don't believe it was in the statement 

but in subsequent statements it was there. 

Q. Now, please, Mr. Gi'eenglass, let us understand each other. — A. You are 
saying 

Q. I am talking now solely and directing my inquiries exclusively .to what you 
told the FBI on the evening of June 15, 1950, and what went into that statement. 

IMr. roHN. Your Honor 

The Witness. Now I 

Mr. CoHN. Just a minute, Mr. Greenglass. I see a difficulty right there. He 
said "what you told the FBI and what went into the statement." I don't think 
it has been established that everything he told the FBI did go into the statement. 
It usually doesn't. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Mr. Cohn. I agree with you. If there is any unclarity about 
it in the re^-ord I want to clarify the record. 

Q. Was there anything in your statement which you signed on the evening of 
June 15, 1950, here in the Federal Building about the receipt of $1,000 from Rosen- 
berg in the year 1950? — A. I don't believe it was in the statement ; no. 

Q. All right. 

The Court. But you had told them about it? 

The Witness. I had told them about it. 

Q. And did you have incorporated in your statement or did you yourself incor- 
porate in your statement anything about the receipt of $4,000 from Rosenberg 
in this brown bag which is marked "Government's Exhibit 10"? — A. I — I had 
told them about this — what they put in the statement, what they wanted me to 
put into the statement, what they wanted me to put into the statement in the first 
thing, they told me was just to make a general statement, that is all. 

Q. Now, isn't it your testimony that you wrote out the statement? — A. That is 
right but it was getting quite late and I mean I am sure that I would have an- 
another opportunity to write more. 

By the Court : 

Q. Do you remember which agent told you just to make a general statement? — 
A. Well, it was just a general statement. 

Q. I say, do you remember whicli agent told you to make a general statement? — 
A. I don't remember which one said to make a general statement. It was just a 
general statement. I said, "Whatever I- will remember more I will write as 
more" — I mean it was getting quite late at the time. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Well, at any rate, whether it was late or early is it your testimony now 
that the $4,000 was not incorporated in your written statement of June 15, 1950? — 
A. I can't say that it was and I can't say that it wasn't. I don't remember if I 
did put it in or not. 

Q. It may have been omitted? — A. It may have been put in, too. 

Q. Now,^is it your testimony that you mentioned the $4,000 to the FBI repre- 
sentatives that evening? — A. I did and I will tell you how I know that, because 
when they searched the house they couldn't find it and I told them then later 
on that I had given it away. 

Q. Now, did you tell them that evening to whom you had given that money? — 
A. I don't remember that either. 

Q. Didn't one of the FBI representatives when you mentioned the $4,000 ask 
you where the $4,000 is'? — A. He must have. I just don't remember saying any- 
thing to him about where it was. 

Q. Well, at that time you had given the $4,000, at least in terms of custody, to 
your brother-in-law, had you not? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you want to conceal from the FBI the name of the person who was 
holding that money for you? — A. No ; I wasn't concealing it. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 129 

Q. But you did, didn't you? — A. No; because when I called up my brother-in- 
law Louis Abel, I told him I was calling my brother-in-law Louis Abel to get 
in touch with a lawyer. I didn't conceal it from them at all. 

Q. Did you tell them either directly or in the conversation that you had with 
your brother-in-law that evening from this building that your brother-in-law 
had $4,000 of your money? — A. Well, I tell you, I don't remember actually telling 
him that or not. I probably did tell it to him. I am not saying that I remember 
it or not. 

Q. But you are not sure? — A. I am not sure that I did or I didn't. 

Q. All right, that is an answer. Did you tell the FBI that evening anything 
about the gold watches and the console table that the Rosenbergs were alleged 
to have received from Russians? — A. Mr. Bloch 

Q. Well, now, if you don't remember A. I don't remember. 

Q. Well, then, say so. Then say so. I d-on't expect you to answer 

By the Court : 

Q. Is that all you wanted to say, INIr. Greenglass? — A. No. I wanted to say 
more but he doesn't allow me to. 

Q. Well, I think I am running this courtroom. What is it you want to say? — 
A. Well, what I wanted to say is all these little details was something I remem- 
bered as time went on. It was just a few hours that I was there and I put down 
what I remembered without trying to conceal a thing. 

Q. It wasn't your intention at that time to give every minute detail? — A. Not 
intention but I couldn't remember every minute detail that had occurred. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch :, 

Q. How many questions A. It is just beyond human ability to do so. 

Q. All right, let us see. You got to this building at about 7.00 or 7.30, didn't 
you? 

The Court. Let us not review that whole story over again. I think we all 
have a slight bit of intelligence. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. All right. 

The Court. We all know by now that he got here at 7.00 or 7.30. 

Q. Now. did you disclose to the FBI directly 

Mr. E. H. Block. I withdraw that. 

Q. That evening, did you ask any of the FBI representatives to go easy on 
your wife? — A. I did not say any such thing. 

Q. Now, Mr. Greenglass, your wife has never been arrested, has she? — A. She 
has not. 

Q. And she has never been indicted, has she? — A. She has not. 

Q. And she has not pleaded guilty to any conspiracy to commit espionage, has 
she? — A. She has not. 

Q. And your wife is at the present time home taking care of your children ; 
isn't that right?— A. That's right. 

Q. Is that why you hired Mr. Rogge or Mr. Fabricant? — A. I don't see where 
one question has to do with the other. 

Q. I am asking you. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move that the answer be stricken out. 

The Court. The answer is stricken out. 

Answer his question. 

The Witness. I don't understand what you mean. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Would you mind rereading the question ? 

The Court. Well, he doesn't understand your question. Maybe you can 
rephrase it for him. 

Q. You wanted a lawyer, did you not?— A. That's right. 

Q. And you wanted a lawyer, not before you signed a statement, but after you 
signed a statement ; isn't that right — A. I just — it just came up at that time that 
we were free to get a lawyer and I got a lawyer at that time. 

Q. And you were free to get a lawyer, at least you felt free to get a lawyer at 
about 2 o'clock in the morning, after you had signed your statement ; is that 
correct? — A. That's right. 

Q. And then j'ou made attempts to get a lawyer; isn't that right? — A. That's 
right. 

Q. You called up your brother-in-law and you told him, "Get a lawyer," 
didn't you? — A. That's right. 

Q. Or words to that effect. Now, I am asking you whether or not, when you 
called up your brother-in-law to get a lawyer, you had in your mind that that 
lawyer should represent your wife? — A. To represent me. 



130 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Only you? — A. When I say that, I don't know who else was involved, in the 
ser:;:e that I don't know what the Government was going to do. They were just 
talking to me, 

Q. You involved your wife that night, did you not? — ^A. Well, I don't know 
sufficiently enough about the law to realize that I did involve my wife. 

Q. Didn't you tell the FBI that night that your wife came out to Albuquerque? — 
A. That is absolutely true. 

Q. And made an invitation to you to commit espionage ; you told him that, did 
you not? — A. That's right. 

Q. You also told them, did you not, that she had accompanied you to Rosen- 
berg's house in September 1945 ; you told them that, did you not? — A. That's right. 

Q. You also told them that your wife had received from you the money that 
Gold had given to you in June 1945; you told them that, did you not? — A. I did, 

Q. Isn't that your testimony just within the last couple of minutes? — A. That's 
right. 

Q. All right, and you also told them 

The Court. Don't repeat it all, 

Q. — that your wife 

The Court. Don't repeat it all, Mr. Bloch. We know. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. All right, just the last question on this line. I think I will 
be all inclusive then. 

Q. And you also told the FBI, did you not, that night that your wife got one- 
half of that side of the Jello box, after arrangements had been made for her to 
go out to Denver and to meet somebody, as a means of identification? — A, What is 
that? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I withdraw the question. 

Q. Did you tell the FBI about your wife's participation in the Jello box inci- 
dent?— A. I did. 

Q. All right. — A. But let me point out, as a lawyer — as I wasn't a lawyer, I 
didn't know it was an overt act or anything else. How was I to know that? I 
just told them the story as it happened. That was all I was interested in getting 
out. 

Q. You were interested in getting out? — A. I said, all I was interested in was 
getting out the story. Don't misconstrue my words. 

Q. Did you at any time think of your wife while you were down here telling 
your story to the FBI? — A. Of course I thought of her. 

The Court. Did he think of her in what respect? He must have; he men- 
tioned her name. 

Q. Did you think of your wife with respect to the fact that she may be a de- 
fendant A. I did. 

Q. In a criminal proceeding? — A. I did. 

Q. And was that at least one of the factors which motivated you in getting 
a lawyer? — A. It didn't motivate me to get a lawyer. At that time I didn't 
even think about it. 

The Court. Supposing you tell us why did you get a lawyer? 

The Witness. I got a lawyer to represent me in court, that is aU. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Represent you in court? — A. That's right. 

Q. As a matter of fact, when you were finally arraigned the following after- 
noon and after you had spoken to Mr. Fabricant in the morning and to Mr, 
Rogge at or about the time of the arraignment, did Mr. Rogge ask for low bail 
for you? — A. Yes, he did. 

The Court. May I ask what is the relevancy of whether he asked for low bail? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I will come to it in just a moment. 

Mr. CoHN. I don't know what that has to do with tliis. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am going to come to it right now. 

Q. Didn't you tell your lawyers to fight this case for you? — A. I did not, 

Q. Now, after you were arraigned, were you then taken to a jail? — A. I was, 

Q. And were you taken to the Federal House of Detention?— A. I was. 

Q. At West Street and West 11th Street, Manhattan?— A. I was, 

Q. What time did you get there? — A. It was in the afternoon. 

Q. Were you put in solitary confinement? — A. I was. 

Q. How long did you remain in solitary confinement? — A. About three days, 

Q. And you were restricted, were you not, in your movements there, to your 
cell?— A. Yes. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 131 

Q. And you weren't permitted during those three days any of the privileges 
that you subsequently found other prisoners had, with respect to walking on 
the roof and other recreational facilities that were made available to them? — A. 
That's right. 

Q. Now, during those three days, did you have any visitors? — A. No. 

Q. Did you ask anybody for permission to receive visitors? — A. I don't believe 
I did. The reason I was confined to those three days 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Now, I move to- strike out any gratuitous remarks of the 
witness. 

The CoTTRT. I will let him give the reason. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except, your Honor. 

The Witness (continuing). The reason, I tried to find out, was because 
there was an erroneous story in the newspapers to the effect that I was going 
to commit suicide, which was far from the truth ; so the keeper, who read 
the story, felt, well, he wasn't going to take it on himself, so he had me put in 
solitary and had my laces taken off my shoes and my belt taken away from me 
so I couldn't commit suicide. That was the whole story. There was no other 
reason. 

Q. Did you tell anybody that you were going to commit suicide? — A. No. 

Q. Now, when for the first time did you have a visitor after you were taken 
to the Federal House of Detention? — A. I don't know exactly. I had a visitor. 

The Court. May I ask what the relevancy of this is? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Yes. If you want me to state it in front of the jury, I will, 
but I think I ought to state it in front of the bench. 

The Court. Come up. 

«; • • • • • * 

By Mr. E. H. Block : 

Q. Mr. Greenglass, did you hire Mr. Rogge's firm to defend you against the 
accusation that was made against you by the United States Government as 
reflected by the complaint before the Commissioner on June 16, 1950? — A, I hired 
Mr. Rogge. 

Q. Is that your best answer? — A. That is my best answer. 

The Court. But did you hire him to defend you or did you hire him to repre- 
sent you? 

The Witness. Well, that is what I was worrying about his question. I said I 
hired Mr. Rogge. 

Q. Now after these three days in solitary were you finally taken out and put 
into a cell with other prisoners? — A. I was. 

Q. And you were treated just the way all other prisoners were treated? — 
A. That is right ; I was. 

Q. Is that right?— A. That is right. 

Q. When was the first time that you left the Federal House of Detention after 
you were first brought there? — A. When they arrested Julius Rosenberg, the next 
day, I was taken out. It was over a week end, so Monday I was taken out. 

Q. Do you know when he was arrested V — A. I don't remember the date. 

Q. Was it about a month after you were arrested? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now, when you were down here in the Federal Building on your arraign- 
ment on June 16, 1950, were you aware of the fact that Julius Rosenberg that 
day was down in this building being interrogated by FBI representatives? — 
A. t was not aware of the fact. 

Q. When did you find out about that? — A. I didn't. I wasn't aware of that 
fact. 

Q. You still don't know it? — ^A. I mean I know it now. 

Q. No. I mean up to the time I directed your attention to that? — ^A. I don't 
understand you. 

Q. Well, is this the first time that you are hearing that Julius Rosenberg was 
being interrogated by FBI agents in the Federal Building on June 16, 1950? — 
A, Well, the FBI agents had never told me that they did. 

Q They didn't tell you. You didn't speak to Julius Rosenberg in this Federal 
Building on July 16, 1950?— A. July 16th? 

Q. I am sorry, June 16th. — A. Speak to Julius Rosenberg? No. 

Q. Did you see him in this building on that day? — A. I don't believe I did. 

Q. Did anybody ever tell you up to that time that I am now directing the 
subject to your attention, that Julius Rosenberg was in this building on June 16, 
1950, and after a number of hours of interrogation he was permitted to ga 
home? — A. Mr. Bloch, I will say that somebody told me that Julius had been 



132 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

interrogated but he wasn't told as to the date — I wasn't told the date or when 
that interrogation occurred, but my mother did tell me that on a visit. 

Q. And that was within a few days after you were arrested; is that right ?^ — 
A. Well, I don't know when she told it to me. 

Q. You don't remember? — A. I do not remember when she told it to me. 

Q. All right. Now while you were in the Federal House of Detention and after 
you had been released from solitary continement did you tell any of the prisoners 
there that you were going to fight this case against you?— A. I had been told by 
my lawyer to just act like they act, and "Don't make any trouble for yourself." 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move that the answer be stricken out as not responsive. 

Mr. CoHN. I object to it being stricken. 

The Court. I will let it stand. 

The Witness (continuing). So I 

Q. Did you A. Whatever they said, I agreed with them. 

Q. Did you on your own initiative A. I never on my own initiative. 

Q. Tell them or any of them that you were going to fight this charge against 
you? — A. I never told them that on my own initiative. 

The Court. Well, you had already confessed, hadn't you? 

The Witness. Certainly, certainly, but you see the idea was it made it un- 
comfortable 

The Court. Don't tell me about any ideas. 

Q. Now, when was tlie first time that you left the Federal House of Detention 
to come down to this building after you were first lodged there? — A. I don't 
know — a week or so, maybe less. I don't know the exact times. 

Q. About a week? Would that be a fair statement? — A. Well, I won't even 
say that because I don't remember when I came back here. 

Q. At any rate, there came a time when you were taken out of the Federal 
House of Detention and brought down to this Federal Building? — A. That is 
right. 

Q. Were you examined by any of the representatives of the Government at 
that time"? — A. I was. 

Q. Was your lawyer present? — A. He had been present at some other times 

Q. I am talking about this time. Try to fasten your mind on the sipeciflc date 
or incident and I think we will get along here. — A. How can I fasten my mind on 
a specific date or incident? Are you saying when I came down I was interviewed 
by anybody? Yes, I was. 

Q. And was your lawyer present at the time? — A. There were other times my 
lawyer was present. I don't remember whether it was the third time, fourth time, 
or the fifteenth time. 

Q. If you don't remember, say so. Nobody is going to take your head off. Your 
best answer is that you don't remember whether your lawyer was present the 
first time you were brought down here? — A. That is right. 

Q. After you were taken from the Federal House of Detention, is that right? — 
A. That is right. 

Q. When did you get down here that day? — A. I don't even remember the day. 

Q. And how long were you here? — A. If I don't remember the day I am cer- 
tainly not going to remember how long I was here. 

Q. Do you remember what you talked about to the FBI? — A. When I came 
down to talk to the FBI I talked about a number of things ; whatever their in- 
terrogation led to, it loosened the springs of my memory and I was able to 
remember things that I had forgotten. 

Q. Was a stenographer present? — A. Usually I talked to them and they write 
It down in longhand. 

Q. Did you sign a statement that day? — A. I don't remember if I signed a 
statement that day, but I signed statements, plenty of statements. 

Q. From that first time when you were taken from the Federal House of Deten- 
tion to come down to the Federal Building here how many times in all did you 
come down from the Federal House of Detention to this building to be interviewed 
by various representatives of the Government? — A. I don't know. 

Q. How long were you in all lodged in the Federal House of Dstention? — 
A. About a month. 

Q. And were you then transferred to another prison? — A. I was. 

Q. Were you transferred to the Tombs? — A. I was transferred to the Tombs. 

Q. And have you been lodged at the Tombs since that time? — A. I have been. 

Q. Have you seen your wife while you were lodged either in the Federal House 
of Detention or in the Tombs at any place outside of those two penal institu- 
tions? — A. What was that again? 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 133 

Q. Did you ever see your wife since your arrest at some place outside tlie West 
Street Jail or the Tombs? — A. 1 have. 

Q. Where did you see herV — A. I saw her at the Federal Building here, 

Q. Did you also see your children here? — A. I did. 

Q. Did you get a special room to see her? — A. The same room that Sobell used 
when his wife and child came to see him. 

Q. And where was that? — A. llight here in the Marshal's chambers. 

Q. You mean downstairs? — A. Downstairs. 

Q. In the .jail? — A. In the jail. 

Q. And did you discuss with your wife the testimony that you were going 
to give on this trial? — A. I have been instructed originally not to discuss testi- 
mony with my wife or any other person and I did not. 

Q. You did not? Not one word? — A. Not a word. 

Q. How many times in all would you say you saw your wife since your 
arrest? — A. As many times as the Tombs would permit. 

Q. Now let us be a little more specific. Give us your best estimate of the 
number of times? 

By the Coukt : 

Q. By that you mean that she came on the regular visiting days? — A. On 
the regular visiting days. 

Q. There were no special days arranged? — A. No. 
Q. For her visit?— A. No. 

By Mr. E. H. Block : 

Q. Y(.u have never been out of the confines 'of a jail since your arrest, have 
you? — A. Except to come to the Federal Building. 

Q. This is still jail ; you were always in the custody of the Marshal, weren't 
you? — A. That is right. 

Q. Now, has your wife been receiving any money from the Government of the 
United States? — A. No. 

Q. Have you received any money? — A. No. 

Q. Is your wife working? — A. No. 

Q. Do you know whether she is (.n relief? — A. She is not on relief. 
• Q. How old are your children? — A. One is four and one is nine months. 

Q. How old are Ethel's children? — A. One is seven and one is three or four — 
three. 

Q. Can you estimate even roughly how many written statements you have 
given to the authorities?^ — A. I would say about six or seven — what do you mean 
by written? I mean it may not have been written. 

Q. Well let us clarify it. How many statements have you given to the FBI 
or any other of the Government agents or ofiicials where you actually signed your 
name at the end of certain printed matter? — A. I would say about six or seven. 

Q. And how many times in all if you can give a rough estimate besides those 
six or seven occasions were you cpiestioned where a stenographer was present? — 
A. I don't remember any stenographer. 

Q. Would you say then that all in all you gave only six or seven statements 
which would include the taking either by notes or otlierwise of what you were 
saying? — A. Mr. Bloch, you will have to clarify that. 

Q. All right, I want to clarify it because I want to clarify it for everybody. 
There were occasions were there not when a stenc grapher was present when you 
were asked certain questions? — A. At times there were, yes. 

Q. Now, at those times did you sign written statements? — A. I don't think so. 

Q. In other words, besides the six or seven written statements there were 
other occasions when you were asked questions and a stenographer took down 
the questions and your answers? — A. That is correct. 

Q. Is that correct? — A. Yes. 

Q. How many times in all would you say there was a stenographer present at 
which you were asked questions and answers and they were taken down and 
transcribed? — A. I couldn't give you an estimate. 

Q. More than one? — A. More than one what? The time 

Q. More than one occasion when that happene;!? — A. Yes, I suppose so. 

Q. More than five?— A. You got me. I really— I can't give you an estimate 
of times on things like that. 

Q. When did you first testify before a grand jury sitting in this court — 
I withdraw that, if I may, your Honor. You know, do you not, that you have 
been indicted as a defendant in a criminal proceeding ijrought by the" Govern- 
ment of the United States sitting in a District Court of the United States for 



134 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

the District of New Mexico charging you with the crime of conspiracy to commit 
espionage V 

Mr. CoH^r. Your Honor, I think Mr. Bloch is going to start going into matters- 
which involve legal technicalities or which have no relevancy to the issues here. 
I think it is improper cross-examination. If he wants to go to the bench I 
will be glad to do that. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Certainly. 

ii: « * 4: * * * 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I withdraw the last question. 

Q. In addition to the charge which has been brought against you here and 
which is the basis for this trial and the issues in this trial, is there another 
charge pending against you in the United States District Court for the District 
of New Mexico to which you haven't pleaded and which still is unresolved? — 
A. Is this within my compass to know this? I mean I don't think I even know it. 

The Court. Now don't ask any questions. He asked you a question. 

The Witness. But I don't know. 

The Court. If you don't know say you don't know. 

The Witness. I don't know. 

Q. You don't know about that? You pleaded guilty to this charge which forma 
the subject matter of this trial, did you not? — A. That is right. 

Q. You are a defendant? — A. I am. 

Q. When did you plead guilty? 

By the Court : 

Q. Do you remember the date? — A. No, I can't remember the date. 
Q. Why don't you just say that if you don't remember it. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. You pleaded guilty did you not in this building to this charge? — A. I did. 

Q. And would it refresh your recollection if I told you that you pleaded guilty 
in Room 318?— A. Yes. 

Q. And would it refresh your recollection if I told you that your lawyer was 
present at the time you pleaded guilty ? — A. That is right. 

Q. How many months ago 

Mr. Saypol. Just a minute. What is happening here? Is his recollection being 
refreshed or is he testifying. The form of the question was such that the 
witness can't give a clear answer. What transpired is a matter of record. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. All right. 

The Court. Proceed. 

Q. Now, does that refresh your recollection as to the date when you pleaded 
guilty? — A. I pleaded guilty to the charge. 

Q. Was that many, many months ago? — A. I pleaded guilty to an indictment 
earlier and I pleaded guilty to this indictment. I withdrew the plea on the 
earlier indictment at the same time. 

The Court. This is a superseding indictment. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. In other words, this is a superseding indictment. 

The Court. Yes. 

Q. Now, how many months ago did you first plead guilty to this charge of 
conspiracy to commit espionage? Do you remember that? — A. Back in last year. 

Q. Last year. Have you been sentenced? — A. I have not been sentenced. 

Q. Do you believe that by giving testimony in this case that you will be 
helped in terms of the severity of the sentence to be imposed upon you by the 
Court? — A. The Court — it is entirely within the discretion of the Court to give 
the sentence, and whatever I do is just — it depends on the Court and nothing 
else but the Court. 

Q. Now I would be — I would ask you to be good enough to answer my ques- 
tion. Do you believe that the Court will be easier on you 

Mr. CoHN. Your Honor, I object. 

Q. — because you are testifying here 

Mr. Corn. Your Honor, I object. 

Q. — the way jou did? 

Mr. CoHN. I object to the question as to form, the witness' belief. 

The Court. I believe that what he is trying to get at is a motive for his 
testimony. 

Mr. CoHN. Yes. I have no objection to a proper question. 

The CoxjRT. So I will permit him to ask the question. 

The Witness. I don't believe that I in testifying will help myself to that great 
an extent. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 135 

Q. When you say "to that m-eat extent," would you like to clarify that for 
the jury? — A. To any great extent. 

Q. Would you say to any extent? — A. To any extent. 

Q. All right. Do you believe that by testifying here in this trial that you 
will help your wife? — A. I don't know what the Government has in mind with 
my wife and I can't answer for them. 

Q. You know, of course, that so far nothing has happened to your wife in 
terms of any criminal proceedings 

The Court. That has been answered. 

Mr. CoHN. It has been answered. 

Q. — or brought against her? 

The Court. You don't have to answer that. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

Q. Let me ask you, Mr. Greenglass, did you ever keep a memorandum book or 
a diary? — A. No, I never did. 

Q. So that when you testified here today and yesterday and the day before 
yesterday, you were relying upon your memory, is that right? — A. Upon my 
memory, yes. 

Q. And solely upon your memory? — A. That's right. 

Q. And when you drew the sketches — one of them I believe in June 19.50 and 
the other two a day or two before you testified — and I think they are reflected 
and marked Government's Exhibits 2, 6 and 7 — did you rely solely on your 
memory in making those sketches? — A. I did. 

Q. Now, when was the last day that you worked at the Los Alamos project? — A. 
1946, February. 

Q. What mouth? — A. February. 

Q. That was about four and a half years ago? — A. That's right. 

Q. And you relied solely upon your memory? — A. I did. 

Q. During all of your months in jail did anybody go over with you any subject 
matter which related directly to those sketches that were introduced in evidence 
here as Government's Exhibits 2, 6 and 7? 

Mr. CoHN. I don't know what Mr. Bloch means "go over with you." I think 
if he would clarify that 

The Court. Try to clarify it for him. 

Q. Did you draw any sketches for any of the FBI men or any agents of 
Mr. Saypol's staff prior to the time you came to testify here? — A. I did. 

Q. Was that the one that has been marked Government's Exhibit 2? — A. No. 

Q. How many sketches did you draw for them?— A. They were the same 
sketches, the only thing I used the ruler to accomplish this. The others were 
freehand. 

.Q. Freehand?— A. That's all. 

Q. Now, were you given any reference books or textbooks while you were 
in jail since your arrest, relating to any scientific matter? — A. No ; I didn't — 
nobody gave me any. 

Q. Did you read any scientific books while you have been in jail? — A. Just 
science fiction, 

Q. That is, of course, not a basic theoretical journal, is it? — A. No. 

Q. That is a popular kind of scientific periodical? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now, Mr. Greenglass, I believe you testified that you graduated from high 
school here in New York City?— A. Yes. 

Q. And I think you testified that you went to Brooklyn Polytech? — A. Right. 

Q. Is that correct? — A. Yes. 

Q. How long did you go to Brooklyn Polytech? — A. Six months. 

Q. And how many courses did you take during those six months? — A. About 
eight different courses. 

Q. And did you fail 

Mr. CoHN. Oh, I object to that, your Honor. What difference does it make? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am coming to a new subject now, your Honor. 

The Court. I assume you are. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Yes ; and I wish you will bear with me, because I am going 
to connect this up. 

The Court. All right. 

Mr. CoHN. Well, I will let Mr. Bloch finish his question. That is as far as I 
will commit myself at the moment, your Honor. 

The Court. Right. 

Q. Did you fail in your subjects? 

81095—51 10 



136 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. CouN. I would now object to that, your Honor. I don't see the relevancy 
of whether he or anybody else failed in subjects might have and it is certainly 
not proper cross-examination. 

The Court. Before you answer that question, let me ask you : These sketches 
that are in evidence, are they the product of your own mind? By that I mean, 
were you helped by anybody on the outside in drawing those sketches? 

The Witness. Nobody else, just myself. 

The Court. Did anybody tell you to change any line here or change any line 
there? 

The Witness. Nobody told me anything like that. 

The Court. Very well. 

Now, you ask your question. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Are you permitting it, your Honor? 

The Court. Yes. What subject? Be specific. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. All right. 

The Witness. I will tell the story. 

Mr. E. H. BiocH. Look, Mr. Greenglass— — 

The Witness. I was quite young at the time, about 18, and I liked to play 
around more than I liked to go to school, so I cut classes almost the whole term. 
Simple. 

Q. How many of the eight courses that you took did you fail? — A. I failed 
them all. 

Q. And did you then go to Pratt Institute? — A. That's right. 

Q. How long did you attend Pratt Institute? — A. I attended it for one semes- 
ter and a half, and the half of the other semester I had to work at night, so I 
had to withdraw from my classes which was allowed by the school, and I went to 
work at night, and I did not fail those courses. As a matter of fact, I got good 
marks. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Congratulations. 

The Court. Strike that from the record. 

Q. Did you ever get. a degree in science? — A. I did not get a degree. 

Q. Did you ever get a B. S.? — A. I did not. 

Q. Did you ever get any engineering degree? — A. I did not. 

Q. From any recognized institution? — A. I did not. 

Q. Have you pursued any other organized and formal courses, held under the 
auspices of a recognized educational institution, apart from the Brooklyn Poly- 
tech and the Pratt Institute courses that you have mentioned you took? — A. I 
did not. 

Q. Do you know anything about the basic theory of atomic energy? — A. I know 
something about it ; yes. I am no scientific — I am no scientific expert, but I know 
something about it. 

Q. Did you ever take courses in calculus? — A. No. 

Q. Differential calculus? — A. I did not. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am just looking for a piece of paper, your Honor. 

Q. Or thermodynamics? — A. I did not. 

Q. Or nuclear physics? — A. I did not. 

Q. Or atomic physics? — A. I did not. 

Q. Or quantum mechanics? — A. I did not. 

Q. Or advanced calculus? — A. I did not. 

******* 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. And I might say I never took any of these courses. 

Q. Have you read any basic works on any of the subjects that I have just 
asked you about? — A. No. 

Q. Do you know what an isotope is? — A. I do. 

Q. What is it? — A. An isotope is an element having the same atomic structure, 
but having a different atomic weight. 

Q. Now, did you learn that in Los Alamos? — A. I picked it up here and there. 

Q. When you came to Los Alamos, you were a machinist, were you not? — A. I 
was. 

Q. What was your rating in the Army? — A. T/5. 

Q. Had you. prior to the time you came to Los Alamos, done any work as a 
machinist in the Army of the United States? — A. I had. 

Q. Where? — A. At a number of places. 

Q. Well, do you mind detailing them, and the length of time that you practiced 
the trade of machinist in the Army of the United States, irior to the time you 
got to Los Alamos? — A. I was a machinist at Fort Ord. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 137 

Q. For how long? — ^A. As long as the company was there, I was a machinist 
there. 

Q. For how long was that? — A. Three months. I was a machinist at South- 
gate, Calit'ornia, in the General Motors Tank Arsenal. 

Q. How long? — A. As long as the company was tLiere, I was a machinist there. 

Q. How long was that? — A. A period of four weeks. 

Q. That is four months so far, right? — A. I was at the P. O. M., Pomona 
Ordnance Base, three months there ; I was at Aberdeen Proving Grounds, three 
months there. 

Q. That is seven ; that is ten. — A. Okay, that is ten right there in the Army. 

Q. All right. — A. And every other post that I ever worked on, was in, in the 
Army, I worked as a machinist. 

Q. Were you classified in the Army as a machinist? — A. I was classified — 
I had two classifications. 

Q. I am talking about the first one, before your promotions. — A. Before my 
promotions? I was chissified — when you originally come into the Army you have 
just a basic classification, which means you have taken basic training. After that 
you have certain skilled classifications. I had two skilled classifications. 

Q. What were they ? — A. One was automotive machinist and one was machinist 
and toolmaker. 

Q. And when you got to Los Alamos, were you an automotive machinist or a 
machinist? — A. A machinist. 

Q. And you say that you first worked in a certain building called the "C" 
building — "E" building, I am sorry? — A. "E" building. 

Q. Now, how many machinists besides you were in that building? — A. At the 
time, about four, five, maybe six. 

The CoiTRT. Is this a convenient place to break off and recess? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I think so. 

The Court. All right, we will take our recess. 

May I see counsel, please. 

( Discussion at the bench off the record. ) 

(Short recess.) 

Q. I believe, Mr. Greenglass, that before recess we were discussing your job 
as a machinist in the Army. Now at the E Building how many other machinists 
were there besides you ? — A. There was about four or five or maybe even six. 

Q. And did they run up to as high as ten at times? — A. That's right. 

Q. And you had an immediate supervisor, did you not? — ^A. I did. 

Q. And his name was what? — A. His name was Demars. 

Q. And besides Demars there was Sergeant Fitzpatrick? — A. That is right. 

Q. And above Sergeant Fitzpatrick there was Dr A. Kistiakowski. 

Q. Is he the gentleman who testified here? — A. He is not. 

Q. Now, when the E shop moved into the Theta Building did the workers in the 
E shop remain as a departmental unit or were you joined or did you join with 
other machinists? — A. No; it was the same shop. 

Q. Were there any other machine shops in the Theta Building? — A. No other 
machine shops in the Theta Building. 

Q. Now when you were in the E Building the only persons or employees who 
were working in that building were the five or six or ten mechanics, machinists 
with their supervisors, is that right? — ^A. That is right 

Q. Now, how about A. In working in the building or in the shop? You 

said "building." 

Q. Were there other employees working in the E Building? — A. Yes. 

Q. How many others? — A. I can't tell exactly. There was laboratories all over 
the building. 

Q. And liow about when you moved into the Theta Building? — A. There were 
other employees working there, too. 

Q. Was the Theta Building a bigger building than the E Building? — A. Well, 
there was more room for our group in it. It wasn't bigger. 

Q. You mean it wasn't bigger physically"? — A. It wasn't bigger physically. 

Q. Were there more employees working in the Theta Building than in the E 
Building? — A. I don't know. 

Q. Were there more machinists working in the Theta Building than in the 
E Building?— A. No. 

Q. About the same?— A. That is right. 

Q. Now with respect to the security regulations at Los Alamos were you 
searched at all when you came in to report to work in the morning? — A. No. 

Q. I'ardon me? — A. No. 

Q. Were you searched at all when you quit at the end of the day? — A. No. 



138 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Were there any security police or guards around? — A. There were. 
Q. Were they in the E Building? — A. They weren't in the buildings; no. 
Q. Were they in the Theta Building— were they outside the building? — A. 
They were at the entrance to the building — at each entrance. 

Q. When you came to work in the morning and when you left at the end of 
the working day was it necessary for you to pass through this screen of security 
police? — A. That's right. 

Q. Did those security police look over any packages or any other thing that 
you may have had on your person either coming in or going out?^ — -A. They did 
that. 

Q. And were you frisked — do you know what "frisked" is? — A. I have learned. 

Q. Well — you have learned. You learned that in jail. All right, then we both 
understand the term. Were you frisked when you came in to work in the morn- 
ing or when you quit in the evening? 

Mr. Saypol. I think Mr. Bloch ought to be relieved of any unconscious impli- 
cation that he cast upon himself. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I didn't mean it ; I didn't mean it. 

Q. Frisk means somebody touching your person to find out whether you have 
something on your person; isn't that right? Isn't that the definition of frisk? — 
A. That is right. 

Q. Now, did you at any time ever take out of the Los Alamos project to your 
home or to any quarters which you were using for dwelling ijurposes any blue- 
print or any sketch during any of the months or years that you worked at the 
project?— A. No; I didn't. 

Q. How long did you continue to work as a machinist until you were promoted 
to the assistant foreman's position? — A. From about March 1945 — I still con- 
tinued to work as a machinist. 

Q. But you supervised other men? — A. Yes. I mean I still 

Q. You were what one would call a working foreman? — A. That is right. 

Q. So that when your wife came down to visit you in Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, in November 1944, and during the time when you received your first 
furlough in New York in January 1945, you had not as yet been promoted to be 
an assistant foreman, is that correct? — A. When my wife was out there I was 
already. 

Q. No ; maybe I misunderstood you. Let us clarify the record. When you 
became an assistant foreman, I believe you said sometime in 1945 — maybe I 
didn't A. I said about March 1945. 

Q. March 1945?— A. Yes. 

Q. You wife came out to see you for the first time? — A. Oh, in 1944, that is 
right. 

Q. And your first furlough to New York was in January? — A. That is right. 

Q. At that time you were still a machinist and you had not been promoted 
to be an assistant foreman or working foreman, is that right? — A. That is 
right. 

Q. And while you were working as a machinist until the time you were pro- 
moted to he an assistant foreman, what color badge did you wear around the 
project? — A. I would like to explain that a little, Mr. Bloch. 

Q. Certainly. — A. When I first came to the Project they had three color 
badges. There was a white, blue, and red. Now, the blue badge was the one 
you were supposed to wear if you could know what you were working on but 
nothing further. The white badge knew practically everything. The red was 
where the person wasn't supposed to know anything of what was going on. 

Q. Correct. — A. Now, these badges were changed sometime during the Project. 

Q. During when? — A. During the Project, during the year, that year. 

Q. 1944?— A. 1945. 

Q. No, no — all right. — A. Now wait, let me explain, and then I will go back. 

Q. All right. — A. Now, they changed that. At that time they switched the 
blue to the red position so if you had a red badge it was what you used to have 
when you had a blue badge. At the time you are talking of you had a blue badge 
which was the equivalent later on of the red badge. 

Q. So there was a white badge in 1944 and that badge was worn by the top 
scientists, the real top men in the Project, is that right? — A. Yes. 

Q. The more important officials? — A. Yes. 

Q. All the most important ofiicials? — A. That is right. 

Q. And then came those who were employed regularly at the Project, and 
this is quite rough, people like you? — A. Yes. 

Q. And they wore the blue badge? — A. That is right. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 139 

Q. And people who came in sporadically or temporarily to do work on the 
Project wore the red badge? — A. That is right. 

Q. Let us fix our minds on those badges because I want to cover 1944 on. 
During that year did you procure any information concerning the work at the 
Los Alamos Project from anybody outside the E Building or the Theta Build- 
ing?— A. From November 29th after I had seen my wife until January 1 I did get 
information. 

Q. You did? You were still wearing the blue badge?— A. That is right. 

Q. Now I want you to name one scientist from whom you received un- 
authorized information? — ^A. By that you mean that he knowingly gave me the 
information ? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Now may I have Government's Exhibit 1, please? 

Q. Now, Government's Exhibit 1 in evidence deals with the regulations govern- 
ing the conduct of employees at the Los Alamos Project, does it not? — A. That 
is right. 

Q. This you identified. Is there anything in these regulations which pro- 
hibit an employee from giving information to another employee outside the 
oflScial routine run of business? 

Mr. CoHN. Now, your Honor, I think the exhibit speaks for itself. I tried 
to inquire into the contents of the exhibit and was stopped on the ground that 
the exhibit does speak for itself, and I think it does in exact terminology. 

The CotTRT. No. That is a proper question. 

(Last question read.) 

The Witness. I don't know exactly what it says in there because I haven't 
read it recently, but I suppose it does state something to that effect. 

Q. Now, you stated that after your wife came to visit you around November 29, 
1944, until the time you got your first furlough in January 1945, you did get 
information outside what would come to you in the ofRcial discharge of your 
duties as a machinist, is that right? — A. That is right. 

Q. And did you procure that information from somebody who was not assigned 
permanently to the E — I think at that time you were in the Theta Building, 
weren't you, at the Theta Building? — A. Well, first of all a scientist — it was 
anybody who was employed up there as a scientist. That could be a GI, a 
civilian, and I did procure for instance the fact that Baker was Bohr from a 
man who happened to be a scientist. 

Q. What is the name of that GI ?— A. William Spindel. 

Q. Did you procure any information, to which you believe you were not entitled, 
from any scientist during this period from November 29, 1944, to January 1, 1945? 

Mr. CoHN. I object to that. 

The Court. Upon what groimds? 

Mr. CoHN. I don't think it is relevant. 

The Court. All right. What is the ground ? I don't see the relevancy as to 
■whether he got the information to which he didn't think he was entitled? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. This is on the question of credibility, your Honor. This man 
is testifying that he is relying solely upon memory and he testified that he pro- 
cured certain information. 

The Court. You say it is on the question of credibility? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That is right. 

The Court. You may go ahead. What is your question now? Put it again. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Will you read the question, please. 

(Question read.) 

The Witness. I told about Bohr. 

Q. You told us about Bohr already. You said you got that information from 
this GI, whose name is Spindel. Now I am asking you if you got any information 
from any scientist working on that project during that period? — A. I was in the 
room when I heard discussions about implosion effect experiments, implosion 
effect of lenses, while some scientists were discussing it in the ofHce of the building 
I was in. 

Q. Were you lawfully in that building at the time? — A. I had come in to pick 
somebody up to go to lunch. 

Q. You weren't there unlawfully? — A. No; there was nobody telling me not to 
go into this room or that room. There are certain restricted areas. 

Q. Yes ; but you couldn't wander around the development, could you? — A. All 
over the Tech area, it was perfectly all right for me to go. 

Q. Even when you are a machinist? — A. Absolutely. In my case, in my build- 
ing, in my group, I don't know anybody else. 

Q. We are confining ourselves to the time before you became assistant fore- 
man. — ^A. Yes. 



140 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. Any other incidents?— A. You said "that month." Well, that is all I remem- 
ber for that mouth. 

Q. Now, then, after you returned from New York on your first furlough, did you 
receive any information from any scientist on that project outside of information 
that would come to you through the discharge of your official duties? — A. Yes; 
I did. 

Q. And from whom? — A. Well, it was in the theoretical physics department. 

Q. Where was that located? — A. In the Tech area. 

Q. What building? — A. "T" building, probably. 

Q. "T" building? — A. Probably, and this man was a mathematician who worked 
there, gave me a pretty good idea of what the lenses were about ; he knew the 
physics, I mean, involved. 

Q. Was this in the course of an official lecture that you attended ? — A. No. 

4: * * * * * * 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Now, I believe on your direct examination you told us, in substance, that 
you snooped around to get information ; isn't that right? 

The Court. Don't shake your head. You had better answer. 

The Witness. Oh, yes, yes. 

Q. And you would make it your business to enter into a conversation or 
overhear conversations where you could pick up information? — A. That is 
right. 

Q. Is that correct? — A. Yes. 

Q. Now, could you give us just two instances of information that you picked 
up that way? — A. I came into a room; there was a piece of material on the 
table ; I picked it up and I said. "It is an interesting piece of material and it 
is interestingly machined." The man I spoke to and another man was there said, 
"Oh, that is neutron source," and explained how it was used, in a conversation. 
That, is one way. That is one instance. 

Q. AYas that in the tech area? — A. It was in the tech area. 

Q. All right, give me another instance — just pardon me, Mr. Greenglass. I 
don't like to break the trend of thought, but just for clarity, in connection 
with this first illustration of how you picked up information; were these men, 
who told you about the fact that this piece of material would have something 
to do with neutrons, were these men, these employees, top scientists? — A. Now, 
look, every scientist had a white badge there. 

Q. Were they white-badge men? Let me put it that way — A. One was a 
white-Jbadge man : one wasn't. 

Q. All right. Now go to the second instance. — ^A. Another instance. A man 
came in to me with a sketch, with a piece of material; said, "Machine it up 
so that I would have square corners, so I could lay out a lens; come over and 
pick it up." I would go over to his place; he was a mathematician, a scientist, 
he had laid it out, and I would say, "What is the idea?" He would tell me the 
idea. 

Q. Tricky like, eh ? — A. Nothing tricky about it. 

Mr. CoHN. Your Honor 

The Court. Strike that out. 

IMr. CoHN. I think that should be stricken, your Honor. 

Q. Well, you meant to trick, did you not. the person who was talking? — A. 
Well, I meant to get the information from him. 

Q. By trick, didn't you? 

Mr. CoHN. Your Honor, we have had that many times. 

Mr. E. H. Bi>ocH. All right, I will withdraw it, but I just wanted the Court 
to know that I wasn't using words loosely. 

Mr. Saypol. That is why it was objected to, because it wasn't being used 
loosely. 

The CoiTRT. All right. 

Q. Now, then, when you were a machinist, were you given a blueprint now 
and then to work on? — A. That is right. 

Q. And were you ever given as a machinist, a job to do without cooperation 
with other machinists? — A. Surely. 

Q. Now, the job that you did was only a part, however, of the matter, or the 
material that was to lie constructed in connection with an over-all blueprint; 
isn't that so? — A. Sometimes, yes. Sometimes it was something by itself. 

Q. And when it was something by itself, wasn't it just the construction of some 
little metal bar or some other little appliance? — A. A lot of little appliances go 
into making something bigger. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 141 

Q. That is correct ; you didn't make all the appliances that went into this lens, 
did you? — A. Of course not — in the lens mold, I made a complete lens mold. 

Q. You yourself made a complete lens mold? — A. That is right. 

Q. Did you make the complete lens mold that was subsequently assembled 
at the remote project, at which the detonation went off? — A. I can't tell. 

Q. You don't know that? — A. I don't know that. 

Q. How lon,t!: did it take you to make the complete lens mold? — A. Well, the 
flat type lens mold would take me about twenty-four hours of work. 

Q. Were other machinists likewise trying- to construct flat lens molds? — 
A. Certainly. 

Q. And did they also work from blueprints? — A. Of course. 

Q. Did you ever make a copy of any of the blueprints that were given to you 
to \\ork on? — A. I made a copy for my own use in the shop. 

Q. Did you ever make a copy of any blueprint and take it out of the project? — 
A. I did not. 

Q. Did you ever steal any documents, whether it be blueprints or any other 
matter, or even including any material, and take it out of the project to your 
home? — A. I did not. 

Q. Or to the place v\-here you stayed? — A. I did not steal anything of that 
nature. I made a radio ; I took the radio out ; I showed them the radio on the 
way out, and it was perfectly permissible to do that. I made a phonograph at- 
tachment ; I brouglit that out with me, too. 

Q. So that we can be very clear about this now, when you made the sketches 
for tlie Government, and particularly the sketches which have been marked as 
Government's exhibits 2, 6, and 7, you relied solely upon what you remembered 
you had done and the knowledge that you had accumulated while you were 
working at Los Alamos prior to 1945; is that right? — A. Prior to 1945? 

Mr. Satpol. 1946. 

Q. 1946.— A. That is right. 

By the Court: 
Q. And would you give the same reply with respect to the sketches that you 
said you turned over to Rosenberg, and that was also a reconstruction of what 
you carried in your mind of the type molds, that is, as to 2 and 6 anyway, as to 
the type molds you had made, and then as to the process which is incorporated 
in 7? — A. That is correct. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. And that was true also of the material that you said you turned over to 
Gold?— A. That is correct. 

Q. Now, tell me, when you worked on the lens mold, or, in fact, when you 
worked on any piece of apparatus while a machinist, were you given any 
lectures as to the functions of the particular piece that you were working on 
and constructing? This was while you were a machinist now. — A. What do you 
mean by lectures ; formal lectures, in a group? 

Q. Let's separate all the possibilities. Were you ever given any formal lec- 
tures? — A. No. 

Q. Were you ever given any informal instructions? — A. Yes. 

Q. Concerning their function? — A. Yes. 

Q. Now were you ever told their functions in relation to the complete object 
that was to be constructed? — A. There are different types of lens molds. Some 
were not used on the bomb itself, and some were just used for experiments. 

Q. How many lens molds in all would you say were constructed at the Theta 
building while you were working there? 

Mr. CoHN. I oliject to that as irrelevant, as to how many lens molds were con- 
structed at the Theta building. 

The Court. Need we have that? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. He said "many." I will be satisfied with the answer 
"Many." 

The Witness. Many. 

Q. Now Mr. Greenglass, can you sketch for us every lens mold upon which you 
worked or which was constructed at the Theta shop in Los Alamos"? — A. Not 
everyone but I can draw — sketch a good deal of them. 

Q. A good deal of them — showing the developing process and the improvements 
that had been made; can you do that? — A. The sketches are — well, that was 
only the improvement in the curve, and I didn't know that. The curve looked 
the same to mc — maybe a little flatter or a little more tapered but I couldn't 



142 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

tell which curve was — I mean it would be very difficult to tell which one was the 
improvement over the other. 

Q. You did not even know the formula for the curvature, did you? — A. That is 
exactly correct. 

Q. What? You had to be a scientist to know the formula, isn't that right? — 
A. That is right. 

Q. Now I would like to direct your attention to the time that you said you 
came to Rosenberg's house in September 1945. I think you testified — again 
check me ; I am doing this in substance and rather roughly — that you and your 
wife came there sometime in the evening? — A. September 194.5 I came in the 
afternoon. 

Q. Well, when was the time that this Ann Sidorovich was there? — A. That 
was Janaury 1945. 

Q. All right, then let us forget about September and go to January. 

In January, or the early part of January, I believe you testified you came to 
the Rosenberg house in the evening and you met Ann Sidorovich r^A. That is 
right. 

Q. You said you knew her husband? — A. I had known her husband. 

Q. Prior to the time that you were introduced to her that evening? — A. That 
is right. 

Q. And that was the first time you met Mrs. Sidorovich, is that correct? — A. 
That's right. 

Q. Were you told where Mrs. Sidorovich lived at the time you were introduced 
to her? — A. I don't believe that I knew that at the time. 

Q. Now you say you did know Mr. Sidorovich? — A. That's right. 

Q. How often had you met him prior to the time that you first met his wife? — 
A. Well, Julius had introduced me to him and I had met him while I was going 
to school. I met him — I seen him around school and we talked together a number 
of times. 

Q. Don't you A. I met him on buses. 

Q. Would you want to change your answer if I suggested to you that the 
Sidorovichs did not live in New York City in January 1944? — A. It wouldn't make 
any difference 

Q. In 1945, I am sorry. — A. It wouldn't make any difference to that because 
I met her there. I did not know anything about where they lived. 

Q. Now we are talking about time. You may have met her there but I am 
trying to focus your attention on the time. Is it your testimony unequivocally 
that in January 1945 you met Ann Sidorovich at the Rosenberg's home in Knicker- 
bocker Village? — A. That is correct. 

Q. All right. Now I think you testified that Julie Rosenberg told you that he 
had received from the Russians or from the Russian Government a watch. Did 
you ever see that watch?— A. He showed it to me. 

Q. Describe it? — A. It was a round watch, round dial watch with a sweep sec- 
ond hand. 

Q. With what? — A. A sweep second hand — round faced watch with a sweep 
second hand, and it had — at the time he first showed it to me I believe it had a 
leather strap. 

Q. Did you ever see the watch that you say Ethel got from the Russians? — A. I 
might have seen it but I didn't — I didn't 

Q. Didn't what?— A. Well, I wasn't told that that was the watch. 

Q. Can you describe the watch that you saw on Ethel's hand or any time when 
she had a watch on her hand in her possession? — A. I can't describe that watch ; 
no. 

Q. I think you also said that the Rosenberg's told you or Julie Rosenberg told 
you that he received a console table from the Russians. Did you ever see that 
console table? — A. I saw that console table. 

Q. Describe it. — A. Well, they had it up against the wall. It is a dark color, 
mahogany probably. It is wider than that table right there [indicating] — I 
mean the length. 

Q. Wider than which table? Do you mean the table against which I am stand- 
ing [indicating] ? — A. Yes. It is longer — it is a little bit wider and it is maybe 
four feet long, maybe three and a hall", four feet long. 

Q. Mr. Greenglass A. And it is 

Mr. CoHN. W^ait. I would like him to finish the answer. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Yes, I want it. 

Q. But you are a machinist, you understand that descriptions of lengths don't 
show up by this table, because that doesn't appear in the record. Then tell us 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 143 

how long it was and how wide it was? — A. I would say it was about — you see, 
the top of the console table, one side lifted up so it made an L if you had it 
against tbe wall, and that is the way I saw it. With the L up against the wall, 
it was about three and a half feet, maybe three feet long [indicating], except 
that is the width when the console table is opened up and the part of tlae table 
underneath the head or the board on top is about two feet wide. 

Q. Now when was the last time you saw that console table in the Rosenberg's 
house? — A. It was some period between '46 and '49. I can't place it. 

Q. Well, do you mind thinking for just a moment about that? — A. I can't 
definitely say when was the last time I saw it. 

Q. Was that the only console table in Rosenberg's living room? — A. Yes. 

Q. And was that console table used for eating purposes? — A. That console 
table was used for photography. 

Q. For photography? — A. That's right. Julius told me that he did pictures 
on that table. 

Q. Did you ever — withdrawn. Were you ever at the Rosenberg's house when 
food was served on that table? — A. I might have been. 

Q. I think you also testified that Rosenberg said to you he received a certif- 
icate from the Russians? — A. A citation. 

The Court. A citation. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. A citation — I am sorry. 

Q. A citation. Did you ever ask him to show you that citation? — ^A. I never 
asked him to show it to me ; no. 

Q. Did you ever see it? — A. I did not see it; but he said there was 

Q. No, no- 
Mr. CoHN. May we have the balance? 

The Court. Go ahead. 

The AViTNESs (continuing). There were certain privileges that went along 
with that. 

The Court. Yes, you told us that. 

Q. Now did he tell you in any detail how that citation read? — A. I don't 
believe he did. 

Q. Weren't you impressed when Rosenberg told you that he received a citation 
from the Russian Government? 

Mr. CoHN. I object to whether or not the witness was impressed, your Honor. 

The Court. I will sustain the objection. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

Now, may I have the Jello box exhibits, please? 

( Handed to Mr. Bloch by Mr. Cohn. ) 

Q. Now Mr. Greenglass, let us come to this Jello box incident. I believe your 
testimony was, substantially, that in September — I am sorry, in January 1945 
after Ann Sidorovich left, you and your wife remained along with the Rosen- 
bergs? — A. That's right. 

Q. And then this Jello business took place, is that right? — A. That's right. 

Q. Now I am going to show you Government's Exhibit 4 [handing witness], 
and I want you to look at that very, very carefully and after looking at it very, 
very carefully I want you to tell the Court and jury whether that is substan- 
tially similar to the part of the Jello box which corresponds to that that you 
allege was used that night. 

Mr. Cohn. I don't quite understand the question myself, your Honor. 

The Court. You are asking him whether this is the same kind of Jello box 
that was used in 1945. 

Mr. E. H. Block. That is right. It is not the contention that this was the 
Jello box that was used? 

Mr. Cohn. No. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. That is what I want to know. 

Q. I want to know whether it is substantially similar? — A. It is substantially 
similar. 

Q. Is it identical? — A. It is not identical ; no. 

Q. What is the difference between the box you have in your hand marked 
"Government's Exhibit 4" and the box that you claim was cut up that night at 
the Rosenberg house in January 194.5? — A. They made a darker colored box 
at the time. It seemed to me much darker than this, than the way it is now. 

Q. Any other differences? — A. I didn't read the Jello box then and I haven't 
read this one how. 



144 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. How can you answer or how did you answer intelligently my question 
before when I asked you whether or not this box was substantially similar to 
the one that was used at the Rosenberg house? — A. It said Jello on both boxes. 

Q. That is the only similarity that you can see, is that right? — A. And the 
shape of the box is about the same. 

Q. Do you notice on that box, Government's Exhibit 4, there is a description 
of the flavor? — A. I do. 

Q. What is the flavor on Government's Exhibit 4? — A. Raspberry. 

Q. Is it imitation raspberry? 

The Court. Is that material? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. It might be. 

The Court. Or is it facetious? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. No, no. It might be. 

The Witness. Imitation raspberry. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. May I say to the Court that I can see what might be com- 
ing in the Government's case and I think this is an important piece of testimony 
that purports to link up my client with Harry Gold. 

The Court. All right, no argument, Mr. Saypol. 

Go ahead. Proceed. 

Mr. Saypol. I would like permission to make one statement. 

The Court. Make it very brief. 

Mr. Saypol. All right ; I certainly can't see how the flavor of the Jello would 
have anything to do with it. 

The Court. I can't either, but I will let him ask it. It seemed to me like 
attempted humor but I may be wrong. 

The Witness. What was the question? (Question read.) This was imita- 
tion raspberry flavor. 

Q. What was the one you say was used in Rosenberg's house? — A. I really 
don't know. 

By the Court : 
Q. Didn't I understand you to say that they had gone into the kitchen, Mr. 
Ro.senberg, Ethel Rosenberg, and your wife? — A. That is right. 
Q. And you were in the living room? — A. Yes. 
Q. And they brought out the piece cut up? — A. That is right. 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 
Q. And they didn't bring out this part of the Jello box which is marked "Gov- 
ernment's Exhibit 4," is that right? 

* * * * * * * 
The Witness. But the box itself I never did see. I was given a very good 

Idea what that Jello box looks like and I know what it looks like from previous 
experience. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I would like to introduce Government's Exhil)it 4 for iden- 
tification in evidence. 

Mr. CoHN. I think it has no relevancy at all, but if Mr. Bloch feels that it is 
going to be helpful in any way I have no objection. 

The Court. It may be received with the understanding that the witness said 
he didn't see the box or the side of it cut up in the kitchen. 

(Marked Government's Exhibit 4.) 

By Mr. E. H. Bloch : 

Q. Are you color blind? — A. I am. 

Q. Do you know what color this is? — A. I do not. If you will notice Mr. 

Bloch 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike any gratuitous statements of the witness. 
The Court. Yes. 

Q. Now then 

The Court. Are you going into a new subject? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I am continuing on the Jello box, your Honor. 

Mr. A. Bloch. May we step up for a minute? 

* * « * • ♦ • 

The Court. We will recess at this point, ladies and gentlemen, until 10 : 30 
tomorrow morning. 

(Adjourned to March 14, 1051, at 10 : 30 a. m.) 



8. The Gold Case — Details 

Harry Gold, like David Greenglass, testified at the trial of Julius 
and Ethel Rosenberg and Morton Sobell. The details of Gold's activi- 
ties as an espionage courier for Fuchs, Greenglass, and others are 
brought out in Gold's own words, hereinafter set forth verbatim : 

From stenographer's minutes of case IS'l— 245, United States of 
America v. Jylnis Rosenherg et al. Before Hon. Irving K. Kaufman, 
district judge. United States District Court, Southern District of New 
York, March 15, 1951. 

Harry Gold, called as a witness on behalf of the Government, being first duly 
sworn, testified as follows : 

Direct examination by Mr. Lane : 

Q. Now Mr. Gold, the accoustics in this particular courtroom are not too good, 
so if you keep your voice up so .that all the jurors can hear, it will help a great 
deal. 

What is your occupation? — A. I am a biochemist. 

Q. JVow where were you born? — A. I was born in Berne, Switzerland. 

Q. When?— A. On December 12th. 1910. 

Q. When did you come to the United States? — A. I came to the United States 
in July of 1914. 

Q. And did you come with your family? — A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Now, were you naturalized at some time subsequent?— A. Yes. I was 
naturalized on my father's papers in the year 1922. 

Q. Do you have — is your father living? — A. Yes, he is. 

Q. Is your mother living? 

* « * 4: * » * 

The Witness. No, she is not. My mother died in 1947. 

Q. Do you have any brothers or sisters? — A. I have one brother. 

Q. How old is your father? — A. My father is 75 years of age. 

Q. And wliat is his occupation? — A. My father is a cabinet maker. 

Q. And is he occupied at the present time? — A. My father is not working right 
now. He did work up until about six months ago. 

Mr. E. H. Block. Now, if the Court pleases, now I object for a different reason. 
I object upon the ground that this background material is being elicited for the 
purposes of building up a sympathy with the witness and has no relation to the 
issues in this case. I am not saying that is the object of the prosecutor but 
I think that is the object of the effect. 

The Court. Overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Block. I respectfully except. 

Q. Now will you briefly sketch your educational background? — A. I attended 
the public schools in Philadelphia and graduated from the South Philadelphia 
High School in the summer of 1928. 

In 1930 I entered the University of Pennsylvania and left there about March 
of 1932. 

From 1934 to '.36 I was a student at Drexel Institute of Technology in the 
evening. I received the diploma in chemical engineering in June of 1936. 

From 1938 to 1940 I attended Xavier University in Cincinnati, Ohio. I grad- 
uated from Xavier in June of 1940 and received the degree of bachelor of science, 
summa cum laude. 

At various times from 1936 on, I took a number of specialized technical courses 
relating to the chemical field, and in addition I had a course in practical psy- 
chology. 

Q. Now will you tell me something about your background of employment?— 
A. When I left high school in 19 — in the summer of 1928, I was employed by 
a firm called Giftcrafters — that is one word — a wood-working firm in Philadel- 

Note. — Counsel for the U. S. Government : Irving Saypol, United States attorney ; Miles 
J. Lane, James Kilsheimer, and Roy Cohn, assistant United States attorneys. Other 
counsel whose names appear in transcript material represent defendants. 

145 



146 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

phia. I left the Giftcrafter firm in December of 1928 and began a period of 
employment with the Pennsylvania Sugar Company. I was employed by the 
Pennsylvania Sugar Company from January of 1929 over a period of 17 years 
up until February of 1946. This stretch was broken up on two occasions by 
leaves of absence so that I could go to college, and on one occasion in December 
of 1932 I was laid off. 

Q. Now you are the Harry Gold, are you not, that is named as a coconspira- 
tor in the indictment which is — in the indictment which includes the Rosen- 
bergs and Sobell and Yakovlev? — A. Yes, I am. 

Q. That is in the indictment in the instant case. — A. Yes. 

Q. Now do you stand convicted of any crime? — A. Yes, I do. 

Q. Of what crime? — A. I stand convicted of espionage. 

Q. And in what court does that conviction stand of record? — A. That con- 
viction stands in the Federal Court in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 

Q. Do vou recall the date? — A. I pleaded guilty to the charge of espionage on 
July 20th, 1950. 

Q. Now what sort of espionage was it? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to the question as too general, not binding upon 
these defendants. 

The Court. I will have to sutain that. 

By the Coubt : 

Q. Was that indictment consummated by a sentence? — A. Yes, it was, your 
Honor. 

Q. There is nothing left open now in that court? — A. There is nothing left 
open in that court, your Honor. 

Q. So far as you know is there anything left open in this court with respect 
to a plea on your part or conviction? — A. There is nothing so far as I know, 
your Honor, that is left open in this court against me. 

Q. So you will not come before any court any longer for any sentence, so far 
as you know? — A. So far as I know, your Honor, I shall not. 

Q. What was the sentence that was imposed upon you in Philadelphia? — 
A. I was given a sentence of 30 years in the Federal Penitentiary. 

The CouET. Proceed, 

By Mr. Lane : 

Q. Do you know Anatoli Yakovlev? — A. Yes; I do. 

Q. When for the first time did you meet Anatoli Yakovlev ? — A. I met Anatoli 
Yakotlev in March 1944. 

Q. Where did you meet him? — A. I met Yakovlev in New York City. It was on 
the north side of 34th Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenue, and some- 
what closer to Eighth Avenue. The exact spot was in front of the bar entrance 
of a Childs Restaurant. 

The Court. What date did you say that was? 

The Witness. That was March of 1944, your Honor. 

The Court. All right. 

Q. Now, did you have a conversation with Yakovlev at that time? 

Mr. A. Bloch. One minute. I object to it on the ground that it is not within 
the time circumscribed by the indictment. The indictment is alleged to have 
begun in June 1944. 

The Court. I suggest that you read the opinion of this Circuit Court in 
United States v. Dennis, et al., which deals with that subject directly. 

Your objection is overruled. 

Mr. A. Bloch. Exception. 

(Question read.) 

The Witness. Yes ; I did. 

Q. And as a result of that conversation what did you do? — A. I continued 
in my espionage work for the Soviet Union with 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I 

A. Anatoli 

INIr. E. H. Bloch. I am sorry but I have got to get up to object to this. I 
think it is damaging evidence, and I think it is incompetent, irrelevant, and 
immaterial, and I believe that the witness is using conclusory words. I submit 
that this is not binding upon any of these defendants. 

******* 

The Court. The objection is overruled. 

Mr. B. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

(Paper marked "Government's Exhibit 11" for identification.) 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 147 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object further, if the Court please, upon the ground that 
no proper foundation has been laid for the introduction of the phrase "con- 
tinuing espionage for the Soviet Union," and I ask that the answer be stricken 
out. 

Mr. Lane. If the Court please, we will connect that very shortly. 

The CouBT. All right. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. And I think that is the pi'oper way to do it, your Honor. 

The Court. All right. Why don't you go to it, Mr. Lane. 

Q. Now I show you Government's Exhibit 11 for identification and ask you 
if you recognize the man depicted in the picture.? — A. Anatoli Yakovlev. 

Q. Now, for how long a period of time did you work with Yakovlev? 

The Court. Are you introducing that?. 

Mr. Lane. Not yet, your Honor. 

The Witness. I worked with Yakovlev for a period of almost three years. 
From March of 1944 until late December 1946. 

Mr. Lane. Now I offer Government's Exhibit 11 for identification in evidence. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. No objection. 

(Government's Exhibit 11 for identification received in evidence.) 

The Court. Show it to the jury. 

Q. Now, did you have several conversations with Yakovlev after the middle of 
June 1944?— A. Yes; I did. 

Q. And in any of those conversations did Yakovlev identify himself to you? — 
A. No ; he did not. I knew Yakovlev only 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out everything after "he did not," on the 
ground the witness has fully answered. 

The Court. All right. He didn't identify himself to you. Very well. Did you 
know the identity of Yakovlev? 

The Witness. I knew Yakovlev only ; I didn't know him as Yakovlev, your 
Honor. 

Q. What name did you know him by? — A. I knew Yakovlev as John, 

Q. Now, for how long a period were you engaged in Soviet activities? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to the form of the question on the ground that it 
presupposes a state of facts not proven. 

The Court, On that ground I will overrule it. The witness knows. 

By the Court : 
Q. Do you know of your own knowledge whether or not you were engaged in 
Soviet espionage work? 
Mr. E. H. Bloch, I object to the Court's question. 

i^ ***** * 

The Court. The objection is overruled. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I respectfully except. 

Mr. A. Bloch. I except. 

(Last question read.) 

The Witness. I was engaged in espionage work for the Soviet Union from the 
spring of 1935 up until the time of my arrest while I was working at the heart 
station of the Philadelphia Hospital. This arrest took place in May. 

******* 

Q. Now, during this period of time did you have superiors working with you? — 
A, Yes ; I did. 

Q. Who was your Soviet superior in June 1944? 

*«*«*** 

By Mr. Lane : 

Q. Now, you have identified the picture of Yakovlev; now will you give a 
description of Yakovlev? — A. Yakovlev was about 28 or 30 years of age at the 
time that I knew him. He was about 5 feet 9 inches in height ; had a medium 
build, which tended toward the slender. He had dark or dark-brown hair and 
there was a lock of it that kept falling over his forehead, which he would brush 
back continually. He had a rather long nose and a fair complexion, dark eyes. 
He walked with somewhat of a stoop. 

Q. Now, you say you had a conversation with him at this meeting which was, 
I believe, in March of 1944, and that took place in Child's Restaurant on Eighth 
Avenue? — A. Yes. 

Q. Now, as a result of that conversation what did you do? — A. As a result 
of that conversation I continued my espionage work for the Soviet Union, with 
Yakovlev as my new Soviet superior. * 

******* 



148 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. All risht, I am sorry. 

Q. Now, did you meet Klaus Fuchs, Dr. Klaus Fuclis, some time in the middle 
of June, 1944?— A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Where did you meet *Puc-hs? — A. I met Fuchs in Woodside, Queens. 
Q. Did you have a conversation with Fuchs at this time? — A. Yes, I did. 
Q. As a result of that conversation what did you do? 

« :;s $ ' 4: * * * 

The Witness. As a result of my meeting with Dr. Fuchs in Woodside, in the 
middle of June, I wrote a report, which I turned over to Yakovlev. 

Q. Where did you turn this report over to Yakovlev? And when? — A. This 
report was turned over to Yakovlev about a week or so after my meeting with 
Dr. Fnchs. The place was somewhere in New York. 

Q. That was in June of 1944; is that correct? — A. That is correct; the mid- 
dle of June. 

Q. Did yoi: have a conversation with Yakovlev at this time? — A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Will you tell the jury what that conversation was, as best you can recall? — 
A. I told Yakovlev — I told Yakovlev that the next time I met Fuchs, Fuchs was 
going to give me information. This information was to relate to the application 
of nuclear fission to the production of a military weapon. I gave Yakovlev the 
exact place where this meeting was scheduled. 

Q. Was that the complete conversation? — Did you tell him anything else, that 
you can recall? — A. That was the complete conversation that I can recall. 

Q. Now, did you have a meeting with Fuchs after that, in July of 1944, at 
96th Street and Central Park? — A. I had a meeting with Fuchs in June of '44, 
late in June of '44. 

Q. And where was this meeting? — A. The meeting witli Fuchs occurred in 
the area of Borough Hall in Brooklyn. 

Q. Did you have a conversation with Fuchs at that time? — A. We had no 
conversation at all. 

Q. Well, what was the rest of that meeting with Fuchs? What did you do as 
the result of that meeting with Fuchs? — A. As a consequence of the meeting I 
had with Dr. Fuchs at Borough Hall I turned over to Yakovlev some few minutes 
after my meeting with Fuchs and still in the area of Borough Hall, I turned 
over to Yakovlev a package of papers. 

Q. Now, did you have another meeting with Fuchs in July of 1944? — A. I had 
a meeting with Dr. Fuchs in the middle of July 1944. 

Q. Now, where did this meeting take place and approximately what time of 
the day or night?— A. This meeting took place at 96th Street, about 96th Street 
and Central Park West. The time was the early evening. 

Q. And how long approximately did this meeting last? — A. The meeting lasted 
about an hcmr and a half. 

Q. And did you have a conversation with him during that time? — A. Yes ; I had 
a conversation with Dr. Fuchs. 

Q. And as the result of that conversation what did you do? — A. As the result 
of the conversation I had with Dr. Fuchs I turned over to Yakovlev a report 
which I had written. 

Q. Now, when did you turn over that report to Yakovlev and where? — A. The 
report to Yakvolev was turned over in New York City and occurred about a week 
or so after my meeting with Dr. Fuchs. 

Q. Now, what did this report contain that you turned over to Yakovlev, do 
you know? — A. Yes; I do. 

Q. What did it contain? 

Mr. A. Bloch. I object to it upon the ground that it is incompetent, irrelevant, 
and immaterial and hearsay against these defendants and not the best evidence. 

The Court. What about that? 

Mr. Lane. Well, your Honor, Lakovlev is one of the codefendants in the case. 

The Court. Yes. 

Mr. Lane. The witness here is a coconspirator. 

The Court. Yes. 

Mr. Lane. The witness read the report. He knew the contents of the report 
and he turned it over to Yakovlev, but I will witl^^i'aw the question, your Honor, 
and I will ask the witness if he had a conversa;tion with Yakovlev on this par- 
ticular occasion. 

The Witness. Yes ; I did. 

Q. And what was the conversation? — A. The conversation had to do with the 
fact that Fuchs had given me, further information on the progress of the work 
going on in New York by a joint American and British project, which project 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 149 

was aimed at producing an atomic bomb. Tlie worli was going on somewhere 
iu tlie area of Church Street, New York. 

The Court. This is in July of 1944? 

The Witness. Yes. It is the middle of July 1944. 

Q. Now, during this period when you were meeting Dr. Fuchs, were you also 
meeting Yakovlev at regular intervals? — A. During this period I had a regu- 
larly scheduled series of meetings with Yakovlev. Yakovlev continually advised 
and instructed me and we talked over together as to how I should continue my 
work with Dr. Fuchs. 

Q. Now, did you have any particular modus operandi in your connections, 
in your work with Yakovlev? — A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Would you tell the jury, would you relate the details of that? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Do I understand that this is pursuant to tlae directions 

Mr. Lane. Pursuant to a conversation I believe with Yakovlev. — A. I worked 
in the following manner with Yakovlev : My duties were to obtain information 
from a number of sources in America and to transfer this information to Yakov- 
lev. The meetings with the sources of information in America were effected 
in two ways : First, it could be personal introduction ; secondly, there was an 
introduction which was elfected only between the American contact and myself 
and was effected by means of a set of recognition signals. Now, these signals 
included at least two fetaures : One of them was that there was always an 
object or a piece of paper involved, on one part or the other, or possibly on both 
parts ; that is the other person in America and myself. In addition there was 
a code phrase used and this phrase was usually used in the form of a greeting. 
In all cases when I introduced myself I used a false name, and in all cases 
I never indicated my true place of residence. 

Now, once the introduction had been effected, I proceeded to work : I con- 
ducted myself in the following manner : I give the source of information in 
America — whoever that person was who was going to furnish me the informa- 
tion — I give him a list of the data or material which was desired ; secondly, 
in case there had been a Soviet agent who had preceded me, I would take steps 
so that the source of information, that the person with whom I was working 
would first clean up all of the back work. Then thirdly, we would arrange for 
a series of meetings. These were very precise arrangements. 

All of these people from whom I obtained information were not residents 
of Philadelphia. I had to go some distance usually to meet them. I would 
arrange for a meeting in the town where they lived or in some other town, 
and the meeting would be for an exact time at an exact place and there would 
be an exact schedule for what was to be done during the meeting. In other 
words, if we were just going to discuss the possibility of obtaining certain tyiJes 
of information, the hazards involved, just how much information should be 
obtained, and just what source was needed, then a rather long meeting was 
scheduled. If I was going to actually get information, very usually a brief 
meeting was scheduled, the idea being to minimize the time of detection when 
information would be passed from the American to me. In addition to this, 
I made payments of sums of 'money to some of the people whom I regularly 
contacted, and always I wrote rejwrts detailing everything that hapiienetl at 
every meeting with these people, and these reports I turned over to Yakovlev. 

By the Court : 

Q. And where would you get the money from that you paid to some of these 
people for the information? — A. The money was given to me by Yakovlev. 
(Paper marked "Government's Exhibit 12" for identification.) 

By Mr. Lane: 

Q. Now I show you Government's Exhibit 12 for iflentification and I ask you 
if you can identify the person in that picture? — A. This is Dr. Klaus Fuchs. 
******* 

Harry Gold resumed the stand. 

Direct examination continued by Mr. Lane : 

Q. Now, Mr. Gold, at the conclusion of this morning's session I believe you 
were giving an account of a conversation with Yakovlev, in which you were 
reciting the details of the modus operandi. Now, did you complete your conver- 
sation with reference to that particular item? — A. No ; I had not. 

Q. Will you continue, please? — A. In addition to the details of my operations, 
of my conduct with the source of information in America, I had a very set 



150 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

pattern which I used in connection with my dealings with Yaliovlev. This is 
how it worlied : We had an ari-angement not only for regular meetings, but we 
had an arrangement for alternate meetings, should one of the regular ones not 
take place, and then, in addition to that, we had an arrangement for an emer- 
gency meeting. This emergency meeting was a one-way affair. A system was 
set up whereby Yakovlev could get in touch with me if he wanted me quickly, 
but I couldn't get in touch with him because I didn't know where. Yakovlev 
told me that in this way the chain was cut in two places. The person from 
whom I got the information in America did not know me by my true name, nor 
did he know where I lived, nor could he get in touch with me, and I couldn't 
get in touch with Yakovlev. Yakovlev said this was a good thing. 

In addition, Yakovlev and I had a very exact method when we were going 
to transfer information. It might be that something would have to be copied 
and then returned. In that case, we had to have a set procedure. On certain 
occasions we had a definite means by which we transferred information. Such 
means would include a set-up whereby I would take the information and put 
it between the folds of a newspaper and Yakovlev and I would exchange the 
newspapers. The one that I got was just a newspaper. The one that he got 
had the information between the folds, the information usually being in some 
sort of an enclosure. In addition to this, of course, we had regular conferences 
all along at which we discussed my conduct with the people in America who 
were furnishing me with information, and the final point was that we had a 
system set up whereby we could act or react very promptly in case there was 
any sign of surveillance, and this system provided for not only surveillance 
should I notice any before I came to see Yakovlev but surveillance if we should 
suspect any while we were actually having a meeting, and also if there should 
be any suspicious actions around either of us after we had parted, around 
either of us after we had parted. 

Q. Now, does that exhaust your recollection of that conversation? — A. That 
is about all that I can recall about that conversation, Mr. Lane. 

Q. Now, did you have a meeting with Dr. Fuchs in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
early in January of 1945? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, do I assume that this question presup- 
poses that this is part of the conspiracy charged in this indictment? 

Mr. Lane. Yes, your Honor. 

The Witness. Yes ; I did. 

Q. Did you have a conversation with Dr. Fuchs at that time? — A. Yes ; I did. 

Q. As a result of that conversation, what did you do? — A. In consequence of 
the conversation that I had with Dr. Fuchs, I did two things. On the same 
day that I saw Dr. Fuchs, the same morning that I saw Dr. Fuchs in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, I returned from Cambridge to New York City and turned over to 
Yakovlev a package of papers which Fuchs had given me. About a week later, 
I wrote a report which I turned over to Yakovlev. 

Q. When did you turn this report over to Yakovlev? — A. The report was 
turned over to Yakovlev somewhere around the second week in January. 

Q. Whereabouts did you turn this report over to Yakovlev? — A. It was turned 
over to Yakovlev somewhere in downtown. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Pardon me. Is that January 1945? 

Mr. Lane. That is correct. 

The Witness. January '45. 

Q. At that time did you have a conversation with Yakovlev? — A. Yes; I did. 

Q. What was the conversation? A. I told Yakovlev that I had received the 
following information from Fuchs : First, that Fuchs was now stationed at a place 
called Los Alamos, New Mexico ; that this was a large experimental station. 
It had formerly been a boys' school, a select boys' school. Fuchs told me that 
a tremendous amount of progress had been made. In addition, he had made 
mention of a lens, which was being worked on as a part of the atom bomb. Fi- 
nally, we had set a date, this date to be the first Saturday in June of 1945, and 
at this date I was to meet Fuchs in Santa Fe, New IMexico. 

Q. Did you have a further meeting with Fuchs within the next month or 
so? — A. Not within the next month or so. 

Q. Did you have a meeting with Yakovlev in May of 1945? — A. I had a meet- 
ing with Yakovlev in February, early in February of 1945. 

Q. Wliere did this meeting take place? — A. This meeting took place about 
23rd Street and Ninth or Tenth Avenue. 

Q. Did you have this conversation with him at that time? — A. Yes, I did. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 151 

Q. What was the conversation? A. At this meeting Yakovlev told me to 
try to remember anything else that Fuchs had mentioned during our Cambridge 
meeting, about the lens. Yakovlev was very agitated and asked me to scour my 
memory clean so as to elicit any possible scrap of information about this lens. 
I recall the meeting very well, because I was frightened, it was a bad neighbor- 
hood to be in. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike that out. 

The Witness. I am sorry. 

The Court. All right, strike it out. 

Mr. SA-iT-OL. What is the objection? Is it the fact that he was frightened, if 
the Court please? 

The Court. I am striking out being frightened. 

Mr. Saypol. Otherwise I take it the witness may continue? 

The Court. That is right. 

Q. Does that exhaust your recollection of the conversation at that particular 
meeting? — ^A. Yes; it does. 

By the Court : 

Q. AVell, did you give him anything else? — ^A. What is it? 

Q. You say he asked you to search your memory, give him every scrap of 
information you had. Now, did you give him anything eLse at that meeting? — 
A. I didn't give him anything else, that I can recall, at that meeting. 

The Court. Very well. 

A. (Continuing). I think I put everything down in the report which I gave 
about the second week in January. 

The CouKi. All right. 

By Mr. Lane : 

Q. Now in May of 1945, did you have a meeting with Yakovlev? — A. Yes; I 
did. 

Q. Will you try and fix the date as best you can of that particular meeting? — 
A. The exact date of the meeting that 1 had with Yakovlev in May of 1945 was 
on the last Saturday in May, and about — -pretty late in the afternoon, around 
four in the afternoon, I would say. 

Q. Where did this meeting take place? — A. The meeting with Yakovlev on the 
last Saturday in May took place inside of a combination restaurant and bar, 
called Volks — V-o-l-k — V-o-l-k-s. I think it is, k's, or possibly, V-o-l-c-k-s. In 
any case, it is at the southwest corner of 42nd Street and Third Avenue, in 
Manhattan. 

Q. Now, will you tell the jury what happened on this occasion? — A. I stood at 
the bar with Yakovlev and we had a drink. I told Yakovlev that I wanted to 
take a walk with him, to dispose of the two matters which were the purpose 
of our meeting. These matters were, one, first, that Yakovlev would be able to 
ascertain definitely that I was going to see Fuchs on the first Saturday in June 
of 1945. I was having difficulty at this time getting off from work and he wanted 
to make sure that I was going. The second point of our meeting was that we 
had to arrange for two meetings when I returned from Santa Fe, one meeting 
at which I would transfer information which I was supposed to receive from 
Fuchs ; then there would be a second meeting some time later, at which I would 
give Yakovlev a detailed report, as well as a verbal account of exactly what 
would have transpired at this meeting with Fuchs. 

Now, Yakovlev told me that he had some matter to discuss with^me at length 
and he said that we should sit in the rear of Volks' cafe, where* there was a 
circular place with some tables in it, fairly secluded. We did so. We sat down 
there and the waiter brought us a drink. Yakovlev told me that he wanted me to 
take on an additional mission besides the one to see Dr. Fuchs. He said that he 
wanted me to go to Albuquerque, New Mexico. I protested 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike that out, your Honor. 

The Court. All right, strike out "protested." 

The Witnkss. Sorry, your Honor. 

The Court. Tell us what you told him. 

A. (Continuing) I told Yakovlev that I did not wish to take on this additional 
task. Yakovlev told me that the matter was very vital and that I had to do it. 
He said that a woman was supposed to go in place of me but that she was unable 
to make the trip. He said, therefore, he said that I had to go. I told Yakovlev 
that it was highly inadvisable to endanger the very important trip to see Dr. 
Fuchs with this additional task. Yakovlev told me that I didn't understand that 
81095 — 51 11 



152 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

this was an extremely important business, that I just had to go to Albuquerque, in 
addition to going to Santa Fe, and he said, "That is an order" ; and that was 
all. I agreed to go. 

Yakovlev then gave me a sheet of paper ; it was onionskin paper, and on it 
was typed the following : First, the name "Greenglass," just "Greeuglass." Then 
a number "High Street" ; all that I can recall about the number is that the 
last figure — it was a low number and the last figure, the second figure was "0" 
and the last figure was either 5, 7. or 9; and then underneath that was "Albu- 
querque, New Mexico." The last thing that was on the paper was "Recognition 
signal. I come from Julius." In addition to this, Yakovlev gave me a piece 
of cardboard, which appeared to have been cut from a packaged food of some 
sort. It was cut in an odd shape and Yakovlev told me that the man Green- 
glass, whom I would meet in Albuquerque, would have the matching piece of 
cardboard. Yakovlev told me that just in case the man Greeuglass should not 
be present when I called in Albuquerque, that his wife would have the 
information and that she would turn it over to me. Yakovlev gave me an 
envelope which he said contained $500, and he told me to give it to Green- 
glass. Yakovlev told me that I should follow a very devious route on my 
way to Santa Fe and to Albuquerque. He said that I should go first to Phoenix, 
Arizona ; then to El Paso, and from thoi-e to Santa Fe. Yakovlev said that I 
should do this to minimize any danger of being followed. 

The iast thing that took place on this last Saturday in May was that Yakovlev 
and I arranged for two meetings upon my return from the Southwest. 

Q. Were you to go to Santa Fe before Albuquerque? — A. Yakovlev told me 
that I was to go to Santa Fe first. 

Q. Was there any route to be followed from Santa Fe to Albuquerque? — A. He 
didn't specify, your tlonor. There is only one way that I know of to get from 
there. They are CO miles apart and there is a bus runs between them. 

The Court. All right. 

By Mr. Lane : 

Q. Do you have the paper on which those instructions were written? — A. I 
have the paper. When Y^akovlev gave me the paper 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I move to strike out everything else, your Honor. 

The Court. All right, strike it out. 

Q. What happened to that paper, if you know? — A. I was to destroy the paper. 

Q. Did you destroy it? — A. I don't know what happened to it. I jufet remember 
the emphasis on memorizing what is in it and destroy it. 

Q. Now, will you describe that cardboard you received from Yakovlev on that 
occasion? — A. Yes. It was about, just about an inch in height, possibly two 
inches — yes, possibly two inches in length and was shaped this way [indicating]. 
It was rectangular and it was shaped like this [indicating]. I can draw it. 

Q. Well, I show you Government's Exhibits 4-A and 4-B in evidence and ask 
you if one of those represents the cardboard you received from Yakovlev? — A, 
This piece here where I have my finger. 

Mr. Lane. May the record indicate that the witness is pointing at Govern- 
ment's Exhibit 4-B in evidence. 

Q. Now, did you go to Santa Fe in June of 1945? — A. Yes ; I did. 

Q. When did you arrive in Santa Fe? — A. I arrived in Santa Fe on Saturday 
the 2(1 of June 1945. 

Q. And did you meet Dr. Fuchs? — Yes; I did. 

The Court. What was that date again that you gave? . 

The Witness. The 2nd of June 1945, a Saturday. 

Q. Did you have a conversation with Dr. Fuchs? — A. Yes ; I did. 

Q. And how long did that conversation last? — A. My conversation with Dr. 
Fuchs in Santa Fe lasted about 20 minutes to a half hour. 

Q. And as the result of that conversation what did you do? — A. As the result 
of that conversation I did two things : Upon my return to New York I turned 
over to Yakovlev a bunch of papers which Dr. Fuchs had given me in Santa Fe. 
About two weeks after that 

Q. No. I neglected to ask you how long this conversation took place in Volks' 
Cafe with Yakovlev? How long did it last? — A. The conversation with Yakovlev 
in Volks' Cafe took about an hour ; three-quarters of an hour to an hour. It is 
hard to place it just exactly. 

Q. Now, when did you depart from Santa Fe? — A. I left Santa Fe in the 
very late afternoon. 

Q. Where did you go? — A. The 2d of June. 

Q. Where did you go? — A. I went b^ bus from Santa Fe to Albuquerque. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 153 

Q. What (lid yon do after you arrived in Albuquerque? — A. I arrived in 
Albuquerque early in tbe evening of the 2d of June, and about S :30 tbat night 
went— about 8 :00 or 8 :30. yes, I went to the designated address on High Street. 
There I was met by a tall elderly whitehaired and somewhat stooped man. 1 
inquired about the Greenglasses and be told me that they were out for the 
evening but he tliought they would be in early on Sunday morning. 

Q. Then what did you do? — A. Then I returned to downtown Albuquerque. 

Q. Did you register in any hotel when you were in Albuquerque on this 
occasion?— A. I stayed that night — I finally managed to obtain a room in a 
hallway of a rooming house and then on Sunday morning I registered at the 
Hotel Hilton. 

Q. Now, did you register under your own name? — A. Yes ; I did. 

Q. What name did you use? — A. Harry Gold. 

Q. Now, what did you do on Sunday? — That is June 3, 1945?— A. On Sunday 
about 8 : 30 I went again to the High Street address. I was admitted, and I 
recall going up a very steep flight of steps, and I knocked on a door. It was 
open by a young man of about 23 with dark hair. He was smiling. I said, 
'•Mr. Greenglass?'' He answered in the affirmative. I said, 'T came from 
Julius," and I showed him the piece of cardboard in my hand, the piece of 
cardboard tbat had been given me by Yakovlev in Volks' Cafe. He asked me to 
enter. I did. Greenglass went to a woman's handbag and brought out from it a 
piece of cardboard. We matched the two of them. 

Q. Will yon describe that cardboard which Greenglass showed you? — A. It 
appeared to be from the same, part of the same packaged food from which the 
piece of cardboard that I had had originally been cut. 

By tbe Court : 

Q. When you say Greenglass matched the two, just what did he do? — A. He 
showed it to me and we put them together, as nearly as I can remember. 

Q. How did you put them together? To see whether the ends met, is that 
what you did? — A. No. Just roughly. I mean you could see at a glance that 
they were the same thing. 

By Mr. Lane : 

Q. Now I show you Government's Exhibit 4-A in evidence and I ask you if it 
resembles the piece of cardboard which Greenglass showed to you? — ^A. This 
resembles it, the one that I had my finger on, 4— A, yes. 

Mr. Lane. May tbe record indicate that the witness has identified Government's 
Exhibit 4-A as the cardboard replica of the piece tbat was shown to him by 
David Greenglass. 

Q. And the two pieces matched, you say? — A. The two pieces matched. 

Q. Now, will you continue the conversation which you had at that time? 

(Marked "Government's Exhibit 13" for identification.) 

The Witness. At this point after we had matched the two pieces of cardboard 
I introduced myself to Greenglass as Dave from Pittsburgh ; that was all. 
Greenglass introduced me to the young woman who was there and said she was 
his wife Ruth. — Mrs. Greenglass said that it was coincidence that my first 
name and the first name of lier husband were tlie same. 

Greenglass then told me that my visit to him on this exact day was a bit of a 
surprise ; he had not expected me right on that day, but that nevertheless he 
would have the material on the atom bomb ready for me that afternoon. 

At this point Mrs. Greenglass went into the kitchen to prepare some food. 
Then I gave Mr. Greenglass the envelope which Yakovlev had given me in 
Volks' Cafe. This envelope was the one that contained $500. Greenglass took 
the envelop from me. Greenglass told me that he would have the infonnation 
ready at about 4 o'clock, 3 : 00 or 4 o'clock in the afternoon ; the exact time I 
can't recall except that we set it. 

At this point Greenglass told me that there were a number of people at Los 
Alamos that he thought would make very likely recruits ; that is, they wex'e 
also people who might be willing to furnish information on the atom bomb to the 
Soviet Union, and he started to give me the names of these people, the names 
of some of these people. I cut him very short indeed. I told him that such 
procedure was extremely hazardous, foolhardy, that under no circumstances 
should he ever try to proposition anyone on his own into trying to get information 
for the Soviet Union. I told him to be very circumspect in his conduct and to 
never even drop the slightest hint to anyone that he himself was furnishing 
information on tlie atom bomb to the Soviet Union. 



154 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The last thing that took place that morning was that just as I was preparing 
to go, Mrs. Greenglass told me that just before she had left New York City 
to come to Albuquerque she had spoken with Julius. This meeting that we had 
in the morning on the 3rd of June 1945, this Sunday morning, took about 15 
minutes. 

Q. Now I show you Government's Exhibit 13 for identification and I ask you 
if you can identify the people in that picture. — A. Yes. The man with his arm 
around the woman is David Greenglass. The woman is Mrs. Ruth Greenglass. 

Mr. Lane. I offer Government's Exhibit 13 for identification in evidence. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. No objection. 

(Marked Government's Exhibit 13.) 

Q. Did you return to the home of the Greenglasses on the same day, Sunday, 
June 3, 1945?— A. Yes; I did. 

Q. And wliat time did you return? — A. It was about between 3 : 00 and 4 
o'clock. 

Q. And who was present when you returned? — A. Mr. Greenglass was there 
and his wife Ruth was there. 

Q. And did you have a conversation at that time? — A, Yes ; I did. 

Q. Will you tell the jury what that conversation was? — A. Mr. Greenglass gave 
me an envelope which he said contained the information for which I had come, 
the information on the atom bomb. I took the envelope. Mr. Greenglass told 
me that he expected to get a furlough sometime around Christmas, and that he 
would return to New York at that time. He told me that if I wished to get in 
touch with him then I could do so by calling his brother-in-law Julius, and he 
gave me the telephone number of Julius in New York City. 

Q. Do you recall now what that number was? — A. I cannot. 

Q. Was that all that was said at that time? — A. I told Greenglass that very 
likely I might be returning to Albuquerque in the early fall of 1945, and if I did 
so there was a possibility that I might stop in and see him. 

Q. And did you receive some information at that time, some papers from 
Greenglass? 

The CouKT. At what time? 

The Witness. I have already related 

Mr. Lane. That Sunday afternoon. 

The Witness. I have already related that he gave me an envelope which con- 
tained, which he said contained information on the atom bomb. 

Q. But did you examine it at that time? — A. I did not examine it at that 
time, no. I just took the envelope and put it in my pocket. 

Q. How long a period of time did this meeting consume? 

The Court. How large an envelope was that? 

The Witness. I would say it was a large letter size, pretty large letter size, 
as I i-ecall it. 

Q. How much time was consumed in this particular meeting? — A. The meet- 
ing took only about five minutes, possibly ten at the very most. 

Q. And then what did you do? — A. The three of us, Mr. Greenglass, Mrs. 
Greenglass, and myself left the Greenglass' apartment and we walked along a 
slanting back street in Albuquerque, and there in front of a small building I 
left the Greenglasses. 

Q. And did you return to New York? — A. Yes; I did. 

Q. Immediately? — A. Yes; I did. 

Q. En route to New York did you at any time inspect the material which you 
had received from Greenglass? — A. Yes, I did, on the train from Albuquerque 
to Chicago and somewhere in Kansas, I believe. I examined the material which 
Greenglass had given me. I just examined it very quickly. My sole purpose 
was to get it 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I object to what his purpose was. 

The Court. All right. 

The Witness. I put it into an envelope, into a manila envelope, one of the 
kind with a brass clasp, and in another manila envelope I put the papers which 
Dr. Fuchs had given me. I labeled the two envelopes. On tlie one from Fuchs 
I wrote "Doctor." On the one from Greenglass I wrote "Other," 0-t-h-e-r. 

Q. Well, now, can you describe a little better what was in the Greenglass 
package? — A. Yes. The material given me by Greenglass consisted of three or 
four handwritten pages plus a couple of sketches. The sketches had letters on 
them which were referred to in the text of the three or four handwritten pages. 
The sketches appeared to be for a device of some kind. 

Q. When did you arrive back in New York? — A. I arrived in New York on the 
5th of June. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 155 

By the Court : 

Q. Did you read the descriptive matter that was contained on these other 
sheets of paper? — A. No; I did not, your Honor. I just — it happened to hit my 
eye and I leafed through them, is what I recall. 

By Mr. Lane : 

Q. Now the question was, w^hen did you arrive back in New York? — A. I 
arrived in New York on the 5th of June 1945, in the evening. 

Q. And did you meet Yakovlev? — A. Yes, I did. 

Q. On the same day? — A. On the same evening. 

Q. Where did you met him? — A. I met Yakovlev along Metropolitan Avenue, 
in Brooklyn, and somewhere, where Metropolitan Avenue runs into Queens. It 
was a very lonely place, particularly at the time of night when I met Yakovlev. 

The Court. What time was it? 

The Witness. It was about 10 o'clock at night. 

Q. Now did I undei'stand you to say that this meeting was by prearrange- 
ment? — A. This meeting had been arranged at Volks' cafe on the last Saturday 
in May of 1945. 

The Court. Excuse me. You say there was an alternative meeting arranged 
also, in the event you didn't meet that evening? 

The Witness. No, Your Honor, there was an alternative meeting but its pri- 
mary purpose was to hand over a written report on what had transpired during 
my trip to Santa Fe. If it should have happened that I hadn't been able to make 
the meeting with Yakovlev, then the alternative meeting would have had to serve 
a double purpose. 

The Court. Very well. 

Q. How long did this meeting last with Yakovlev? — A. The meeting with 
Yakovlev lasted about a minute, that was all. 

Q. What did you do at that meeting? — A. We met and Yakovlev wanted to 
know if I had seen the both of them, said, "The doctor and the man." I said 
that I had. Yakovlev wanted to know had I got information from the both of 
them and I said that I had. Then I gave Yakovlev the two manila envelopes, 
the one labeled "Doctor," which had the information I had received from Fuchs 
in Santa Fe ; the one labeled "Other," which had the information I had received 
from David Greenglass in Albuquerque, on the 3d of June 1945. 

Q. When was your next meeting with Yakovlev? — A. My next meeting with 
Yaliovlev was about two weeks later, and 

Q. Where did this meeting take place? — A. This meeting took place at the end 
of the Flushing elevated line, at Main Street, in Flushing. 

Q. What time was it? — A. The time was in the middle of the evening. 

Q. Did you have on conversation with Yakovlev? 

The Court. Excuse me. When did you say that was? 

The Witness. In the middle of the evening. 

The Court. What date did you say that was? 

The Witness. It was about two weeks after the 5th of June. We are still in 
June. 

Q. Did you have a conversation with Yakovlev at that time? — A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Will you tell the jury what that conversation was? — A. I told Yakovlev — 
Yakovlev told me that the information which I had given him some two weeks 
previous had been sent immediately to the Soviet Union. He said that the infor- 
mation which I had received from Greenglass was extremely excellent and very 
valuable. Then Yakovlev listened while I recounted the details of my two meet- 
ings, the one with Fuchs in Santa Fe, the one with Greenglass in Albuquerque. I 
told Yakovlev that Fuchs had related that tremendous progress had been made 
on the construction of the atom bomb and Fuchs had said that the first trial of 
an atomic explosion was due to take place in July, in New Mexico. Fuchs and 
I — I told Yakovlev that Fuchs and I had agreed upon a meeting between the two 
of us in Santa Fe for September of 1945. 

Q. Approximately how long did this conversation last, with Yakovlev?— A. This 
conversation lasted about two and a half hours. I gave every detail at that time 
of my two meetings with these people who furnished me with information in 
the Southwest. 

Q. Did you have a meeting with Yakovlev early in July of 1945? — A. Yes, 
I did. 

Q. Where did this meeting take place? — A. The meeting with Yakovlev early 
in July of 1945 took place inside of a combination seafood and bar, which is 
at the Broadway stop of the Astoria elevated line. 

Q. Did you have a conversation ? — A. Yes, I did. 



156 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Q. What was this conversation? — A. Yakovlev told me that it was necessary 
that we have an arrangement whereby some Soviet agent other than himself 
could get in touch with me. At Yalcovlev's instructions, I took from my pocket 
a piece of pai^er. This piece of paper was a memorandum sheet, sometliing like 
an invoice, from the Aithur H. Thomas Company, of Philadelphia, a laboratory 
supply house, and I tore oft the top part of this memorandum sheet, and on 
the reverse side, at Yakovlev's instructions, I wrote the following words, and 
I wrote it across as a diagonal of a parallelogram. I wrote, "Directions to Paul 
Street" and the "Street" is spelled out, S-t r-e-e-t. Then Yakovlev took this 
piece of paper and he tore it in an iiTegular fashion, so that the tear came be- 
tween the P and the a of the Paul. Yakovlev retained the part of the paper 
which said "Directions to P" and I was given by Yakovlev the piece of paper 
which had on it, "aul Street." Yakovlev told me that should I ever receive two 
tickets in an envelope, in the mail, with no other enclosure inside that envelope, 
that I should take this to be a signal, that at a definite number of days after 
the date that was printed on the tickets — the tickets themselves were to be 
tickets to either a sporting event or a theatrical attraction in New York City ; 
it would have a date on them — now, a certain number of days after that date 
on the tickets, I was to go to the Astoria — to the Broadway stop of the Astoria 
elevated line, but before I went there I was to scout the place very carefully for 
about an hour, to make sure there were no signs of surveillance. Then when 1 
was inside, I was to take a seat at a table in this combination restaurant and 
bar. My replacement Soviet contact was to stand at the bar where he could 
observe me, to again watch for any symptom of anything svispicious. Then he 
would approach me, the new Soviet contact, and he would say, "Can you direct 
me to Paul Street?" I was seated at the table. I would answer, "Yes, I am 
going there myself. Come along." First, however, he would show me the piece 
of paper, that is the first thing he would do, he would show me the piece of 
paper, and then I would produce the matching half. Then would come the recog- 
nition signal or the recognition phrases having to do with the directions to 
Paul Street. 

(Marked Government's Exhibit 14 for identification.) 

Q. I show you Government's Exhibit 14 for identification, and I ask you if 
this is a replica of the sheet of paper which you had on that particular occasion 
of your conversation with Yakovlev [handing] ? 

t^ Ht * f * * * 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. May I ask INIr. Lane to explain what he means by "replica"? 
The Court. Yes. 

Mr. Lane. Well, it is a duplicate, I believe, Mr. Bloch, of the same sheet of 
paper that he had on that occasion, took out of his pocket. 
Mr. E. H. Bloch. Does this purport to be the original? 
Mr. Lane. No, it does not. 
Mr. E. H. Bloch. Oh, I see. 

i^ 4: ill * * 4^ * 

The Witness. This sheet of paper is of the type used by the Arthur H. Thomas 
Company when someone went there to pick up a package. That was how I 
had got the original sheet and happened to have it in my pocket. 

Q. Is that a duplicate of the sheet you had on that particular occasion? — A. 
This appears to be a duplicate, Mr. Lane. I just want to see one thing — yes, I was 
looking at the reverse side to see if there was any printing on there. There 
isn't. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Mr. Lane, I wonder whether you can let me look at it, so 
that I don't get confused. 

Mr. Lane. Yes [handing]. 

Q. Now, will you write on this Government's Exhibit 14 for identification 
the wording that was on tliat paper, as best you can recall it. and then tear it in 
the way that you i-ecall it was torn on that particular evening? [Handed to 
witness.] — A. The wording will iiave to be written on the reverse side, because 
that is the way that it was done. It was on the reverse side, not the side where 
the printing is, but on the back. 

Q. Well, you do it as best you recall it. — A. (Witness writes on Government's 
Exhibit 14 for identification.) 

Q. Have you got the writing on there, Mr. Gold? — A. I have got the writing 
there. 

Q. Now, will you tear it in the way you recall it was torn at that time? — 
A. There is one difficulty, which was unavoidable here. The actual piece of paper 
was larger in this direction [indicating], but in order not to touch the imprint 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 167 

here, "Government's Exhibit."' I had to crowd the words towards the top a little 
bit, so that it is actually just a little smaller in this direction [indicating]. 

Mr. Lane. On the left-hand side. May the record indicate that the witness 
is pointing to the left-hand side of the exhibit? 

Q. Go ahead, rip it, tear it the way it was torn. — A. Well, I will have to tear 
across this notation. 

Q. Go ahead, tear across it. — A. (Witness tears as requested:) Just about like 
this. Now, this Would have to go down a little further. Shall I do it? 

Q. You do it. — A. (Witness te;',rs further.) 

Q. Now, is that a reasonable facsimile of the way the paper was torn before? — 
A. Yes, it is. 

Sli it * * * * * 

By Mr. Lane : 

Q. Mr. Gold, did you have a meeting with Yakovlev in the middle of August 
1945 ?~A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Where did this meeting talve place? — A. This meeting took place in 
Brooklyn. 

Q. And did you have a conversation at that time? — A. Yes, I did. 

Q. Will you tell the jury what the conversation was? 

The CotTPvT. Let me get this. When was this? 

Mr. Lane. August of 1945, your Honor. 

The Cox:rt. All right, proceed. 

The Witness. The conversation concerned the fact that I was to take, soon 
to take a trip in September to Santa Fe to meet Dr. Fuchs. I told Yakovlev that 
since I was going to see Dr. Fuchs I might as well go to Albuquerque and see the 
Greenglasses. At this time Yakovlev told me that it would be inadvisable to 
endanger the trip to see Fuchs by complicating it with a visit to the Greenglasses 
in Albuquerque. 

Q. Now, was that the sum and substance of that conversation? — A. That is the 
sum and stance of the conversation. 

Q. Now, did you have a meeting with Dr. Fuchs in September 1945? — A. Yes; 
I did. 

Q. When and where did this meeting take place? — A. The meeting took place 
in Santa Fe, New Mexico, on the 19th of September 1945. The exact place was 
on the outskirts of Santa Fe along a road leading out of Santa Fe near a large 
church. 

Q. As the result of this conversation what did you do? — A. As the resiUt of 
the meeting — of the conversation I had with Dr. Fuchs I returned to New York 
City and I did two things : I returned on the 22d of September and I missed 
my meeting with Yakovlev. I got back just too late that evening to see Yakovlev. 
About 10 days later I met Yakovlev and this time — the original meeting on the 
22d was supposed to be a short one. This time I met him in Main Street in 
Flushing, in Main Street, Flushing, and I turned over to him a package of infor- 
mation which I had received from Fuchs. 

Q. Now, at this time did you have a conversation with Y'akovlev, in your 
September meeting with Yakovlev? Was it September or October? — A. This was 
about 10 days later I would say or two weeks — it was still September, as I recall. 
Yes, I did. 

Q. What was the conversation?— A. The conversation covered the following 
matters which Fuchs told me : Fuchs had .said first that there was no longer 
open and free and easy cooperation between the British and the Americans 
at Los Alamos and that many departments which had been formally readily 
accessible to him were now closed. He said as a result his superiors among the 
Britains had advised him that he would probably very soon have to return to 
England. 

The second thing was that Fuchs told me that the first explosion at Alamogordo, 
New JNIexico, in .July had produced a tremendous feeling of awe among the 
scientists who had been producing it. He said in addition the attitude of the 
townspeople had changed quite a bit. Before that they had been regarded as a 
sort of boondoggling outfit and how they were raised to the level of heroes. 

Fuchs told me, the third thing, that he had attended 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, may we approach the bench becau.se it 
is in connection with a proposition of law on this Fuchs conversation. I would 
like to discuss it with the Court and Mr. Saypol. 

The Court. Come up. 



158 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Just to clarify the record, is it understood that what the 
witness is now testifying about is a conversation which he had with one of the 
defendants? 

The Court. Yakovlev. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Yakovlev? 

The Court. Yes. 

The Witness. I reported to Yakovlev that Fuchs had told me about being 
present at the first atomic explosion at Alamogordo, New Mexico. Fuchs had 
said that the flash had been visible some 200 miles away. I told Yakovlev that 
Fuchs was very worried about one matter : This concerned the fact that the 
British had gotten to Kiel, Germany, ahead of the Nazis — ahead of the Russians, 
and Fuchs was very worried, very much concerned over whether the British 
Intelligence might not discover the Gestapo dossier upon him. I told Yakovlev 
that Fuchs had said that he, Fuchs that is, had been the leader of the student 
group, the German student group at the University of Kiel and had fought the 
Nazis, Nazi storm troopers in the streets of Kiel. Fuchs had said that there 
was a very complete dossier by the Gestapo upon him and he was greatly troubled 
by the fact that should the British Intelligence come upon it they would become 
aware of his very strong Communist background and ties. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If your Honor please, although as we as lawyers may 
understand it quite clearly, I would ask the Court to instruct the jury, to tell 
the .iury at this point that Dr. Klaus Fuchs is not a defendant or a conspirator 
in this proceeding. 

The Court. Dr. Klaus Fuchs is not a defendant in this case. This testimony 
is being admitted in connection with the general charge of conspiracy to commit 
espionage, in which Yakovlev is a defendant. 

Mr. Satpol. Will the Court supplement that observation with the statement 
also that this witness is a coconspirator? 

The Court. Oh, yes. The witness Harry Gold is a coconspirator. 

The Witness. The final item I reported to Yakovlev were the details of an 
arrangement which Fuchs and I had arrived at, which arrangement concerned 
the means by which someone would get in touch with Fuchs when he returned 
to England. The exact details were these : Beginning on the first Saturday of 
every month after it had been determined that Fuchs had returned to England, 
at a stop on the British subway, underground in London called Paddington 
Crescent, possibly Teddington Crescent, 8 p. m., Fuchs was to be on the street 
at the underground stop, the street level. He was to be carrying five books 
boimd with strings and supported by two fingers of one hand; he was to be carry- 
ing two books in another hand. His contact, whoever that would be, was to be 
carrying a copy of a Bennett Cerf book, Stop Me if You Have Heard This. 

Q. Does that conclude your conversation with Yakovlev at that time? — A. That 
concludes my conversation with Yakovlev. 

Q. When was your next meeting with Yakovlev? — A. Yakovlev and I had a 
regular series of meetings all throughout that fall of 1945. 

Q. Do you recall a meeting in November of 1945? — A. Yes ; I do. 

Q. With Yakovlev?— A. Yes; I do. 

Q. Where was this meeting held? — A. This meeting was held in New York City. 

Q. And did you have a conversation with Yakovlev? — A. Yes; I did. 

Q. Will you tell the jury what that conversation was? — A. I told Yakovlev 
that Greenglass had said at the time that I saw him in .Tune of that year that 
Greenglass would be possibly coming home on a furlough about Christmas time. 
I told Yakovlev the time was drawing near to Christmas and that we ought to 
make some plan to get in touch with this brother-in-law, .Julius, so that we could 
get further information from Greenglass. Yakovlev told me to mind my own 
business. He cut me very short. 

Q. Now, in January 1946 did you have a conversation witli Yakovlev? — A. Yes, 
I did. 

Q. Where did this conversation take place? — A. This conversation took place 
in New York City. 

Q. What was the conversation? — A. Yakovlev at this time told me that I should 
be very careful, much more careful than ever before. He related to me an 
incident which liad taken place toward the end of 1945. He said that a very 
important person who had upon him information on the atom bomb had come 
to New York at the end of 1945 and that he, Yakovlev, had tried to get in touch 
with that ijerson over a period of time, a period of a few days, but that the 
man had been trailed by Intelligence men continually, so that Yakovlev had to 
give up tlie idea of getting in touch with this source of information. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 159 

Yakovlev told me, he was telling me the story as an example of how to conduct 
myself. He said if it came to a choice it was far better to pass up any chance of 
getting information than to do anything which would endanger the whole scheme. 

Yakovlev said that he was very apprehensive. 

By the Couet : 

Q. Did you know what Yakovlev was doing by way of employment aside from 
these activities? — A. I did not, your Honor. I had assumed 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Wait, if the Court please. I object to what he might have 
assumed. 

Q. Now was there anything else said on that occasion about any future meet- 
ings — A. Yes. Yakovlev and I had arranged the following. We made a slight 
change in our method of meeting. Sliould a scheduled meeting not take place, 
then the nest meeting which would take place would be at the same time as had 
originally- — at tlie same place that had originally been planned, but the time was 
changed and the day of the week was changed, and should this alternate meeting 
not take place, then tlie emergency meeting would take place. But I was to use 
extreme caution about the emergency meeting. I was to go there well in advance, 
to scout it thoroughly, and to make certain that there was absolutely no sur- 
veillance going on. 

Q. Now, did you have a meeting scheduled with Yakovlev for February of 
1946?— A. Yes, I did. 

Q. And where was this meeting scheduled to take place? — A. This meeting in 
February was scheduled to take place at the Earl Movie Theatre in the Bronx. 

Q. Did you keep this appointment with Yakovlev? — A. Yes, I did. 

Q. And what happened on that occasion? — A. Yakovlev didn't show up. 

Q. When was the next time that you saw Yakovlev? — A. The next time that I 
saw Yakovlev was on the night of the 26th of December 1946. 

Q. And you didn't see him in the interim between February and December of 
1946? — A. For a period of about ten months I did not see Yakovlev. 

Q. Now, will you tell the jury how you happened to meet Yakovlev in Decem- 
ber of 1946? — A. Early in December of 1946 I received two tickets, two tickets 
to a boxing match in New York Oity. The tickets had arrived very late for me 
to keep the appointment. They had been addressed wrongly ; they had been 
sent to 6328 Kindred Street instead of 6823 Kindred Street. So I wasn't able 
to keep the appointment. 

Q. Kindred Street where? — A. In Philadelphia, my home in Philadelphia. At 
about five o'clock in the late afternoon of the 26th of December the phone rang 
at the laboratory where I was working in New York City, the laboratory of 
A. Brothman and Associates. I answered. A voice asked for Harry Gold. I 
said that I was Harry Gold. The voice said, "Have you been all right?" 

Q. Did you recognize the voice? — A. And said, "I am John." I recognized it 
as that of Yakovlev. I said, I told him that I had been fine. Now, the phrase 
used by Yakovlev was a code phrase which was employed to indicate whether 
there had been any suspicious signs about us, about my being watched, and my 
answer that I was fine was my code answer which indicated that there was no 
sign of any surveillance going on. 

Yakovlev told me that he would meet me at the theater — he didn't specify. 
He said at the theater at 8 o'clock that night. And I said — I answered that I 
would be there. 

Q. And what happened? — A. By the theater I knew that Yakovlev meant the 
Earl Theatre where our last meeting had been scheduled. 

Q. Now, on that evening did you appear at the Earl Theatre? — A. At exactly 
eight o'clock I was in the upstairs lounge of the Earl Theater in the Bronx. 

Q. What happened there? — A. There I was accosted by a man who showed 
me a torn piece of paper which Yakovlev and I had prepared on that night in 
July in Astoria. 

Q. Are you referring to Government's Exhibit 14-A and B in evidence [show- 
ing] ? — A. Yes, I am. 

Q. And are you now telling the jury that one part of that exhibit was shown 
to you? — A. Yes, it was. 

Q. And did you have the other part? — A. I had the matching part. 

Q. Did you match the two papers at that time? — A. We did not match them. 
I was just shown this part. 

Q. And then what happened? 

The Court. What did you mean by accosted? I don't quite understand what 
you mean. 



160 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The Witness. The man who met me was not Yakovlev. He was — — 

The Court. Is that all you care to convey by the word accosted? 

The Witness. No. I would like 

The Court. Go ahead. 

The Witness. To convey more. The man was not Yakovlev. He was tall, 
about 6 feet 2, had blond hair, and a very determined feature. He walked with 
a catlike stride almost on the balls of his feet, and he told me, after showing 
me- 



Mr. E. H. Bloch. One moment. I object to what he told him. It wasn't one 
of the defendants. 

Mr. Lane. Well, it isn't necessary, your Honor, to get that. It isn't necessary. 
It isn't too important. 

The Court. All right. Don't tell us what he told you. 

Q. Now as a result of your meeting with this individual whom you just de- 
scribed, what did you do? — A. As a result of the meeting I had with the man 
I met in the lounge of the Earl Theater I went to the southwest corner of Forty- 
second Street and Third Avenue, and there later that evening met Yakovlev. 

Q. Now, was there anybody with you and Yakovlev at that time? — A. No; 
there was not. 

Q. Did you have a conversation? — A. Yes; we did. 

Q. What was the conversation? — A. Yakovlev asked me if I had anything 
further from Dr. Fuchs in the interim. I told him I did not. Yakovlev then 
apologized for not having seen me in almost ten months, but he said it was un- 
avoidable, that he had had to lie low during that period. We took a walk and 
we sat down at a bar on Second Avenue. There Yakovlev told me that he was 
very glad that I was now working in New York. He said it would put much 
less of a strain upon me as regards to meeting my Soviet contact. Yakovlev 
told me that I should begin to plan now for a mission which he had. He said 
that he wanted me to go to Paris, France, beginning in March of 1947. Yakovlev 
told me that I was to go first to London, and from London to take a plane to 
Paris. He gave me a sheet of paper, on which was typed — a sheet of onion- 
skin paper — and on it was typed the following information regarding a meeting 
I was to have in Paris. I was to meet a physicist 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, this may seem technical but will the 
witness tell us what happened to that piece of paper? Otherwise I will have to 
object to it on the grounds it is secondary evidence. 

The Court. What happened to the piece of paper? 

The Witness. I destroyed that piece of paper just a day or so before Memorial 
Day of 1947, and just about a few minutes before Agents Shannon and O'Brien 
of the FBI came to question me about my relationship with Abe Brothman. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. I must say, your Honor, this presents a rather novel prop- 
osition to me in connection with the secondary evidence rule. It is my under- 
standing that where a witness wilfully destroys a document, he can't introduce 
secondary contents of it. Of course, I am not sure of my position in the light 
of the context of the charges, but may I make my objection to save the record? 

The Court. All right. 

Mr. Lane. Well, your Honor, we withdraw the question and we withdraw the 
answer. 

The Court. All right. I must say, Mr. Lane, you have been very helpful to 
the Court. 

Mr. Lane. Thank you, your Honor. 

Q. Now, was there any discussion at that time about the name Brothman? — A. 
Yes, there was. Yakovlev began to discuss with me the means by which I should 
manage to get off from work, in order to make this trip to Paris. I told Yakovlev 
that once the pressure of work at Abe Brothman and Associates had eased up a 
bit — and then Yakovlev almost went through the roof of the saloon. He said, 
"You fool!" He said, "You spoiled eleven years of work." He told me that I 
didn't realize what I had done, and he told me that I should have remembered 
that some time in the summer of '45 he had told me that Brothman was under 
suspicion by the United States Government authorities of having engaged in 
espionage and that I should have remembered it. Yakovlev threw down on 
the table where we were sitting, the bar, an amount of money which was about 
two or three times the actual cost of the drinks which we had had, and he dashed 
out of tlie place. I walked along with him for a while, and he kept mumbling 
that I had created terrible damage and that he didn't know whether it could 
be repaired or not. Yakovlev then told me that he would not see me in the 
United States again, and he left me. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 161 

Q. Now, during the period between the middle of June of 1944 and December 
26 of 1946?— A. Yes. 

Q. That was your last meeting with Yakovlev?— A. That is right. 

Q. During that period of time did you have any conversations with a man 
by the name of Dean Slack? — A. I had conversations about— about three or four 
conversations with a man called Alfred Dean Slack. 

Q. As a result of those conversations, what did you do? — A. As a result or 
those conversations I turned over to Yakovlev information relating to the 

Q. Now, just a minute. I haven't asked you what the contents were.— A. I 
see, I am sorry. 

Q. I merely want to know what you did. — A. I turned over information to 
Yakovlev. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. If the Court please, I would be obliged if the Court would 
just tell the jury that Alfred Dean Slack is not a defendant in this case, nor is he 
named as a coconspirator. 

The Court. That is right, he is neither a defendant nor a coconspirator. 

Q. Now, prior to your association with Yakovlev, were you associated with any- 
one else? — A. Yes, I was. , 

Q. Who was that? 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Would you fix the time, please? 

Mr. Lane. Well, I think he has testified that he met Yakovlev in March of 1944. 
I want to know 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Prior. 

Mr. Lane. On that day, just before he met, before he became associated' with 
Yakovlev. 

Mr. E. H. Bloch. Well, I object to it upon the ground it is not within the 
corners of the indictment. 

Mr. Lane. I withdraw the question. 

Q. Now I show you Government's Exhibit 15 in evidence and I ask you to look 
at the picture attached thereto and tell me if you recognize that individual 
[showing]? — A. Yes, I do. 

Q. Who is it?— A. That is Anatoli Yakovlev. 

The Court. Would you be able to shorten this perhaps if we recessed until 
tomorrow ? 

Mr. Saypol. No ; we can get it right in. 

Mr. Lane. That is the last thing I am going to do. 

Q. Now, is this man whose picture I showed you on Government's Exhibit 15 
in evidence and whom you have identified as Yakovlev, is that the party whom 
you knew as "John"? — A. Yes, it is. 

Mr. Lane. Now, I am going to read to the jury portions of the certified docu- 
ment from the Department of State. 

It is entitled "Foreign official status notification," and it has on here the full 
name, "Anatoli Antonovich Yakovlev." 

The second item : "Name of Government and agency or department thereof," 
and it is the "Consulate General of the U. S. S. R., New York," United States 
of Soviet Russia. 

"Present nationality — U. S. S. E. 

'•Previous nationality or nationalities — U. S. S. R. 

"Place of birth" — I will have to spell that — "B-o-r-i-s-o-g-l-e-b-s-k," that is the 
"City or town" "State" is Y-o-r-n-n-e-z-h, and the "Country" is the U. S. S. R. 

"Date of birth— May 31. 1911. 

"Port or place, date and manner of last arrival in United States and name of 
vessel, if any : San Pedro, February 4, 1941, SS. Ecuador." 

"American visa issued by American Embassy in Moscow. 

"Duties terminated : Left New Yorlv December 1946 by ship. 

"Business address : 7 East 61st Street, New York, N. Y. 

"Home address : 6 East 87th Street, New York, N. Y. 

"Capacity in which signer is now serving, giving title of position, if any : Clerk. 

"Date of as.sumption of present duties in the United States : February 8, 1941. 

"Detailed statement of signer's present and proposed activities, including the 
place or places of performance and for whom performed or to be performed : 
Clerical duties. 

"Nature and place or places of occupation or employment during the last five 
years, 1936-1941 : Student, engineering — Economic Inst., Moscow." 

Then attached hereto is a smaller notation, Avhich is headed : "Department 
of State 



162 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

"Washington 

"Anatoli Antonovich Yakovlev lias notified the Secretary of State of his (or 
her) status in the United States as an official (or employee) of the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics Government" ; and that is dated April 3, 1941. 

On the back of that card is the notation : 

"The Secretary of State must be notified of any change in the status of the 
holder of this receipt." 

Attached thereto also is another card : 

"Department of State," giving the name "Anatoli Antonovich Yakovlev, 6 
East 87th Street, New York, N. Y.," and it sets forth the Yakovlev is a citizen 
of subject of the Soviet Union, "Whose status as an official (or employee) of the 
Soviet Government has been notified to the Secretary of State by the Embassy all 
legation of the country by which he is employed." 

At the bottom of this particular document is the picture of Yakovlev attached 
thereto and it also contains Yakovlev's signature. 

* * » * * * • * 



PART II 

CHARGES NOT PROVEN IN A COURT OF LAW 

1. Charges Concerning Arthur Adams, Clarence Hiskey, John 

Chapin, and Others 

The following excerpt is reprinted, witliont comment and only for 
purposes of assisting the reader, from a committee print issued by 
the Committee on Un-American Activities of the House of Repre- 
sentatives and entitled "Report on Soviet Espionage Activities in Con- 
nection With the Atom Bomb" (September 28, 1948; 80th Cong., 2d 
sess.) : 

THE CHAPIN-HISKEY CASE 

Sometime in 1938 an individual who was born eitlier in Sweden or in Russia, 
according to information wliich the committee has, and who goes under the name 
of Arthur Alexandrovich Adams, entered the United States from Canada, and 
in connection therewith furnished a fraudulent Canadian birth certificate. 

Adams' admission to the United States for permanent residence was facilitated 
by the false statements of one Samuel Novicli, who is presently the president of 
Electronics Corp. of America, and has been prominently connected with that com- 
pany, and with the ownership thereof, since its creation in 1942. During the war 
Electronics Corp. of America performed secret Government contracts in the 
amount of some $6,000,000. For a time it was the only contractor engaged in 
producing certain highly secret items for use in radar installations. Further 
reference is hereafter made to the activities of Samuel Novick. 

Arthur Adams is virtually a charter-member Communist of the Soviet Union. 
He participated as a revolutionary in the Russian Revolution of 1905, was impris- 
oned, and is still suffering from the injuries resulting from the beatings he 
received at that time. As will hereafter appear, all of the persons who were his 
close contacts in New York during the period 1943-45 testified as to his physical 
disabilities — they were conveniently ignorant as to the cause of those disabilities. 

It has been discovered subsequently that Arthur Adams had several previous 
sojourns in the United States. In 1920 or 1921 he was in the United States repre- 
senting himself as a technical engineering adviser to a commission of the Russian 
Government. Between 1922 and 1927 he was back in Russia. He returned to the 
United States in 1927 and represented himself on this occasion to be engaged in 
some Russian governmental business, having to do with the Amo Motor Co., the 
first automobile work constructed in Russia. Between 1927 and 1932 he was 
again back in Russia. In 1932 he showed up in the United States representing 
himself as a member of a purchasing commission sent by the Soviet Government 
to purchase airplanes from the Curtiss-Wright Co., and as a member of the Avia- 
tion Trust of the Russian Government. 

In 1936, Adams, accompanied by his wife, reappeared, and for a time visited 
Adams' wife's sister in New York City. According to the brother-in-law of 
Adams' wife, they left in 1937, ostensibly to return to Russia. The committee 
does not know whether or not Adams actually returned to Russia before he 
appeared in Canada seeking admission to the United States. It was about this 
time that Samuel Novick facilitated Adams' entry into the United States from 
Canada by false statements as to Adams' employment by Novick. 

According to the brother-in-law of Adams' wife, there had always been gome- 
thing very "hush-hush," as he put it, about Adams' work and the real reasons 
for his visits to the United States. Adams' work had been similarly character- 
ized by various friends of Adams who were known to his wife's brother-in-law. 
The brother-in-law testified that he, of course, knew Adams to be a Communist. 

The committee has little information as to Adams' activities since his entry 
from Canada in 1988 to the time it was discovered that Adams was acting as a 

163 



164 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Soviet espionage agent. It does know, however, that he was endeavoring to con- 
ceal the nature of those activities. Sometime in 1941 or 1942, Adams gave 
$1,875 to one Samuel J. Wegman, now deceased, who was operating a business in 
Hollywood, Calif., and in New York City, and requested Wegman to use these 
funds to pay Adams $75 per week and forward the checks to Adams at the 
Peter Cooi>er Hotel in New York City. Before his death, when Wegman ex- 
plained his association with Adams, he stated that he had first met Adams 
through Julius Heiman. In 1942 Adams represented himself as employed by 
Wegman as a machine designer, and listed Wegman's business address as Holly- 
wood, Calif. 

During the war period Adams was discovered to be actively engaged in espio- 
nage activties for the Soviet Government. Those activities included the secur- 
ing of information with respect to the developments that were being made in the 
United States in connection with nuclear fission. He was in physical contact 
with Clarence Hiskey, an atomic scientist assigned to the Manhattan project. 
This report herein after deals at length with Clarence Hiskey's connection with 
Adams. 

He experienced considerable success in securing data that he desired, for 
when his room and his effects were secretly searched in 1944 by Government 
agents, he was found to have in his possession highly secret information regard- 
ing the atomic bomb plant at Oak Ridge, Tenn., as well as other vital informa- 
tion regarding the development of atomic energy in other countries. The com- 
mittee has evidence of at least one direct contact that he made with the Soviet 
consulate in New York. On October 25, 1944, Adams was observed to leave the 
home of a lawyer in New York and enter an automobile registered in the name 
of Pavel Mikhailov. Pavel Mikhailov was vice consul in the Soviet consulate 
in New York at that time. AVheu Adams entered the car he was carrying a large 
carrying case. Adams was driven directly to the Soviet consulate. 

The importance of Adams in the Soviet hierarchy was testified to by Adams' 
wife's brother-in-law, who in 1932 had visited Adams and Adams' wife in Moscow. 
He testified that they had a maid and served the best of food. In short, they 
were well off. A station such as this in the Soviet Union is limited to persons 
regarded by the Soviet Government as being of considerable importance. 

When Adams' status as a Soviet espionage agent was discovered, he was 
thereafter under fairly constant surveillance by the security officers of the Man- 
hattan Engineering District, as well as by special agents of the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation. 

Eventuail.y, Adams discovered that he was under surveillance, and in Febru- 
ary 1945, made a desperate but unsuccessful attempt to leave the United States. 

The committee is presently investigating the complicity of two of the subjects 
of this report in the attempted escape of Arthur Adams. Contradictory testi- 
mony has been given by Government agents and these two witnesses. When the 
facts can be dtifinitely verified, the committee intends to recommend indictment 
and prosecution for perjury. 

Adams began his attempted escape by leaving the apartment of Victoria Stone, 
one of these witnesses. He appeared in Chicago with Eric Bernay, the other of 
these two witnesses. 

Adams, from Chicago, preceded to Portland, Oreg., where he attempted to 
board a Soviet vessel. He was thwarted by the FBI in this attempt ; but, because 
of governmental policy in existence at that time, the full details of which are 
unknown to this committee because it has not had access to the records, Adams 
was not arrested. He proceeded immediately back to New York, where he sub- 
sequently disappeared and has not been seen or heard of since. According 
l^p the committee's best information, he is now in the Soviet Union. 

Clarence Francis Hiskey is presently employed as professor of analytical 
ctemistry at the Polytechnic Institute in Brooklyn, N. Y. He was born on July 5, 
1912, in Milwaukee, Wis. He graduated from La Crosse Central High School in 
La Crosse, Wis., in 1929. From 1929 to 1933, he attended the La Crosse State 
I'I'eachers College. He attended the University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis., re- 
ceiving a B. S. degree in 1935, an M. S. degree in 1936, and a Ph. D. degree in 1939. 

During the time he attended the University of Wisconsin, he met Marcia Sand, 
his ffi'st wife. An otficial Military Intelligence report, dated June 5, 1945, makes 
the following evaluation of Hiskey: 

"Hiskey was active in Communist movements while attending graduate school 
at the university. * * * Allegedly Marcia, subject's wife, was a Communist. 
It was reported Hiskey had stated 'that the present form of government is no 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 165 

good, the Russian Government is a model and that Russia can do no wrong; if 
the lend-lease bill is passed this country will have a dictator.' * * * Also re- 
marked that the United States Government should look to Russia for leadership. 
Hiskey reportedly urged radical-minded young men to take ROTO training to 
provide for 'possible penetration of the Communist Party in the Armed Forces 
of the United States.' In various lectures he discussed communism. * * * 
Investigations conducted in 1942 revealed Hiskey read the Communist publications 
Daily Worker and In Fact, and he had definite communistic leanings. * * * 

Hiskey and his wife lived for approximately 2 years with whose brother 

was later president of the Young Communist League (cited as subversive by the 
Attorney General) at the University of Wisconsin. * * * It was reported that 
subject and his wife associated with other alleged Communists or Communist 
sympathizers. Hiskey was said to be an active member of the Communist Party." 

The committee makes no findings as to the correctness of such evaluation by 
Military Intelligence. When Clarence Hiskey and his former wife, Marcia 
Sand, testified before this committee on September 9, 1948, however, both he and 
Marcia Sand refused to answer any questions concerning their Communist affilia- 
tions and connections while attending the University of Wisconsin, on the basis 
that they might incriminate themselves. However, Marcia Sand testified, under 
oath, that she was not presently a member of the Communist Party, but, asked 
if she had ever been a member of the Communist Party, she refused to answer 
this question "on the grounds that it may degrade or incriminate me." 

While attending the University of Wisconsin, Clarence Hiskey applied for a 
Reserve commission from the United States Army. On June IS, 1938, he was 
issued a Reserve commission as a second lieutenant in the Chemical Warfare 
Service. This commission was given on the basis of his educational background 
and due to the fact that he had had ROTC training while attending college. 

From September 1939 to 1941, Clarence Hiskey was employed as an instruc- 
tor in chemistry at the University of Tennessee at Knoxville. For 5 months in 
1941, he was an associate chemist with the Tennessee Valley Authority aluminum 
nitrate plant at Sheflield, Ala. 

According to the testimony of Hiskey, he then went to Columbia University, 
New York, where he was engaged as an instructor from September 1941 until 
approximately September 1942. In the fall of 1942, upon the recommendation of 
Harold Urey, Hiskey was requested to do research work in connection with 
atomic energy in a laboratory at Columbia University, known as the SAM Lab- 
oratory. The SAM Laboratory worked primarily on the gaseous diffusion process 
of separating out xiranium 235. This process was later known as the K-25 
pi'ocess. The plant which resulted from the research at Columbia University 
later became known as the K-25 plant at Oak Ridge, Tenn. The major research 
on this phase of the work was done at Columbia University. According to Army 
records, Hiskey, while engaged on this project, was in charge of a team of sci- 
entists. This project also worked on the development of heavy water. 

The code letters "SAM" for the laboratory were taken as the first letters of the 
words "substitute alloy material" and were purposely chosen to mislead outsiders 
as to the true purpose of the laboratory. 

The gaseous diffusion plant, which resulted from this work at Columbia Uni- 
versity, was later constructed at Oak Ridge, Tenn., and details of the process, 
and its rate of production, are at the date of this report, top secret. 

Hiskey, in his testimony, stated that he was a chemist and was engaged in 
chemical research on the SAM project. In September of 1943 or thereabouts, the 
laboratory in which Hiskey was engaged was moved to the University of Chicago. 
In Chicago, Hiskey joined the Metallurgical Laboratory, where he remained until 
April 28, 1944, when he was ordered to active duty in the United States Army for 
limited military service. 

The importance of the Metallurgical Laboratory toward the development of the 
atomic bomb is quoted from the Smyth report which states : 

"It would be foolish to attempt an assessment of the relative importance of the 
contributions of the various laboratories to the over-all success of the atomic 
bomb project. This report makes no such attempt, and there is little correlation 
between the space devoted to the work of a given group and the ability or impor- 
tance of that group. * * * Such criteria, applied to the objectives and ac- 
complishments of the various laboratories set up since large-scale work began, 
favor the Metallurgical Laboratory as the part of the project to be treated most 
completely. 

"In accordance with the general objectives just outlined, the initial objectives 
of the Metallurgical Laboratory were: First, to find a system using normal 



166 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

uranium in which a chain reaction would occur; second, to show that, if such a 
chain reaction did occur, it would be possible to separate plutonium chemically 
from the other material ; and finally, to obtain the theoretical and experimental 
data for effecting an explosive chain reaction with either U-235 or with plu- 
tonium. The ultimate objective of the laboratory was to prepare plans for the 
large-scale production of plutonium and for its use in bombs." 

As previously mentioned, Clarence Hiskey was called to active duty in the 
United States Army on April 28, 1944. It should be noted that during World 
War II, scientists— and particularly scientists engaged within the Manhattan 
Engineering District — were deferred pursuant to instructions given selective 
service boards. The United States Army was cognizant of such instructions in 
connection with ordering Reserve officers to active duty. The reasons he was 
called to active duty were given to the committee by a high-ranking official 
formerly connected with the Manhattan Engineering District. The pertinent 
portions of his testimony are as follows : 

"Colonel X. Hiskey was, I think, a $9,000-a-year man. You can verify that 
at the University of Chicago, the money being paid by the Government on a 
project. He was very definitely, in our opinion, a strong suspect, and, then 
finally we were convinced that he was a subversive agent. 

"The Chairman. You were convinced — what? 

"Colonel X. We were convinced that he was a subversive agent. Now, the 
question was what to do with Hiskey. We had trouble with scientists when we 
tried to move one. Someone, I think it was Colonel Lansdale, found in Hiskey's 
record that he had a second lieutenancy in college in the ROTC. Providentially, 
he had not given up his second lieutenancy, and we called The Adjutant General, 
and we had him call Hiskey to active duty amidst a great furore that we were 
doing it deliberately, and so on, and we transferred Hiskey, I think to the Canol 
project, I think, in Canada, where, in the Quartermaster Corps, he counted under- 
wear until that went out of business. He was then transferred to an outfit in 
the South Pacific. He was promoted under ordinary steps from lieutenant to 
captain with no interference from us, and he finally came out of the Army as a 
captain." 

An Army Intelligence report reflects that a letter dated July 4, 1942, recom- 
mended that Hiskey not be called to active duty. On April 19, 1943, it was rec- 
ommended that Hiskey's Reserve commission be revoked. The recommendation 
on April 19, 1943, was based on a report dated March 10, 1943, in which an in- 
vestigating agent stated, among other things, that Hiskey's attitude was un- 
American and his discretion and integrity were questioned. According to the 
agent, the investigation proved definitely that Hiskey was communistic in his 
beliefs. 

In a letter dated April 13, 1944, the recommendation that Hiskey not be called 
to active duty was rescinded, and on April 28, 1944, Hiskey was ordered to active 
duty for limited military service. The reasons for this action have already 
been explained. He was relieved from active duty on July 18, 1946. 

Official records of the Army reflect that Clarence Hiskey was property survey 
officer at White Horse, Yukon Territory, from May 8, 1944, to August 26, 1944. 
While at this station, a search of Clarence Hiskey's effects by security officers 
disclosed that he had in his effects a personal notebook which contained notes 
that he had made while working on the atomic bomb project at Chicago, 111., 
relative to the development of several components of the bomb. 

A CIC (Counter Intelligence Corps) agent assigned to the Chicago office of the 
Manhattan Engineering District was dispatched to White Horse, where he 
obtained the afore-mentioned notebook and returned it to authorities at the 
Manhattan Engineering District. 

When Hiskey appeared before the subcommittee, he was given every oppor- 
tunity to clear his record and deny the testimony before the committee that he 
had given information to Arthur Adams. Instead, lie refused to answer these 
questions on the ground that his answer might incriminate and degrade him. 
The whole of his testimony is being made public with the making of this report. 

The day after that on which Hiskey was called to active duty in the Army, 
Arthur Adams arrived in Chicago from New York and immediately met with 
Clarence Hiskey. From what transpired thereafter, as will presently be de- 
scribed, the inference is irresistible that at this meeting Adams told Hiskey 
that Hiskey would have to develop a contact within the Metallurgical Labora- 
tories to take Hiskey's place ; for on the following day Hiskey proceeded to 
Cleveland. There he went to the hotel of John Hitchcock Chapin, a chemical 
engineer emijloyed in the Metallurgical Laboratories, who was in Cleveland 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 167 

engaged in a project which, according to Chapin, was even secret within the 
Manhattan Engineering District project itself. 

At that meeting between Chapin and Hisliey, Chapin, upon the urging of 
Hisliey, agreed to meet witli Artliur Adams and furnish him with information 
as to the progress being made in the development of the atom bomb. So that 
Chapin would be sure of the individual to whom he was to give the information, 
Chapin gave Hiskey a key, whicli Hiskey in turn gave to Arthur Adams for 
the latter's identification. Chapin admitted to the committee that Hiskey 
informed him that Adams was a Soviet agent. Some of Chapin's testimony 
follows : 

"Mr. Stripling. Before you met Arthur Adams, did you have any conversation 
with Clarence Hiskey regarding Arthur Adams? 

"Mr. Chapin. Yes. 

"Mr. Stripling. Would you give the committee the details of that conversation? 

"Mr. Chapin. As well as I can remember. Well, I was told that Arthur Adams 
was a Russian agent, and told by Hiskey, that is 

"Mr. Stripling. When did he tell you that? 

"Mr. Chapin. That was around the spring of — it must have been the spring of 
1944 ; yes. 

"Mr. Stripling. April 29 or 30 — do you know? 

"Mr. Chapin. It could have been. 

"Mr. Stripling. It was in April, spring? 

"Mr. Chapin. Well, it was the spring. 

"Mr. Stripling. Spring of 1944. All right; what else did he tell you? 

"Mr. Chapin. I have to think now — he asked me whether I would be willing 
to meet Arthur Adams at some future time. 

"Mr. Stripling. What was your reply? 

"Mr. Chapin. After thinking about it awhile, I said, 'Yes, I would be willing 
to meet him.' 

"Mr. Stripling. Why did Hiskey want you to meet Arthur Adams? 

4: * :|: H: 4: « 4; 

"Mr. Chapin. Well, to the best of my recollection, it would be to discuss whether 
or not I should hand out any information to Adams on my work. 
"Mr. Stripling. On your work? 
"Mr. Chapin. That is vague ; I mean the gist of it was that. 

******* 

"Mr. Stripling. Was any arrangement made at that time between you and 
Hiskey for you to meet Adams? 

"Mr. Chapin. No definite arrangement ; that is — well, it was arranged that I 
would meet Adams sometime probably ; no date or anything like that. 

"Mr. Stripling. Did you give Hiskey a key? 

"Mr. Chapin. Yes ; I did. 

"Mr. Stripling. Explain the circumstances and the details of the key arrange- 
ment to the committee. 

"Mr. Chapin. The key would be a means of my knowing if Adams ever did get 
in touch with me — would be a means for my knowing that that was Arthur Adams, 
or the man that Hiskey had spoken to me about. 

"Mr. Stripling. You gave Clarence Hiskey a key. Do you recall what kind 
of a key it was? What it was a key to? 

"Mr. Chapin. It was an ordinary key. I think it was a key to the basement 
of our apartment, or something or other. It was an extra key that I had. 

"Mr. Stripling. But the key was to serve as a so-called instrument of identity ; 
is that right? 

"Mr. Chapin. Yes. 

"Mr. Stripling. Did you ever see Arthur Adams ? 

"Mr. Chapin. Yes. 

"Mr. Stripling. Would you give the committee the details of your meeting with 
Arthur Adams. 

"Mr. Chapin. As best as I can. He came around to our apartment — first, he 
phoned actually ; and then 

"Mr. Stripling. That was the fall of 1944? 

"Mr. Chapin. Yes. He phoned and then came around to our apartment some- 
time after that, and he did not come into our apartment actually, he came down- 
stairs, and I went out and answered the doorbell and went down to meet him, 
and he gave me the key, and I believe I asked him whether he would come up or 
not, and he did not and suggested that we meet in a hotel room, or something 
like that. 

81095—51 12 



168 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

"Mr. Stripling. Did he suggest that you come to his hotel room? 

"Mr. Chapin. Well, he must have, because that is where I went ; I do not know. 

"Mr. Stripling. Yes; where did you go with him? 

"Mr. Chapin. This was another night now ; I went to the Stevens Hotel, I think 
it was. 

"Mr. Stripling. In other words, you met him on this particular night, and you 
made arrangements to meet him — was it the following night? 

"Mr. Chapin. I do not know ; I mean, I cannot remember. 

"Mr. Stripling. But you did go to the Stevens Hotel? 

"Mr. Chapin. Yes ; I did, 

"Mr. Stripling. It was within a few days, at least? 

"Mr. Chapin. Yes. 

"Mr. Stripling. All right ; tell the committee what tran.spired at the hotel. 

"Mr. Chapin. Well, I went when Adams was there in the room that he told 

me he would be in, and he suggested that he would like to — this again, I am 

trying to give the essence of it ; I honestly do not remember the details — tlie 

es&ence of it was that he would like to have me give liim information on my work. 

9 ***** * 

"Mr. Stripling. Yes. How long were you in his room? 
"Mr. Chapin. Oh, I would guess an hour so so." 

(Note. — Chapin in his testimony said that he did not furnish any information 
to Arthur Adams in the Stevens Hotel.) 

^ ***** * 

"Mr. Stripling. When did you decide not to cooperate, Mr. Chapin? 

"Mr. Chapin. Well, I think I said it must have been during the interview; 

because, after all 

"Mr. Stripling. You got cold feet, in other words? 
"Mr. Chapin. I would say so. 

"Mr. Stripling. What happened to the key? 
"Mr. Chapin. The FBI has it, so far as I know." 

John Hitchcock Chapin was born August 18, 1913, at Rutland, Vt. He gradu- 
ated from Cornell University in 1935 with a bachelor's degree in chemistry. He 
received his Ph. D. in chemistry from the University of Illinois in 1939. While 
Chapin was attending the University of Illinois he was also employed there as a 
part-time assistant professor. His first employment started in July 1939 with 
the du Pont ammonia department in Belle, W. Va. He remained at du Pont until 
the fall of 1942, when he joined the Manhattan project, being assigned to the 
SAM laboratories as a chemical engineer, which was located at Columbia Uni- 
versity. In the spring of 1943 Chapin was transferred to the metallurgical labo- 
ratories at the University of Chicago, where he remained until the spring of 1945. 

Chapin first met Clarence Hiskey at the SAM laboratories, at Columbia Uni- 
versity. According to Chapin, they did not become good friends until after both 
had moved to the metallurgical laboratory in Chicago. During the period they 
knew one another Chapin often discussed with Hiskey the nature of the research 
in which he, Chapin, was engaged. 

When Chapin completed the secret project in Cleveland and returned to the 
metallurgical laboratories in Chicago, he wrote a letter to Clarence Hiskey, in 
care of Marcia Sand Hiskey, who at that time was Hiskey's wife. Thereupon 
Marcia Sand Hiskey wrote her husband, who was at that time stationed at 
White Horse, Yukon Territory, Canada, that she had received a letter from 
Chapin which she had forwarded to Adams. Chapin told the committee that 
this letter to Marcia Sand Hiskey was a prearranged signal whereby Arthur 
Adams would be informed that Chapin had completed the project in Cleveland 
and was returning to Chicago. 

"Mr. Stripling. Now, did you ever write to Mrs. Hiskey? 

"Mr. Chapin. Yes ; I think so. There is a technical point there, but go ahead. 

"Mr. Stripling. You go ahead and tell me whether or not you wrote to Mrs. 
Hiskey. 

"Mr. Chapin. Whether or not I wrote a note to Mrs. Hiskey — a note — I would 
not swear. I wrote to Mr. Hiskey, sending it to Mrs. Hiskey for forwarding to 
Hiskey. 

"Mr. Stripling. What were the contents of the letter? 

"Mr. Chapin. It was practically zero, I do not know, really. The FBI has 
it, I think. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 169 

"Mr. Stripling. Did you tell Hiskey in the letter that you had met Arthur 
Adams? 

"Mr. Chapin. The only time that I wrote Mrs. Hiskey must have been — well, 
before I met Arthur Adams, I think. In fact, I know. 

"Mr. Stripling. Did you ever write — did you say that you were going to meet 
Arthur Adams in this letter? 

"Mr. Chapin. No ; I do not believe so. 

"Mr. Stripling. Was it agreed between all parties concerned that when you 
wrote this letter to Mr. Hiskey that that would mean that you were ready to 
see Arthur Adams? 

"Mr. Chapin. That would mean that I was going back to Chicago ; yes. 

"Mr. Stripling. Yes. That was part of the agreement? 

"Mr. Chapin. That is correct." 

In the fall of 1944 Arthur Adams called at Chapin's apartment house and 
Chapin came downstairs and talked with Adams. Adams gave Chapin the key 
which Chapin had some time previously given to Hiskey and suggested that 
Chapin come to Adams' hotel room at the Hotel Stevens. A day or so later 
Chapin did go to Adams' hotel room and conversed with Adams for approxi- 
mately an hour and a half. He denies that in this conversation he gave Adams 
any information. 

Chapin was a very cooperative witness. Hiskey, on the other hand, came to 
the committee accompanied by counsel and refused to answer all pertinent ques- 
tions that were put to him, on the ground that his answer might incriminate or 
degrade him. It is apparent from all the testimony that the committee has, as 
well as from other reliable information secured from former intelligence officers, 
that Hiskey was engaged in Soviet espionage in connection with the atom bomb. 
The testimony of Chapin is clear that he continued his contacts with Arthur 
Adams after he went into uniform. Hiskey still holds a Reserve commission 
as captain in the Army of the United States. 

Compare, for example, the following from Hiskey's testimony : 

"Mr. Stripling. Did you ever turn over any information concerning the atomic 
bomb or the development of the atomic bomb or any scientific research relating to 
the discovery of the atomic bomb to the individual whose picture I show you? 

"Mr. Hiskey. Upon the advice of counsel, I refuse to answer that question on 
the grounds that it may tend to degrade and incriminate me. 

"Mr. Stripling. I would like for the record to show, Mr. Chairman, that I 
have shown the witness a photograph of Arthur Adams. 

"Mr. Hiskey, you are aware of the seriousness of the position which you are 

taking before this committee ; are you not ? 

"Mr. Hiskey. I am aware that this is a serious matter ; yes. 

******* 

"Mr. Stripling. Did you ever confer with any official representative of the 
Soviet Union in 1943, '44, or '45? 

"Mr. Hiskey. Upon the advice of counsel, I refuse to answer that question on 
the grounds that it will tend to degrade or incriminate me." 

"While the military and civilian investigative agencies knew of the contact 
Chapin made with Arthur Adams and with Marsha Sand Hiskey, no effort was 
made to remove Chapin from the highly secret cliemical research in which he was 
engaged. Cliapin was permitted to continue in cliarge of his chemical group 
until May of 1945, when he was released by reason of the reduction in force 
which resulted from the curtailment of research activities. After a period of 
employment in the plastics department of the General Electric Co., Pittsfield, 
Mass., Chapin became employed at the M. W. Kellog Co. The M. W. Kellog Co., 
specializing in engineering development at this time, was under contract to the 
United States Air Forces for a phase of secret Air Corps development. Chapin 
was assigned to work on a phase of this secret development. However, when 
the Air Forces discovered that Chapin was employed on this project, they imme- 
diately demanded that he be relieved from this employment. He is presently 
employed in a brewery in Newark, N. J. 

Chapin, in testifying before the committee, denied under oath that he was now 
or had ever been a member of the Communist Party. While he admitted that 
he might have subscribed to or read Communist publications, the committee 
did not feel that this was a sufficient motive for Chapin to agree to meet a 
Russian agent for the purpose of turning over to him secret developments on 



170 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

the atomic bomb. Under questioning, he explained as a possible motive the 
fact that he and Hiskey shared a mutual interest in Russia and that he had 
often held the desire of teaching or working in Russia at a future date. Chapin 
related that prior to his agreeing to meet Arthur Adams he strongly felt that 
the secret of the atom bomb should be shared by all the Allied Nations. When 
questioned by the conunittee as to his thought along this line now, Chapin did 
not think he would be willing at this time to risk the security of the American 
people by delivering to Russia the secret of the atom bomb. 

The meeting in Cleveland between Hiskey and Chapin, the conversation which 
transpired, the letter from Chapin to Marcia Sand Hiskey, and the subsequent 
contact between Chapin and Adams in Chicago present a clear case of a con- 
spiracy between Hiskey, Chapin, and Marcia Sand Hiskey, to divulge seci'et 
and classiiied information relating to the atom-bomb project to a Soviet espio- 
nage agent. The committee recommends immediate prosecution of the 
conspirators. 

In the opinion of the committee, although John Hitchcock Chapin committed 
an indictable offense as a coconspirator in matters affecting the security of the 
United States, it is felt that his participation in the conspiracy is mitigated by 
the fact that when he appeared before the committee he was cooperative and 
apparently sincere in his answers to pertinent questions directed to him ; whereas 
in contrast, his coconspirators refused to answer pertinent questions on the 
ground that to do so might inci-iminate them. Chapin impressed the Committee 
as a person of deep sincerity who, in a moment of weakness, had made a vital 
mistake. 



2. Charges Concerning Martin David Kamen 

The following excerpt is reprinted, without comment and only for 
purposes of assisting the reader, from a committee print issued by 
the Committee on un-American Activities of the House of Representa- 
tives and entitled "Report on Soviet Espionage Activities in Connec- 
tion with the Atom Bomb" (September 28, 1948; Eightieth Cong., 
2d sess) : 

THE KAMEN CASE 

Martin David Kamen is presently employed as associate professor of chemis- 
try at Washington University in St. Louis. He was born in Toronto, Canada, 
in 1913 and was brought to the United States when he was 3 months old. His 
father was born in Russia. Kamen testified before a subcommittee on Septem- 
ber 14. His testimony is being made public concurrently with the making of this 
report. 

From 1936 to 1944 Kamen was staff chemist for the radiation laboratories at 
the University of California at Berkeley, Calif. From 1941 to 1944 he was 
assigned to the Manhattan Engineering District's atomic-bomb project. Kamen 
testified that he believed that his work was of substantial importance to the 
project. As indicative of his competence, Kamen was the discoverer of carbon 
14 and was also the discoverer of an improved method of producing iron 55. He 
has written a book on his particular specialty, which is tracer research in biology, 
and has published some 65 articles concerning his various researches. 

On July 1, 1944, Kamen proceeded from Berkeley to San Francisco and was 
met in San Francisco by Gregory Kheifets., the Soviet vice consul in San Fran- 
cisco, and Gregory Kasperov, the person who was about to succeed Kheifets. 
Kheifets was leaving for Russia. In fact, he left for Russia 3 days after the 
incident about to be described took place. 

Kamen, Kheifets, and Kasperov proceeded to a restaurant known as Bern- 
stein's Fish Grotto in San Francisco and had dinner together in a booth in that 
restaurant. The dinner meeting lasted approximately 2 hours and 40 minutes. 

The dinner meeting was covered by Government intelligence officers. The 
conversation, or as much of it as could be heard, was taken down. According 
to the former MED scientist who read the transcript of the conversation, and 
who testified before the committee, Kamen very definitely gave classified infor- 
mation to Kheifets and Kasperov, including information about the uranium pile 
in Chicago, and information as to MED activities in other localities in the 
United States. Certain sections of testimony in this case are being made public 
concurrently with the making of this report. 

While Kamen had numerous friends in Communist and radical circles, there 
appears to be little if any evidence at this time that his revealing of classified 
information was willful and deliberate. There is no evidence connecting Kamen 
otherwise than casually with members of the Communist espionage apparatus 
that was operating on the Pacific coast. 

Ten days after the incident in question, Kamen was requested to resign forth- 
with from the MED project. He concedes that what he did constituted a 
gross indiscretion. Whether that was all it was or whether it constituted 
something more than that, the committee is not prepared at this time to say. 
Kamen testified that he has been denied a passport to leave the United States 
on three occasions in the last 2 years. 

171 



3. Charges Concerning Steve Nelson, Joseph Weinberg, and Others 

The following excerpt is reprinted, witlioiit comment and only for 
purposes of assisting the reader, from a report issued by the Committee 
on Un-American Activities of the House of Representatives and 
entitled "Report on Atomic Espionage" (September 29, 1949) : 

Report on Atomic Espionage (Nelson-Weinberg and Hiskey-Adams Cases) 

scientist x case 

This case deals with the activities of that branch of the Communist espionage 
apparatus which operated on the Pacific coast, particularly within the i-adiation 
laboratory of the University of California at Berkeley which was engaged in 
certain activities in connection with the development of the atomic bomb. This 
case, in the past, has been identified by the committee as the "Scientist X case." 
The committee, as a result of an investigation pursued this year, has received 
testimony identifying the scientist involved in this case as Joseph Woodrow 
Weinberg. 

Previous reports regarding the Scientist X case have identified Steve Mesarosh 
alias Louis Evans alias Steve Nelson as the Communist espionage agent who 
was engaged in securing information regarding the development of the atomic 
bomb from Scientist X. 

Steve Mesarosh, or Nelson as he is commonly known, was born in Yugoslavia 
on January 1, 1903, in a town called Chaglich. He entered the United States 
on June 12, 1920, accompanied by his mother and two sisters. He gained admis- 
sion to the United States as a citizen of this country under the name of Joseph 
Fleischinger, that being the name of his mother's brother-in-law. Nelson's 
mother and two sisters also gained admission at the time by falsely representing 
themselves as the wife and children of Joseph Fleischinger. The name of Nelson's 
mother and the names of her three children were all included on the United 
States passport issued to said Joseph Fleischinger. 

On June 22, 1922. a warrant of arrest in deportation proceedings was issued 
charging that the subject, his mother, and two sisters had entered the United 
States without proper passports ; that they had entered by false and mislead- 
ing statements ; and that they were persons likely to become public charges at 
the time of their entry. 

A hearing was held under the authority of the warrant of arrest in Phila- 
delphia on October 17, 1922, as a result of which the examining immigration 
inspector recommended that the aliens be afforded the opportunity to legalize 
their residence in the United States. It should be noted that during the hear- 
ing the United States Government recommended that Steve Nelson, his two 
sisters, and his mother, be afforded a haven in the United States, even though 
they illegally entered the country. During the hearing it was brought out that 
Steve Nelson, his two sisters, and his mother, had taken advantage of opportuni- 
ties in this country ; that Steve Nelson, as well as his sisters, were attending 
school, and that the entire family had gained employment. In the recommenda 
tion of the immigration inspector, it was stated that after examination of the 
aliens it was decided that the sub.1ect individuals were taking advantage of the 
opportunities olfered by this country and undoubtedly would become substan- 
tial citizens. On October 30, 1922, the Board of Review entered an order that 
the warrant of arrest be canceled on payment of head tax if the Department 
of State would waive passport requirements. On November 14, 1922. the Secre- 
tary of State waived the passport and visa requirements in behalf of the subject, 
his mother, Maria, and his two sisters. Thereafter, on November 27. 1922, the 
aliens were examined by surgeons of the United States Public Health Service 
and passed; head tax was collected; and the entry of the subject, his mother, 
and his two sisters was legalized. 

172 



I 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 173 

Steve Nelson was admitted to citizenship in the United States District Court, 
Eastern District of Michigan, Detroit, Mich., on November 26, 1928, and was 
issued certificate of naturalization No. 2834850. 

In evaluating- Steve Nelson's entry in the United States and the Govern- 
ment's position in legalizing said entry, the United States afforded a haven for 
a refugee whose political ideologies in subsequent years dedicated themselves 
to the violent overthrow of the United States Government by force. It is not 
definitely known when Steve Nelson joined the Cf)mmunist Party. However, in 
an article in the Dally Worker, November 10, 1937, under the byline of Joseph 
North, dispatched from Valencia, Spain, North stated that while interviewing 
participants fighting for the International Brigade, he obtained the following 
information from Steve Nelson : 

'The working people of the Soviet Union were passing through a bitter period 
and Steve joined the Friends of Soviet Russia. On the first anniversary of 
Lenin's death (1925), he joined the Communist I'arty at the memorial in 
Philadelphia." 

This alleged statement by Steve Nelson is noteworthy because, as previously 
stated, he was granted citizenship on November 26, 1928. If the truth of the 
article written by Joseph North, which appeared in the Daily Worker, could 
be established, it is apparent that Steve Nelson was a member of the Communist 
Party prior to gaining his citizenship and therefore perjured himself when he 
obtained his naturalization papers. 

In 1931 Steve Nelson's importance to the Communist movement was recognized 
in Moscow and he was called there to attend the Lenin Institute. On August 1, 
1931, he filed a passport application with the Department of State in which he 
requested permission to visit Germany to study building construction. He falsi- 
fied his passport by stating that he was born in Rankin. Pa., on December 25, 
1903. This ci'iminal offense was never prosecuted due to the fact that it was 
not discovered until the statute of limitations had run. There is further evidence 
with respect to Mr. Nelson's attendance at the school in Moscow. Mr. William 
Nowell testified before this committee on November 30, 1939, and he stated that 
while he was a member of the Communist Party he attended the Lenin Institute 
in Moscow and that Steve Nelson was in attendance at this school under the 
name of Louis Evans. Mr. Nowell stated in his testimony that Nelson's promi- 
nence in the Communist Party was conspicuous because of his frequent contact 
with the OGPU (Russian secret police) in Moscow. Additional evidence of 
Nelson's visit to Russia has been developed by this committee which indicates 
that in July 1933 Nelson filed with the American consul in Austria a 2-year 
renewal of his passport, stating that he had resided in Russia from September 
1931 to May 1933, and had resided in Germany, Switzerland, and Austria from 
May 25, 1933. Nelson, when questioned by this committee regarding his attend- 
ance at the Lenin school, refused to answer on the ground of self-incrimination. 

Official intelligence reports in possession of this committee reflect that Nelson 
was in China for 3 months in 1933. working for the Comintern in Shanghai, 
and that a coworker of his was Arthur Ewert, a well-known Comintern agent, 
who was subsequently sentenced to imprisonment in Brazil for his part in the 
Communist revolution in 1935. The exact date of the suliject's return to the 
United States from China and the 'European countries mentioned above is im- 
known, but in 1934 he contributed an article to the Party Organizer, oflicial 
organ of the central committee of the Communist Party, United States of 
America. 

During the Spanish Civil War, Nelson received consideral publicity in the 
Communist press because of the fact that he had risen to the rank of lieutenant 
colonel in the International Brigade of the Lo.valist Army. Nelson returned 
to the United States in the latter part of 1937 from Spain and became active 
in the affairs of the Veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade and the Amer- 
ican League for Peace and Democracy, both notorious Communist organizations. 

Since 1938, Steve Nelson has been a national figure in the Communist Party, 
as well as a leading functionary in the Moscow-controlled Communist under- 
ground. 

With reference to Nelson's participation in the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, Nel- 
son applied for a passport on February 13, 1987, and the passport was issued on 
February 23. This passport was issued to Nelson under the name of Joseph 
Fleischinger. It is noted on the application form that the name Fleischinger 
was misspelled in two places by the applicant. This criminal violation likewise 
escaped the attention of the authorities until the statute of limitations had ex- 



174 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

pired. When questions were propounded to Nelson regarding this false pass- 
port, he again followed the current Communist Party line by declining to an- 
swer questions and placed himself under the sanctuary of the fifth amendment 
to the Constitution. 

Steve Nelson was so Important to the Communist movement and had gained 
such favor with his superiors that in 1940 he was assigned as organizer for 
the party in the bay area at the port of San Francisco, Calif. He was also given 
the underground assignment to gather information regarding the development 
of the atomic bomb. This assignment was facilitated by Steve Nelson's having 
met a woman in Spain who had gone to Spain in 1937 to meet her husband, also 
a volunteer of the International Brigade. Upon arrival in Spain, this woman 
was informed that her husband has been killed, and she was befriended by Steve 
Nelson. This woman, upon her return to the United States, moved to Berkeley, 
Calif., where she became acquainted with and married one of the leading phys- 
icists engaged in the development of the atomic bomb. 

The Communist Party and the Soviet Government were aware of Steve Nelson's 
acqiTaintance with the physicist and attempted to use this as a medium of infiltra- 
tion of the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California, which was 
working on the development of the atomic bomb. An investigation of the afore- 
mentioned scientist disclosed that neither he nor his wife engaged in any sub- 
versive activities and tliat their loyalty has never been questioned by the 
Government. Nelson later reported that neither the physicist nor his wife were 
sympathetic to communism. 

Under the guidance of Steve Nelson, infiltration of the Radiation Laboratory 
actually began in other ways. A cell was developed within the laboratory, 
consisting of five or six young physicists. The existence of the cell has been 
established in sworn testimony before this committee. According to a sworn 
statement by a witness, Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz was the principal Communist 
Party organizer. The records of this committee also reflect that David Bohm, 
presently a professor of physics at Princeton University, was also a member of 
this cell. Upon two occasions, both Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz and David Bohm 
declined to answer questions regarding their respective memberships in this 
cell upon the ground that to do so might tend to incriminate them. 

In 1942 Steve Nelson gained another promotion within the Communist Party 
when he was assigned as county organizer at Alameda, Calif. This assignment 
placed the atomic bomb project under the direct jurisdiction of Steve Nelson for 
the Communist Party. According to the official files of the Government, when 
Nelson was under surveillance, he visited the home of Vassili Zubilin, a former 
secretary of the Soviet Embassy in Washington, D. C, who was then in Oakland, 
Calif. Zubilin's cover name in the Communist Party was "Cooper." During this 
meeting, Nelson complained to Zubilin about the inefficiency of two individuals 
working for the apparatus. These persons have been identified by the committee 
and their names are being presently withheld from the public. Because of Mr. 
Nelson's complaint to Zubilin, these individuals were transferred from Alameda 
County, one to Detroit, Mich., and the other to Los Angeles, Calif. 

The details of the meeting between Nelson and Scientist X are set forth 
as follows : 

Late one night in March 1943, a scientist -at the University of California, who 
identified himself as "'Joe" went to the home of Steve Nelson, after having made 
arrangements earlier in the evening with Steve Nelson's wife to meet Nelson at 
Nelson's home. When Joe arrived at Nelson's home. Nelson was not present but 
arrived at about 1 : 30 on the morning of the following day. Upon his arrival 
at his home. Nelson greeted Joe and the latter told him that he had some infor- 
mation that he thought Nelson could use. Joe then furnished highly confidential 
information regarding the experiments conducted at the radiation laboratories 
of the University of California at Berkeley. At the time this occurred, the radia- 
tion laboi-atorles at Berkeley were engaged in vital work in the development of 
the atomic bomb. 

Several days after Nelson had been contacted by Joe, Nelson contacted the 
Soviet consulate in San Francisco and arranged to meet Peter Ivanov, the 
Soviet vice consul, at some place where they could not be observed. Ivanov 
suggested that he and Nelson meet at the "usual place." 

As a result of the surveillance that was being kept on Nelson, the meeting be- 
tween Nelson and Ivanov was found to take place in the middle of an open park 
on the St. Francis Hospital grounds In San Francisco. At this meeting. Nelson 
transferred an envelope or package to Ivanov. A few days after this meeting 
between Nelson and Ivanov, on the St. Francis Hospital grounds, the third 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 175 

secretary of the Russian Embassy in Washington, a man by the name of Zubilin, 
came to the Soviet consulate in San Francisco. Shortly after his arrival, Zu- 
bilin met Nelson in Nelson's liome and at this meeting paid Nelson 10 bills of 
unknown denominations. 

Wlien Nelson testified before the committee in September 1948, he refused 
to answer all pertinent questions on the ground that his answers would tend to 
incriminate him. During this interrogation, he was asked whether he was 
acquainted with Vassili Zubilin of the Soviet Embassy and he refused to answer 
on the ground that to do so might incriminate him. 

EXTRACTS FEOM INTELLIGENCE REPORTS — SCIENTIST X CASE 

During the course of the committee's investigation of the Scientist X case, 
certain information contained in reports made by intelligence agents was obtained 
by the committee. An extract from one of these reports reads as follows : 

"A very reliable and highly confidential informant advised that certain instruc- 
tions had been given by Steve Nelson, who was at the time a member of the 
national committee of the Communist Party of the United States, to the scientist 
identified herein as Joseph W. Weinberg, a research physicist connected with the 
atomic bomb at the University of California, at Berkeley, Calif. The instructions 
were that Weinberg should furnish Nelson with information concerning the 
atomic bomb project so that Nelson could, in turn, deliver it to the proper officials 
of the Soviet Government. Nelson advised Weinberg to furnish him any informa- 
tion which he might obtain from trustworthy Communists working on the atomic 
project ; he. Nelson, being of the belief that collectively the Communist scientists 
working on the project could assemble all the information regarding the manufac- 
ture of the atomic bomb. Nelson told Weinberg that all Communists engaged 
on the atomic bomb project should destroy their Communist Party membership 
books, refrain from using liquor, and use every precaution regarding their 
espionage activities." 

At the time of this meeting, according to an extract from an intelligence report, 
Weinberg furnished Nelson with information regarding the experiments which 
had been conducted in connection with the development of the atomic bomb at 
the radiation laboratories of the University of California. The information fur- 
nished Nelson by Weinberg was taken down in the form of notes by Nelson. 

An extract from a report filed with the committee states that Weinberg, while 
employed on the atomic project, had as his closest associate Giovanni Rossi 
Lomanitz, David Joseph Bohm, Max Bernard Friedman, and Irving David Fox, 
all of whom have refused to answer questions propounded by the committee 
regarding Communist Party activities and associations on the ground of self- 
incrimination. 

Regarding the identity of the scientist as the person who furnished informa- 
tion concerning the atomic bomb to Steve Nelson in March of 1943, the following 
is an extract from testimony given to the committee during the month of August 
1949 by James Sterling Murray, presently assistant to the president of the 
Lindsay Light & Chemical Co., West Chicago, 111., and formerly officer in charge 
of security and intelligence in the San Francisco, Calif., area for the Manhattan 
Engineering District, which was the division of the United States Army charged 
with the development and production of the atomic bomb : 

"Mr. Murray. A liighly confidential informant informed our office that an un- 
identified scientist at the Radiation Laboratories had disclosed certain secret 
information about the IManhattan engineering project to a member of the Com- 
munist Party in San Francisco, and this confidential informant went on to say 
that such information was transmitted to the Russian consulate in San Francisco 
and later was on its way to Washington, D. C, and later out of the country in a 
diplomatic pouch. This was the only allegation we had to begin with, but through 
information which the confidential informant was able to supply us on the back- 
ground of the particular scientist, we finally narrowed it down and definitely fixed 
the scientist as Weinberg." 

In addition to the identification mentioned above, it should be pointed out 
tliat a number of persons who were engaged in the investigation of the Scientist 
X case have been interrogated by the committee, and/or its staff, and the identi- 
fication made by Witness Murray has been concurred in by these other persons. 

On Tuesday, April 26, 1949, S'teve Nelson was again a witness before the 
Committee on Un-American Activities. On this occasion, Joseph W. Weinberg 
was brought face to face with Steve IS'elson, and when Steve Nelson was asked 



176 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

the question as to whether he was acquainted with Weinberg, he refused to answer 
on the ground that to answer might tend to incriminate him. 

Upon two occasions, Joseph W. Weinberg, in appearances before tlie committee, 
specifically denied having furnislied any information regarding the atomic bomb 
to Steve Nelson. This is in direct contradiction to the testimony of James Ster- 
ling Murray and other witnesses who have appeared before the committee. 

The committee, during its investigation, devoted a great deal of time toward 
establishing the true facts regarding a meeting which was lield in the home of 
Joseph Weinberg in Berkeley, ('alif., in August 1943. According to information 
furnished by witnesses before the committee, this meeting was attended by Berna- 
dette Doyle, who was secretary to Steve Nelson during the period he was the 
Communist Party organizer for Alameda County, Calif. : Steve Nelson ; Giovanni 
Rossi Lomanitz ; Irving David Fox ; David Bohm ; and Ken Max Manfred, for- 
merly known as Max Bernard Friedman. As will be shown, Joseph Weinberg 
was present in his apartment in Berkeley, Calif., at the time this meeting was 
held. All of the persons mentioned as attendants at this meeting were employed 
by the Radiation Laboratory of the University of California, at Berkeley, with 
the exception of Bernadette Doyle and Steve Nelson. All of these persons were 
reported, during the course of the committee's investigation, as being members 
of the Communist Party. 

All of the persons mentioned as having attended the meeting in the home of 
Joseph Weinberg in August 1943 were subpenaed as witnesses before the com- 
mittee, with the exception of Bernadette Doyle. Witnesses Lomanitz, Nelson, 
Fox, Bohm, and Manfred declined to answer questions regarding this meeting 
upon the ground that to do so might tend to incriminate them. Joseph W. Wein- 
berg was questioned regarding this meeting upon two occasions by the committee, 
and denied that such a meeting had ever been held in his home, and further 
denied that he knew or had ever been acquainted with Steve Nelson and Berna- 
dette Doyle. 

Altogether Joseph Weinberg has appeared before the committee upon three 
occasions, and pertinent extracts of the testimony given by him upon these 
appearances before the committee are being set forth as follows : 

"Question. I show you a photograph of an individual and ask if you have ever 
seen this person. 

"Mr. Weinberg. No ; I have not seen him before. 

"Question. Mr. Chairman, I have shown the witness a picture of an individual 
known as Steve Nelson, 

"Have you ever known this person under any name other than Steve Nelson? 

"Mr. Weinberg. So far as I can recollect, no. 

"Question. Mr. Weinberg, are you certain you have never seen this individual 
whose picture I have shown you [showing protograph to Mr. Weinberg] ? 

"Mr. Weinberg. WMthin rea.son, I am. 

"Question. I have shown the witne.ss a picture and he said he is reasonably 
certain he has never seen Steve Nelson. I am sure the witness is aware of the 
penalties of perjury. I am sure his counsel has advised him of the penalties of 
perjury before a committee of Congress. 

"You are now viewing two pictures of Steve Nelson. That is not Mr. Nelson's 
real name. He is known under various names, but I ask you if you have ever 
seen that individual, if you ever saw him in the years 1942, 1943, 1944, or 1945. 

"Mr. Weinberg. So far as I know now I have never seen him. I don't think it 
is necessary to call your attention to the fact that you ask me about events that 
happened 5 years ago and that I have a very large circle of very casual acquaint- 
ances. Within those reasonable limits I would say I have not seen him. 

"Question. You have never seen that individual? 

"Mr. Weinberg. So far as I am aware. 

"Mr. Tavenner. Now, I believe you met Steve Nelson in Washington on April 
26, 1949. Did you meet him prior to that time or had you met him prior to 
that time? 

"Mr. AVeinbekg. No. 

"Mr. Tavenner. Now, let me ask you if on or about the 17th day of August 1943 
Steve Nelson came to your home at the address which you have just given, in 
Berkeley, Calif.? 

"Mr. Weinberg. I remember no such occasion. 

"Mr. Tavenner. Do I understand that you merely do not recollect or that you 
deny that he came there to vist you and that you saw him there? 

"Mr. Weinberg. The situation was more or less this, and perhaps I should take 
a moment to explain. At this time I had a vei-y wide circle of acquaintances 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 177 

there. There were many people who dropi>e(l into my house. There were many 
students who brought friends and introduced them and who promptly walked out 
of my life thereafter. I exempt such possibilities when I say I do not recollect 
the occasion. That is, I would not be prepared to state emphatically and with 
absolute certainty that no such person ever dropped into my house. I would 
certainly be prepared to state emphatically that I had nothing significant to do 
with him at the time. 

"Mr. Tavenner. Do you know Bernadette Doyle V 

"Mr. AVeinberg. No ; I do not. 

"Mr. Tavenner. Is it not a fact that on the 17th day of August 1943 Steve 
Nelson and Bernadette Doyle visited you at your house V 

"Mr. Weinberg. I certainly don't remember any such visit. Or at least I don't 
remember the occasion. 

"Mr. Tavenner. I did not get the last answer. 

"Mr. Weinberg. I have no specific memory of such a visit or that it mattered or 
that a person by the name of Doyle was ever introduced to me. 

"Mr. Nixox. Mr. Chairman, the witness has qualified several answers of late 
that he does not remember a visit that "mattered," and I tliink the record should 
be clear that that is not responsive to the question. Whether the visit mattered 
or not is not the point. It is whether or not these people visited him. 

"Mr. Weinberg. Well, then, sir, to the best of my ability, I would answer the 
question with a qualification that I do not remember such a visit, in the interests 
of saying strictly what I am qualified to say. 

"Mr. Walter. In other words, the visit made no impression? 

"Mr. Harrison. Nothing hapi^ened that would have made any impression on 
your mind? 

"Mr. Weinberg. That's correct. That was the intent of my remark that it 
did not matter. 

"Mr. Tavenner. Was there another occasion in 1943 on which Bernadette 
Doyle met you at the front door of your house and at which time you had a short 
conversation with her? 

"Mr. Weinberg. I remember no such occasion. 

"Mr. Tavenner. You still state that you have never met Bernadette Doyle? 

"Mr. Weinberg. Not to my knowledge. 

"Mr. Tavenner. Do you know now where Bernadette Doyle lived? 

"Mr. Weinberg. No ; I do not. 

"Mr. Tavenner. Have you ever been to Iier house? 

"Mr. Weinberg. No. 

"Mr. Tavenner. Did you ever attend any of the meetings of the Young Com- 
munist League? 

"Mr. Weinberg. No. 

"Mr. Nixon. Would you remember if Mr. Nelson had come to your house and 
spent an hour or so alone with you? 

"Mr. W^einberg. I think if Nelson had come to my house and introduced himself 
as some sort of high-ranking Communist and spoke to me for any length of time 
I would remember that occasion. 

"Mr. Case. Was that where you met Steve Nelson? 

"Mr. Weinberg. I certainly don't remember meeting Steve Nelson at that 
meeting or any other meeting." 

Upon one occasion wlien Joseph Weinberg appeared before the committee, he 
was brought face to face with Steve Nelson, and the following is an extract from 
the testimony relating to a confrontation between Nelson and Weinberg upon 
this occasion : 

"Mr. Russell. Mr. Nelson, will you stand, i^lease? Mr. Weinberg, will you 
face Mr. Nelson, the gentleman in back of you? 

"Mr. Nelson, I ask you whether you are acquainted with this individual, Mr. . 
Joseph Weinberg? 

"Mr. Nelson. I refuse to answer that question on the ground that it may tend 
to Incriminate me. 

"Mr. Russell. Mv. Weinberg, I ask you whether or not you are acquainted with 
Mr. Nelson, the gentleman facing you? 

Mr. Weinberg. My only recollection of Mr. Nelson is a picture I have seen in 
the papers. 

"Mr. Russell. Are you acquainted with him? 

"Mr. Weinberg. I am not acquainted with him. 

"Mr. Russell. Have you ever met Mr. Nelson? 



178 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Mr. Weinberg. I do not recall ever meeting Mr. Nelson. I do not believe I have 
ever met him." 

With reference to the associations of Joseph W. Weinberg, Steve Nelson, and 
Bernadette Doyle, the following extracts from testimony presented to the com- 
mittee by several witnesses on this point are being set forth herein. This testi- 
mony is in direct conflict with that of Joseph W. Weinberg : 

"Mr. Velde. You are satisfied that Dr. Joseph W. Weinberg was employed by 
the University of California in January 1943, and that he was engaged in work 
on the Manhattan project at that time? 

"Mr. MuREAY. Yes. We were satisfied he was actively engaged in worli on the 
project. 

:i: * * « * * * 

"Mr. Murray. On August 12, 1943, we were conducting physical surveillance 
of Joseph W. Weinberg, and at approximately 5 o'clock in the afternoon a highly 
confidential informant advised us that there was to be some tyi^e of a meeting at 
Weinberg's home that evening, at which Steve Nelson and Bernadette Doyle 
would be present. I immediately instituted surveillance of the entire area by the 
agents assigned to our office, to watch the visitors in the Weinberg home, and I 
myself stationed myself next door to the Weinberg home. I believe it was located 
on Blake Street in Berkeley, Calif. 

"At approximately 9 o'clock I observed a man known to me to be Steve Nelson, 
and a woman known to me to be Bernadette Doyle, approach the Weinberg home 
and enter therein. After their entry into the Weinberg home I, in the company 
of Agents Harold Zindle and George Rathman, went to the roof of the apartment 
house which was immediately next door to the Weinberg home, and from an ob- 
servation post on the roof I was able to look into the second-story apartment of 
Weinberg. 

"I noted Weinberg, Steve Nelson, and Bernadette Doyle, in company with at 
least five other members, some of whom were employed by the Radiation Labora- 
tory, seated around a table in the dining room of the Weinberg apartment. 

"At approximately 9 : 20 p. m. Weinberg came to the window and attempted to 
adjust the window, it being a very hot and sticky night. He had some difficulty 
in raising the window, or lowering it, or something, and Steve Nelson came over 
to help him, at whicli time I was able to get a good look and identify him. 

"Mr. Yelde. Just a minute, if you please. Do you have a picture of Weinberg? 
I think at this point possibly you had better have him identify it. 

"Mr. Appell. We have a newspaper picture. 

"Mr. Russell. While Nelson and Weinberg were at the window, did you observe 
whether or not any conversation took place between the two individuals? 

"Mr. Murray. I did observe some conversation, but I think it only had to do 
with the window adjustment at that point. I observed them sitting around the 
table, at which time the conversation appeared to be very serious. 

"Mr. Russell. Do you recall the other persons around the table in Weinberg's 
apartment at this meeting you are describing? 

"Mr. MtjRRAY. I don't recall all. I know Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz, David 
Bohm, Irving David Fox, Max Friedman. I know INIax Friedman was there, but 
for a very short time. He was the first one to leave. 

"Mr. Russell. What other agents of the Manhattan Engineering District 
accompanied you on the occasion of this surveillance? 

"Mr. Murray. Special Agents Harold Zindle and George Rathman. 

"Mr. Russell. Will you spell Rathman, please? 

"Mr. Murray. R-a-t-h-m-a-n. 

"Mr. Russell. These two agents were also assigned to the Manhattan Engi- 
neering District ; were they not? 

"I\Ir. Murray. Yes ; they were. I was their immediate superior. 

"Mr. Russell. Did you maintain a surveillance of the Weinberg apartment? 

"Mr. Murray. Yes; we did. I believe the meeting broke up at about 10:15 
p. m., at which time we saw a general shaking of hands and a general showing of 
disposition to leave, at whicli time I ran down to the street floor again and ob- 
served Nelson and Doyle leaving together. They turned east on Blake Street, 
and I turned east on Blake Street also, and was immediately in front of them. 
We proceeded up the street approximately 100 feet in that fashion, at which 
time I tliought, for tlie purposes of the record, that I should make some face-to- 
face contact with Mr. Nelson, and so I swung on my heel and started west on 
Blake Street, and in so doing I touched the shoulder of Nelson. We both imme- 
diately pardoned each other, and I continued west on Blake Street, and my 
surveillance of the entire proceeding was at an end at that point. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 179 

"Mr. Appell. Mr. Murray, I show you a picture and ask you if you can iden- 
tify the person on the left as you look at the picture as being that of Steve 
Nelson? 

"Mr. Murray. Yes ; that is Steve Nelson as slightly older than when I knew 
him. 

"Mr. Appell. And that is the individual you bumped into on Blake Street in 
Berkeley, Calif.? 

"Mr. Murray. Yes. 

"Mr. Velde. Let that be marked "Murray Exhibit 1" and received in evidence. 

"Mr. Russell. When you bumi>ed into him, that was after he had left the 
residence of Joseph Weinberg? 

"Mr. Murray. Yes. 

"Mr. Appell. I show you a picture that appeared in the Washington Post as 
of September 22, 1948, and ask if that is the individual you observed in the 
Blake Street residence with Steve Nelson? 

"]Mr. Murray. Yes. I identify the picture as the picture of Dr. .Toseph Wein- 
berg, and as the individual who was in his own apartment sitting around the 
table with Mr. Nelson. 

"Mr. Appell. And the individual you saw standing at a window of the apart- 
ment together with Steve Nelson, attempting to fix the window? 

"Mr. Murray. Yes ; that is right." 

This witness furnished additional information regarding the association of 
Steve Nelson and Joseph Weinberg which is not being set forth in this report. 

The following is a signed statement obtained by committee investigators from 
George J. Rathman, whose name appears in the testimony of James Sterling 
Murray as one of the agents attached to the Manhattan Engineering District 
who accompanied him on the surveillance regarding the meeting held by Nelson 
and certain other persons in the apartment of Joseph Weinberg in Berkeley, 
Calif. : 

"I have been interviewed concerning a .surveillance I conducted along with 
Harold Zindle and James Murray, who were attached with me to the Manhattan 
Engineering District as special agents. Counterintelligence Corps, in Berkeley, 
Calif. 

"On or about August 17, 1943, at approximately 8 : 45 p. m., Harold Zindle, 
Murray, and myself arrived at an apartment house adjacent to the residence of 
the subject of this surveillance, Joseph W. Weinberg. During this surveillance 
I had occasion to observe the subject, Joseph Weinberg ; a man identified to me 
as Steve Nelson ; a woman identified to me as Bernadette Doyle ; together with 
four or five additional persons whom I could not identify due to my point of 
observation, engaged in conversation. At approximately 9 : 45 p. m., Joseph 
Weinberg and the man known to me as Steve Nelson appeared at the window of 
the second-story apartment of Joseph Weinberg, closing the window and lowering 
the shade. At approximately 10 p. m. on the night of this surveillance Harold 
Zindle, Murray, and the undersigned left the roof of the apartment house and 
proceeded to the street where Murray and the undersigned saw Steve Nelson 
and Bernadette Doyle walking west on Blake Street from the direction of the 
subject's residence. 

"I am certain if I could observe Steve Nelson personally today that I would be 
able to identify him as the person who was present in the second-story apartment 
of Joseph Weinberg on the night of surveillance. 

"I have read the above statement, and to the best of my knowledge and belief 
this statement is true in every respect. 

"G. J. Rathman." 

The following is an extract from the testimony furnished the committee by 
William S. Wagener, who was also attached to the Manhattan Engineering 
District : 

"Mr. Wheeler. Do you know an individual by the name of Bernadette Doyle? 

"Mr. Wagener. Yes, sir. 

"Mr. Wheeler. Did she contact any scientists employed by the radiation 
laboratory? 

"Mr. Wagener. Joseph Weinberg. 

"Mr. Wheeler. On how many occasions? 

"Mr. Wagener. Just once. 

"Mr. Wheeler. Will you describe the meeting? 

"Mr. Wagener. One evening we were on physical surveillance, and we saw 
this woman whom we identified as Bernadette Doyle go up to the door of Joseph 



180 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Weinberg and talk to him for a few minutes. She departed and got in her car. 
She had her ear parked a block or so away. She got in her car and drove away. 

"Shortly after, Weinberg and his wife came out, got in their car, and drove 
around very suspiciously, stopping here and there, and apparently like they were 
going to contact someone, but they apparently did not meet the individual, who- 
ever it was." 

The following is an extract from the testimony furnished by Col. John L. 
Lansdale, Jr., who was also attached to the Manhattan Engineering District 
during the time agents of that district were conducting an investigation of Joseph 
Weinberg. Other tlian the statement set forth herein, Colonel Lansdale was 
unable to provide the committee with further information because of the Execu- 
tive order prohibiting him from furnishing information to a congressional 
committee : 

"Mr. Russell. Are you familiar with the name Steve Nelson? 

"Colonel Lansdale. Yes, sir. 

"Mr. Russell. Do you recall the names of any scientists who were contacted by 
Steve Nelson? 

"Colonel Lansdale. At least one ; yes. 

"Mr. Russell. Who was that? 

"Colonel Lansdale. Joseph Weinberg." 

It is to be noted that the testimony of James Sterling Murray regarding the 
association of Bernadette Doyle and Joseph Weinberg is corroborated by the 
signed statement of witness George J. Rathman and the testimony of William 
S. Wagener. 

During the committee's examination of witnesses Mr. and Mrs. Paul Crouch, 
it was developed that both of these individuals had attended Communist Party 
meetings with Joseph Woodrow Weinberg. Mrs. Crouch recalled one partic- 
ular meeting of the Young Communist League which Weinberg attended and 
which was held in a private home. Witness Paul Crouch, who was the pre- 
decessor of Steve Nelson as Communist Party organizer in Alameda County, 
Calif., identified Weinberg as a person who had attended the meeting of the 
Young Communist League, mentioned by his wife, and at least two or three 
other meetings of the Young Communist League which were held in a private 
home in Oakland, Calif. Neither of these witnesses, however, knew Weinberg's 
name. The testimony of Paul and Sylvia Crouch regarding their identification 
of Joseph Weinberg is being printed and made a part of this report.^ 

The committee has additional evidence regarding the meeting held in the home 
of Joseph W. Weinberg during the month of August 194.3, but for obvious reasons 
all of the committee's evidence is not being incorporated in this report. 

BECOMMENDATION FOB PERJURY PROSECUTION 

Based upon the testimony set forth above and the testimony of other wit- 
nesses appearing before the committee, it is the committee's opinion that Joseph 
Weinberg made untruthful statements upon the three occasions he appeared 
before the committee. 

Testimony before the committee and signed statements furnished to com- 
mittee investigators indicate that Joseph Weinberg did not testify truthfully 
when he said : 

1. That he did not know Steve Nelson. 

2. That he did not know Bernadette Doyle. 

3. That he had never attended any meeting of the Young Communist League, 
and that he had never been a member of the Communist Party. 

It is recommended that the Attorney General convene a special grand jury 
in the District of Columbia for the purpose of hearing certain witnesses whose 
names will be furnished by this committee, and who have knowledge of the 
untruthful statements made by Joseph Weinberg. 

WITNESSES INTERROGATED INCLUDED THOSE EMPLOYED ON ATOMIC BOMB PROJECT 

The committee has interrogated the following i)ersons who were attached 
to the radiation laboratory at the University of California at Berkeley and who, 
while employed there, were performing work on the atomic bomb : 



1 See hearings regarding Communist Infiltration of Radiation Laboratory and Atomic- 
Bomb Prelect at tbe University of California, Berkeley, Calif., vol. II (Identification of 
Scientist X). 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 181 

Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz, formerly professor of physics at Fisk University, 
Nashville, Tenn. 

David Bohm, who is presently assistant professor of physics at Princeton 
University, Princeton, N. J. 

Ken Max Manfred, formerly known as Max Bernard Friedman, who is pre- 
sently attending the University of California at Berkeley as a result of a scholar- 
ship granted him by the University of Puerto Rico amounting to $2,000 per year. 
Manfred is attending the University of California at Berkeley by virtue of a 
leave of absence granted him by the University of Puerto Rico, where he is 
employed as an assistant professor of physics, in order to obtain a degree of 
doctor of philosophy. 

Irving David Fox, who is presently employed as a teaching assistant by the 
University of California at Berkeley. 

Joseph Weinberg, who is presently employed as an assistant professor of 
physics at the University of Minnesota. Weinberg was born on Januaiy 19, 
1917, at New York City, N. Y. He attended public schools in the Bronx, N. Y., 
and graduated from the DeWitt Clinton High School in New York City in 1932. 
During the years 1932 to 1936, he attended City College in New York City. In 
1937, he attended the University of INIichigan during the summer session, and 
during the academic year of 1938-39, he attended the University of Wisconsin. 
During the years 1939-43, he attended the University of California, from which 
he received a Ph. D. degree. 

Frank Friedman Oppenheimer, whose resignation from the University of 
Minnesota as an assistant professor of physics was recently accepted by the 
university. 

Robert R. Davis, who was formerly employed by the Manhattan Engineering 
District at the University of California Radiation Laboratories. 

Upon two occasions, witnesses David Bohm and Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz 
declined to answer questions regarding Communist Party membership and activi- 
ties on the gi-ound that to do so might tend to incriminate them. Witnesses 
Manfred and Fox declined to answer questions regarding Communist Party 
membership and associations on the occasion of their appearance before the 
committee on the ground that to do so might tend to incriminate them. Witness 
Robert R. Davis, on the occasion of his appearance before the committee, testi- 
fied that he had been recruited into the Communist Party by Giovanni Rossi 
Lomanitz. Frank Friedman Oppenheimer, upon the occasion of his appearance 
before the committee, admitted former membership in the Communist Party 
but declined to answer any questions pertaining to the Communist associations 
of other individuals. 

Of the persons mentioned in the above-quoted excerpt, Irving David 
Fox, Giovanni Eossi Lomanitz, and Steve Nelson were indicted on 
December 4, 1950, by a Federal grany jury in Washington, D. C, for 
contempt of Congress. The charges are based upon the refusal of these 
three individuals to answer questions posed by the House Committee 
on Un-American Activities. In each case the defendant has pleaded 
not guilty. 

At the present writing, a Federal grand jury has before it the ques- 
tion of an indictment of Joseph Weinberg for perjur3^ 

Regarding Robert R. Davis, the following is excerpted from a news- 
paper article which appeared on the front page of the Washington 
Post on June 11, 1949 : 

(By Arthur Edson, Associated Press reporter) 

A wartime worker in a west coast atomic laboratory testified yesterday that he 
became a Communist after he was taken to a party meeting by an atomic scien- 
tist. 

The worker, Robert Davis, told the House Un-American Activities Committee 
that the scientist was Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz. 

At one period during the war they both were employed at the important Uni- 
versity of California radiation laboratory in Berkeley. 

Davis said that Lomanitz asked him to go to a meeting, that he went with him 
to two or three, and that at one of the meetings Davis joined the party. Mrs. 
Davis joined, too, he said. 



182 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The price of a Communist card in capitalistic terms : 50 cents * * *. 

Davis, who now lives in New York, followed Lomanitz to the stand. 

Then Louis J. Russell, the committee's senior investigator, asked Lomanitz to 
come forward once more. 

As the two men stared at each other, Davis said : 

"He looks familiar." 

He said he believed this was the same man he knew at the laboratory, but he 
refused to make the identification positive, saying that it had been 6 years since 
he had seen him. 

Davis said that near the end of March 1943 he was transferred to the Los 
Alamos, N. Mex., atomic plant. 

But before he left he burned the two Communist cards, his wife's and his own. 

Never, Davis said, had he looked upon himself as a real Communist. He had 
joined out of curiosity, to see what went on, and he had found the meetings 
"very educational." 

If he had known what it would lead to, he said, he wouldn't have joined. 

He later was asked to resign at Los Alamos, he said, because the Atomic 
Energy Commission considered "my character and associations question- 
able." * * * 



4. Testimony of David Hawkins 

The following article appeared in the New York Times of January 
28, 1951 : 

Professor, Once Red, Held Los Alamos Job 

Washington, January 27 (UP) — David Hawkins, a professor of philosophy, 
became an administrative aide at the Los Alamos (N. Mex. ) atom bomb plant 
in May 1943, soon after he drifted out of the Communist Party, the House Un- 
American Activities Committee disclosed today. 

Professor Hawkins, now at the University of Colorado, said he joined the 
party at the University of California in 1938 and left it in the spring of 1943. 
He said he withdrew from the party when he realized he did not want it 
involved in his life. 

Mr. Hawkins' testimony before the House committee was taken in closed 
session December 20 and 21. He was called in the connnittee's investigation 
of reported Communist infiltration at the University of California's radiation 
laboratoi'y and atomic bomb project. The professor and his wife, Frances 
Pockman Hawkins, who also testified, refused to name any persons they had 
known to be Communists, unless their names already had been cited by the 
committee. 

As administrjftive aide at Los Alamos, Mr. Hawkins helped draw up personnel 
regulations, made out draft deferment forms and acted as a liaison officer repre- 
senting the atom bomb plant in its relations with the Army engineers and the 
town of Los Alamos. 

The connnittee also disclosed testimony of I3r. Kenneth May, former student 
and teacher at the Univerfsiity of California. Dr. May admitted having been a 
•Communist from 1936 to 1942. 

Mr. Hawkins and Dr. May said they knew Dr. Joseph W. Weinberg, who has 
been identified by the committee as the "scientist X" who gave atomic material 
to Communist couriers. Both denied any knowledge that Dr. Weinberg was a 
Communist or that there was a Communist cell in the radiation laboratory. 

A New York Times article of March 14, 1951, describes courtroom 
testimony of David Greenglass and also contains the following ex- 
tract : 

Yesterday's testimony recalled the recent case of Dr. David Hawkins, philos- 
ophy professor, who told the House Un-American Activities Committee last 
December that be became an administrative aide at Los Alamos soon after 
quitting the Communist Party in 1943. 

Dr. Hawkins held the title of "Historian, Los Alamos project for developing 
the atomic bomb." As historian, his work gave him access to basic facts about 
the plant. Dr. Hawkins, according to the committee, admitted that he joined 
the Communist Party in 1938 at the University of California and left it 5 years 
later. 

183 



81095 -r.i J,S 



5. Allegations Concerning Wartime Exports 

The following self-explanatory document is from tlie files of the 
Joint Committee on Atomic Energy : 

January 9, 1950. 

Report on Export of Atomic Materials to the Soviet Union in 1943 and 1944 

(Prepared by the staff of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy) 

I. introduction 

On December 2, 1949, in a radio interview with Fulton Lewis, Jr., George Racey 
Jordan, a former United States Army Air Force major, alleged that shipments of 
uranium, heavy water, and engineering documents referring to Oak Ridge, Tenn., 
were shipped through Great Falls, Mont., to the Soviet Union during 1943 and 
1944. In this and subsequent statements on the radio, in the press, before the 
House Committee on Un-American Activities, and to Joint Comnnttee staff 
members, the exact charges varied but the following are the principal allegations : 

1. 500 pounds of uranium were shiijped to Russia through Great Falls, Mont., 
in the spring of 1943 ; 

2. 1,150 pounds of uranium were shipped from Canada to Russia through 
Great Falls, Mont., in either late fall or winter of 1943 ; 

3. 1,200 pounds of uranium were shipped to Russia through Great Falls, Mont., 
shortly after June 1, 1944, under the personal supervision of Col. Anatole Kotikov, 
Russian military representative stationed at Great Falls in connection with 
lend-lease shipments ; 

4. Carboys of heavy water were shipped to Russia through Great Falls, Mont., 
between January 1943 and June 1944 ; 

5. At least one folder containing an engineering blueprint of some device re- 
lated to atomic energy and Oak Ridge was shipped to Russia in a bhick suitcase 
under diplomatic immunity as air freight from Great Falls, Mont., in the spring 
of 1944, with an attached note on White House stationery which contained the 
following : "Had a hell of a time getting these away from Groves" and signed 
"H. H." (allegedly referring to Gen. Leslie R. Groves of the Mnnhattan Engineer 
District and Harry L. Hopkins, Presidential assistant and lend-lease expediter.) 

6. On one occasion, Mr. Harry L. Hopkins personally directed Major Jordan 
by telephone to expedite a special shipment of uranium to Russia and to keep 
the matter confidential. 

7. On December 6, 1949, Fulton Lewis. Jr., stated in a broadcast that the 
individual responsible for the shipments of atomic materials which Mr. Jordan 
had described was former Vice President Henry W^allaee. 

8. On December 14, 1949, Royall Edward Norton, a retired Navy chief petty 
officer and student at Chapel Hill, N. C, was interviewed on Mr. Lewis' radio 
broadcast and indicated that on one occasion a document relating to the atomic 
structure, possibly of element "92," went to Russia in a Navy lend-lease aircraft. 

II. COMMITTEE FILES 

The files of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy concerning this subject 
commence with a letter request to the Atomic Energy Commis.sion, on August 
9, 1948, for information pertaining to uranium shipments to Russia between 
1843 and 1945. A reply on August 19, 194S, included a summary prepared by 
Dr. Philip L. Merritt of the AEC New York office who, during World War II, 
had been in charge of sci'eening requests received by the War Production Board 
for raw materials relating to the activities of the Manhattan Engineer District. 
This summary revealed that 200 pounds of uraiuum oxide, 220 pounds of uranium 
nitrate, and a quantity of impure uranium metal of less than 25 pounds were 

184 . 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 185 

shipped with authorization from both Manhattan Engineer District and WPB 
under export license. A supplemental letter from the AEG on September 15, 
19-J8, stated that 500 pounds of uranium oxi<le and. 500 pounds of uranium 
nitrate were shipped to Russia by the Eldorado INIining & Refining Corp.,. Ltd., 
from Canada in 1943. 

IIT. BACKGROUND 

Lend-lease.— Under the lend-lease program, a total of $46,000,000,000 worth 
of materiel of varied description was supplied to wartime allies of the United 
States. Of this amount, $11,000,000,000 worth, or 25 percent of all lend-lease 
aid, went to the Soviet Union. The shipments included basic raw materials, 
explosives, shells and guns, medical supplies, chemicals, combat vehicles, air- 
planes, and complete alcohol, synthetic rubber, and petroleum cracking plants, 
together with the requisite engineering drawings, operating and maintenance 
manuals, spare parts lists, and other pertinent documents. This data is con- 
tained in State Department Document No. 2759, European Series 22, titled 
"Soviet Supply Protocols" and in the reports to Congress of the Lend-Lease 
Administration. 

The Lend-Lease Administration assumed that military aircraft such as the 
B-25, of whicli a considerable nnniber were furnished to Russia, would he com- 
paratively useless if not accompanied by blueprints, drawings. sp;^ciflcations, 
maintenance and operational manuals, and spare parts. Since the B-25 at 
this time was one of the principal medium bombers of the United States, data 
concerning it was classified to avoid its falling into the hands of the enemy. The 
documents for this particular plane would make a xtack 3 feet high. A large 
volume of blueprints, documents, and papers was required for such lend-lease 
items as the oil refinery and the synthetic rnbber plants shipped to Russia. 

While this provides an explanation of the heavy fiow of documents, drawings, 
blueprints, and other papers sent to Russia, it also suggests the difficnlty of 
detinitely establishing that no single piece of paper relating to the atomic energy 
program was surreptitiously taken or sent ont of the country. Atomic energy 
documents were, of course, under the control of the Manhattan Engineer District. 

Diplo)iiati(; mail. — Diplomatic mail enjoys innnunity from search. During 
the war there was a great volume of such mail between the United States and 
the Soviet Union. In the light of the information available as a result of the 
Canadian spy trials, Russia is known to have displayed an interest in the atomic 
energy project prior to its public announcement. It is by no means inconceivable 
that, were the Russians able to obtain classified documents from the Manhattan 
project, such documents might have been shipped out of the country in diplomatic 
pouches. However, the committee staff was una])le to locate definite evidence 
that such a shipment actually did occur in connection with the allegations which 
are the subject of this report. 

It is possible, however, that docviraents relating to particle accelerators, such 
as cyclotrons, could have ])e':^n obtained from one of the institutions owning and 
operating them, au'l carried out of the conntry. Such information was widely 
distril)uted prior to the war due to the fact that cyclotrons were then in operation 
in this and other countries. At least one was known to hiave been built in 
Russia. The term "5-foot walls of water and lead," referred to by Mr. Jordan as 
appearing on a document shipped to Russia could describe a standard shielding 
technique used in conjunction with cyclotrons. 

Uranium. — Uranium has been known and used to a minor extent in industry 
since the Curies produced radium at the turn of tlie century. As a byproduct of 
radium production, the supply of uranium exceeded demand until 1942. Indus- 
trially it was used to color ceramics, in photography, and as an analytical agent. 
Experiments with uranium as an alloying metal in steel were carried on during 
this period but were not commercially successful, primarily because other ma- 
terials such as vanadium were cheaper and more satisfactory. Prior to World 
War II, the world use of uranium amounted to several hundred tons per year. 

Before January 26, 1943, there were no unusual United States Government 
controls on delivery, price, or use of uranium ; but on that date, its ceramic 
and photographic uses were forbidden by WPB Order No. M-285. Other legal 
restrictions were not applied as the Manhattan District did not wish to call 
attention to this material. Instead, an attempt was made to gain control of the 
supply of uranium indirectly. 

Heavy water. — Prior to World War II, heavy water was a scientific curiosity 
produced at several research laboratories throughout the world. In the 
United States, the Stuart Oxygen Co. of San Francisco produced about 10,000 



186 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

grams (about 3 gallons) a year which were sold commercially to universities for 
use in laboratories and cyclotrons. Heavy water had no industrial or military 
use prior to 1943, and no legal restrictions were placed on its movement within 
or out of the country prior to passage of the McMahon Act. 

The Manhattan District did not place any restrictions on the movement of 
heavy water, as this material was not then considered of primary importance in 
the atomic project. Under the provisions of the McMahon Act, after the war, 
the Atomic Energy Commission reciuested the Department of Commerce to 
prohibit its exportation. 

IV. HISTORY OF SHIPMENTS 

Four authorizations for shipment to Russia of materials which could be 
related to an atomic energy program were granted during the war. Two of 
these were for uranium oxide and uranium nitrate totaling 1,420 pounds. A 
third was for 25 pounds of uranium metal. The fourth was for 1,000 grams 
of heavy water. The total amount of uranium oxide and nitrate authorized 
was shipped by commercial suppliers following standard procedures. The 
uranium metal actually shipped was 2.2 pounds (1 kilo) procured through 
commercial channels after considerable technical diflBculty. All three shipments 
of uranium materials were paid for under the provisions of the Lend-Lease 
Act. A shipment of 1,000 grams of heavy water was made through normal 
commercial channels on an export license. Another shipment of 100 grams 
of heavy water was made without export license, there being no license re- 
quirement for either shipment. Both shipments were paid for, not with 
lend-lease funds but with funds supplied by Russia herself, as lend-lease 
authorities had taken the position that heavy water was not in the list of 
materials authorized to be financed by the United States. The authorized 
shipments were cleared by Lend-Lease, the WPB, State Department, and 
the Manhattan Engineer District to the extent required by existing regulations. 
The records indicate it was felt that refusal to ship might have been more 
informative to the Russians than any help they could derive from the small 
quantities of material requested. A subsequent Russian request for nine long 
tons of uranium oxide and nine long tons of uranium nitrate was rejected 
because of ''unavailability" of the material. 

Shipment No. l.—On January 20, 1948, WPB Conservation Order M-285 
directed that all trade in uranium or uranium compounds, alloys, or mixtures 
for certain industrial purposes be suspended. On January 28, 1943, the Soviet 
Purchasing Commission directed a request to the Office of Lend-Lease Adminis- 
tration for 25 pounds of uranium metal, 220 pounds of urano-uranic oxide, and 
220 pounds of nitro-uranyl. The request also notified the authorities of an in- 
tention to file application for 8 tons of each of the two uranium salts. The 
Soviet Purchasing Commission was informed on February 15, 1943, by letter 
from WPB, that these shipments could be approved but that a precise statement 
as to its intended operational use would be required. On March 6, 1943, a letter 
application for an export permit for 200 pounds of oxide and 220 pounds of 
nitrate was submitted by the Soviet Purchasing Commission to the Lend-Lease 
Administration for "making armaments." Another letter application on March 7, 
1943, from the Soviet Purchasing Commission requested an export license for 
500 pounds of oxide and 500 pounds of nitrate for "manufacture of ferro-uranium 
compounds which will be used in the production of arm.aments." 

In the meantime, on March 4, 1943, the Lend-Lease Administration received a 
letter application from "Chemator, Inc." (Chematar, Inc.) for clearance to ship 
uranium compounds to the Soviets. A letter reply from Lend-Lease on March 
6, 1943, informed Chematar, Inc., that clearance would be granted provided the 
necessary data on exact quantities and source were filed. 

The Soviet Purchasing Commission letter of March 6 bears one notation 
dated March 8 : "Cleared with Mr. Lund of WPB and General Groves of the 
U. S. Army Engineers." Export license No. C-1537205 was assigned on March 9, 
1943, for this shipment. 

Chematar, Inc., acting on the order placed with it by the Soviet Purchasing 
Commission, ordered 200 pounds of uranium oxide and 220 pounds of uranium 
nitrate from the S. W. Shattuck Chemical Co., Denver, Colo., on March 15. 1943. 
The material was shipped bv rail to Gore Field, Groat Falls, Mont., from Denver 
on INIarch 23, 1943, on Shattuck order No. 9239. The shipment was contained 
in four boxes and identified on an Air Force outgoing tally sheet dated April 
5, 1943, as "Chemicals" with a gross weight of 691 pounds. A signed receipt 
was obtained from a Rus.sian official for the material. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 187 

Shipment No. 2. — On April 10. 1943, General Groves was informed by the 
Lend-Lease Adiuiuistration of the request for 500 pounds each of uranium 
oxide and nitrate submitted by the Soviet Purchasing Commisson on March 
7, 1943. He agreed to reach a decision by the following Monday morning, 
according to the daily report of the Soviet Supply Division of the Lend-Lease 
Administration. On April 14, 1943, a letter was addressed to the Soviet Pur- 
chasing Commission from the Lend-Lease Administration rejecting the request 
for a total of 1,000 pounds of uranium coinpounds. Telephone calls were re- 
ceived by the Lend-Lease Administration from the Soviet Purchasing Com- 
mission on April 15, 1943, to protest the denial of clearance and to state that 
"they had been offered large quantities" although the denial was on the ground 
that the material was not available. This view was expi-essed again in a letter 
on April 20, 1943, from the Soviet Purchasing Commission to General Wesson, 
Senior Assistant Administrator for Lend-Lease. A formal reapplication was 
submitted on April 23, 1943. 

In a classified file memorandum dated May 1, 1943, the Lend-Lease Adminis- 
tration ofiicer, through whom most of these exchanges had been carried on, 
wrote that as a result of telephone conferences between General Wesson and 
General Groves, the previous decision not to approve the Soviet request was 
reversed by General Groves and General Wesson, and that it had been decided 
to allow the Soviets to proceed under the export license to obtain the particular 
stocks of 500 pounds of urano-uranic oxide and 500 pounds of uranium nitrate 
for which they had previously applied. A note ap]iended to the reapplication, 
dated April 22, 1943. indicated that General Wesson had decided that this export 
license should be approved and issued as soon as possible. 

On April 23, 1943, General Wesson addressed a letter to the Soviet Purchasing 
Commission approving the request for 500 pounds of uranium oxide and 500 
pounds of uranium nitrate. License No. C-16431S0 was assigned on the same 
date. 

The records of the Canadian Radium & Uranium Corp., New York, disclose a 
letter from Chematar, Inc., dated April 27, 1943, confirming an interest in obtain- 
ing 1,000 pounds of uranium oxide and nitrate. On May 1, 1943, another letter 
from Chematar, Inc., placed a firm order for 500 pounds of each material for 
shipment to Great Falls, Mont., for export under license No. C-1643180. 

The Canadian Radium & Uranium Corp. placed a firm order with Eldorado 
Gold Mines, Ltd., Canada, on May 6, 1943, for 500 pounds of oxide and 500 pounds 
of nitrate for shipment to Col. A. N. Kotikov for the Soviet Purchasing Com- 
mission at Gore Field, Great Falls, Mont. The purpose was stated as : "The 
uranium oxide will be used for making ferro-uranium compounds, which in turn, 
will be used in the production of armaments. The uranium nitrate will be used 
for medical purjjoses. * * *" By invoice No. U-664 of the Eldorado Gold 
Mines, Ltd., on May 21, 1943, the oxide was shipped in 5 cases containing 100 
pounds each of black powder, and the nitrate was shippetl in 10 cases containing 
50 pounds each of yellow powder. The total value of the order was $2,455. The 
packing cases were made of wood. The oxide boxes each had a gross weight of 
117 pounds and the nitrate cases each had a gross weight of 100 pounds. The 
gross shipping weight of the order was 1,585 pounds. The shipment went by air 
freight from Great Falls, Mont., to Fairbanks, Alaska, on June 10, 1943, and was 
accepted there by the Russian representative for transshipment to the Soviet 
Union. 

Shipment No. 3. — The Soviet Purchasing Commission included in its request 
to the Lend-Lease Administration on January 29, 1943, an item of 25 pounds of 
uranium metal. On February 4, 1943, a similar request was submitted by the 
same organization in a requisition to the International Division, Services of Sup- 
ply, War Department. This requisition was denied by letter to the Soviet Pur- 
chasing Commission from the Division Director on March 9, 1943, because of 
"unavailability." The request to the Lend-Lease Administration was granted 
in their letter of February 15, 1943, conditioned upon more adequate explanation 
of the ultimate use of the material. The Soviet Purchasing Commission tele- 
phoned the Lend-Lease Administration on March 9, 1943, according to that or- 
ganization's daily reports, and urgently requested approval of a uranium-metal 
shipment. On March 10, the Soviet Purchasing Commission called again and 
stated that the Manufacturers Chemical Co., New York, could supply the metal 
out of stock and that approval was necessary to avoid a black-market trans- 
action. A letter from the Lend-Lease Administration to the Soviet Purchasing 
Commission on March 12, 1943, stated in part: "There is no objection on the 
part of this office to the placing of an order for 25 pounds of uranium 



188 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

metal. * * *" A carbon copy of this letter was sent to General Groves on 
March 15, 1943. 

The letter from the Soviet Purchasing Commission to General Wesson of the 
Lend-Lease Administration on April 20, 1943, again requested authority to buy 
"25 pounds of uranium metal for wliich we also have a proposition." (In a letter 
to the Manhattan Engineer District from the Lend-Lease Administration on April 
23, 1943, it was stated that "General Groves has advised General Wesson that 
the particular request for 500 pounds of urano-uranic oxide and 500 pounds 
of uranium nitrate can be approved. * * * in addition, it has been agreed 
that an application for 25 pounds of uranium metal will be entertained if sub- 
mitted.") General Wesson replied to the Soviet Purchasing Commission on 
April 23, 1949, following a telephone conference with General Groves, that an 
application for the uranium metal would be entertained "provided you can locate 
a source of supply." An application was received dated April 27, 1943, for metal 
valued at $1,875. Export license No. C-16532S8 was assigned on April 29, 1943. 

The Soviet Purchasing Commission placed its order for the uranium metal 
with Manufacturers Chemical Co., which in turn placed it with A. D. MacKay, a 
chemical supply house in New York, on April 13, 1943. This firm placed the order 
with Hugh S. Cooper Metallurgical Laboratory in Cleveland, Ohio. The exact 
date and document for this order has not been available. 

On March 31, 1944, the Soviet Purchasing Commission directed a letter to the 
Secretary of War in further effort to obtain 8 tons each of uranium oxide and 
nitrate and 25 pounds of uranium metal. Reference was made to the correspond- 
ence on this matter during 1943. At a conference of representatives of the 
International Division and the Production Division of Services of Supply, War 
Department, on April 7, 1944, General Groves indicated that he desired to handle 
this new request in its entirety. The memorandum recording this conference 
contains the International Division recommendation that consideration be given 
to a solution designed "to avoid arousing Soviet suspicions." 

The Secretary of War informed the Soviet Purchasing Commission by letter 
on April 17, 1944, that "our supply of this material is not sufficient for us to 
comply with your request * * *." There is no record of a cancellation of 
export license No. C-16532S8, assigned on April 29, 1943, to the Soviet request 
for 25 pounds of uranium metal. 

A sample of uranium metal was sent on September 9, 1944, by Hugh S. Cooper 
Metallurgical Laboratory, Cleveland, Ohio, to the Bureau of Standards for 
assay. The assay was prepared on Septemlier 11, 1944. The results were con- 
siderably at variance with assays of Tiranium metal used by the Manhattan 
engineer district according to an interview statement on December 8. 1949, by 
Dr. Philip L. Merritt, former Raw Materials Director for MED and present 
AEC Raw Materials Chief in New York. A series of three shipments of vary- 
ing assay, totaling slightly over 6 pounds of uranium metal, was made to A. D. 
MacKay by Cooper Metallurgical Laboratory in September and December 1944 
and .Tanuary 1945. Out of this material A. D. MacKay selected 1 kilo (2.2 
pounds) of uranium metal for application against the original Soviet order. 
This shipment was made on February 16, 1945, under export license No. 
0-1653288, assigned on April 29, 1943. The material was packed in a wooden 
container, had a gross weight of 3 pounds 6 ounces, at a cost of $314.60. It 
was shipped to Washington, D. C, for transshipment by diplomatic courier 
pouch to INIoscow. 

Shipment No. J). — The daily report for the Division of Soviet Supply of the 
Oflice of the Lend-Lease Administration contains an entry on September 22, 
1943, that a Soviet "requisition for heavy water for laboratory purposes was 
discussed and referred to Mr. Moore for investigation." A second entry on the 
same day states that Mr. Pauley (Henry M. Pauley, Foreign Requirements Unit, 
Chemicals Division, War Production Board) was immediately notified of the 
request. 

The Lend-Lease Administration requested the Soviet Purchasing Commission 
on September 28, 1943, to supply the end use for heavy water and stated that 
the Lend-Lease Administration was unable to find that it was used for war 
purposes in the United States. On September 30, 1943, representatives of the 
Soviet Purchasing Commission came to the Lend-Lease Administration to dis- 
cuss, among other things, the request for heavy water. 

On October 11, 1943, the Lend-Lease Administration wrote the Soviet Pur- 
chasing Commission to the effect that Lend-Lease policy covered only materials 
essential to the war effort and that the heavy-water request would have to be sup- 
ported by further definition of the intended end use. The letter stated that un- 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 189 

less a war purpose could be established, and request for heavy water could not 
be construed as coming within the materials covered by Lend-Lease provisions 
and could not be financed under its arrangements. Again, on October 14, 1943, 
the chronological files of the Lend-Lease Administration bear a notation that 
representatives of WPB, the Soviet Purchasing Commission, and Lend-Lease met 
to discuss certain items, among them heavy water. 

On November 16, 1943, the Division of Soviet Supply, Office of Lend-Lease 
Administration, assigned program license No. 339 and release certificate No. 
C-366 to a Soviet export license application for a cash purchase of heavy water. 
The program license report covering the period October 1-December 31, 1943, 
showed program license No. 339 for 1,000 grams (2.2 pounds) of heavy water 
with a shipping weight of 41 pounds and a value of $3,250. This report bears 
a covering memo with the word "Noted" and the initial "W", followed by a 
typed name, "General Wesson". 

The records of Chematar, Inc., show that on August 23, 1943, a month be- 
fore the first notation in the Lend-Lv^ase chronological file, a telephone call 
was received from the Soviet Purchasing Conmiission in Washington, D. C, per- 
taining to a potential order for 1,000 grams of heavy water. The firm order 
was placed on October 21, 1943, after Lend-Lease had told the Soviet Purchasing 
Commissions that Lend-Lease credits could not cover the heavy-water requisition. 
The heavy water was obtained without delay from the only commercial manu- 
factm-er in the United States, the Stuart Oxygen Co. of San Francisco. It 
amounted to about 1.2 quarts and was packed in 40 Pyrex ampoules, each con- 
taining 25 grams net weight, and then in cotton in four wooden boxes each hold- 
ing ten ampoules. The four wooden boxes were contained in a larger box with 
a gross weight of 41.12 pounds. The l)ox was strapped and sealed at the time of 
delivery to the Soviet Purchasing Commission in Washington, D. C, on Novem- 
ber 4, 1943. 

The 1,000 grams of heavy water were shipped to Russia through Great Falls, 
Mont., on November 29, 1943, with a notation on the United States Air Force 
airway bill "Shipped 12-2-43." A release certificate, dated November 15, 1943, 
and signed by the head of the Lend-Lease Division for Soviet Supply and by the 
head of the Chemicals Division for the Soviet Purchasing Commission, is in 
United States Army records. 

Chematar. Inc., solicited another order from the Soviet Purchasing Commission 
in .January 1944 witliout success. A second order was received on January 16, 
1945, without solicitation, for 100 grams. This amount of heavy water was 
obtained from Stuart Oxygen Co. on February 7, 1945, and it was forwarded to 
the Soviet Purchasing Commission on February 14, 1945. This pacliage con- 
sisted of a single wooden box containing four sealed Pyrex ampoules packed 
in cotton. The box was wrapped in heavy paper and sealed with wax, had a 
gross weight of 6 pounds, and a value of $350. Payment for the shipments of 
heavy water were by check from the Soviet Purchasing Commission. No Lend- 
Lease or Air Force records have been located for this shipment. 

Thei'e is no record of any order or directive by MED, Lend-Lease, WPB, or 
other interested agency forbidding the shipment of heavy water during the war. 
Neither shipment involved the use of carboys such as Mr. Jordan has stated he 
saw at Great Falls, Mont. Shipments to Russia through Great Falls of sulfuric 
acid in carboys have been noted during the period 1943-44 on Air Force shipping 
tickets. 

Ferro-iiranium. — On February 9, 1943, the Redistribution Division. WPB, 
regional office in Cleveland, Ohio, directed a letter to the Manhattan Engineer 
District, with regard to approximately 65 pounds of ferro-uranium in the posses- 
sion of the Latrobe Electric Steel Co., Latrobe, Pa. (It was used by this com- 
pany and others to produce high-quality alloy steel. It was exi)ensive to use 
and, about this time, uranium was replaced by ferro-chrome and ferro-vanadium 
because of its cost and scarcity.) The purpose of the letter was stated as the 
return of this material into war production. The Manhattan District contacted 
the Lend-Lease Administration by letter on April 17, 1943, and passed along 
a copy of the letter relating to the ferro-uranium. It was suggested by the 
Manhattan District that the Soviet Purchasing Commission's request for uranium 
for experimental work on alloys for armaments might be satisfied by this ferro- 
uranium. 

On April 23. 1943. the Lend-Lease Administration replied to the War Depart- 
ment that Generals Groves and Wesson had indicated approval would be forth- 
coming for the Soviet request for 500 pounds each of uranium oxide and nitrate 
and that Lend-Lease assumed General Groves would keep the correspondent, 



190 ■ SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Colonel Crenshaw of the Manhattan District, informed of any details regarding 
his deeision. 

In the meantime, the Lend-Lease Administration had advised the Soviet Pur- 
chasing Commission, on April 14, 1943, that its application for export permission 
on 500 pounds each of uranium oxide and nitrate was impossible to clear 
but that "we may be of assistance in obtain. ng uranium compounds other than 
those specified, which nevertheless are suitable for the production of armaments." 
The lend-lease officer who signi'd tills letter was William A. Moore. He 
stated in an interview on December 9, 1949, with a joint committee staff member 
that this was an indirect reference to the ferro-uranium at Latrobe. No direct 
Soviet reaction to the offer was received. The material was not obtained for 
the Soviet Purchasing Commission and no further reference to it is contained in 
records or files which have been examined. 

Documents. — In an interview with a joint committee staff member on December 
5, 1949, General Groves, former chief of the MED, stated that he had no knowl- 
edge of any shipment to Russia during the war of any "maps, documents, blue 
prints, engineering drawings, or scientific data" originating with the Manhattan 
Engineer District. Investigation into the records of the various organizations 
concerned have not revealed any evidence of shipment of documents bearing 
on the atomic energy program, such as Mr. Jordan mentioned in his testimony 
before the House Un-American Activities Committee on December 5, 1949. 

v. OTHER ALLEGATIONS 

Han-y L. HopTcins. — The investigation into the alleged Hopkins note which 
Mr. Jordan reported seeing in a black suitcase on its way to Russia has been 
developed l)y interviewing persons who said they had been in a position to 
know how Harry Hopkins worked, what stationery he used, and how he signed 
his initials. 

On December 9, 1949, Maj. Gen. James H. Burns, who had been executive 
officer to Mr. Hopkins on the Soviet Protocol Committee and chairman of the 
Soviet Lend-Lease Shipping and Supply Committee, was interviewed in the 
Office of the Secretary of Defense. General Burns recollected that the only 
specific item which Mr. Hopkins "insisted on following" in the Soviet lend-lease 
program was the number of planes delivered to the Russians. 

Dr. Vannevar Bush, wartime head of the National Defense Research Council, 
was interviewed in his office at the Carnegie Institute on December 7, 1949. 
He stated that Mr. Hopkins' knowledge of the atomic energy program stemmed 
from his interest and assistance in working out the international relationship 
problem with Great Britain and Canada. Dr. Bush knew of no detailed interest 
in the program on the part of Mr. Hopkins. 

Mr. Sidney Hyman, personal secretary to Mr. Hopkins from September 1945 
until the latter's death, was interviewed on December 7, 1949. Mr. Hyman's 
job was to sort and summarize the material in almost 100 tiling cabinets con- 
taining "the Hopkins papers." He said INIr. Hopkins never permitted any docu- 
ments or papers to be destroyed. This applied even to penciled notes. INIr. 
Hyman says he never saw the initials "H. H." and stated Mr. Hopkins invariably 
initialed his papers "H. L. H." 

Mr. Isador Lubin, assistant to President Roosevelt and Chief of the Statisti- 
cal Division of the Munitions Assignment Board, was interviewed in New York 
on December 9, 1949. Mr. Lubin had an office adjoining Mr. Hopkins' during 
the war and frequently shared secretarial service with him. Mr. Lubin said he 
could not recall Hopkins mentioning General Groves or the atomic energy 
project. He stated that Hopkins was security-minded and never discussed 
classified matters over the telephone. Personal memos, Mr. Rubin said, were 
signed "Harry" and all others initialed "H. L. H." Mr. Rubin added that he 
could not recall ever seeing any White House stationei"y with an individual's 
name printed on it during the war. Hopkins had some special private stationery 
which Mr. Lubin helped him .secure and which was printed "Harry L. Hopkins, 
Washington, D. C." Air. Lubin said there was no indication that the stationery 
came from the White House. 

Mr. Robert Sherwood, intimate of Mr. Hopkins and author of the book Roose- 
velt and Hopkins, was interviewed in New York on December 9. 1949. Mr. 
Sherwood expressed disbelief that Hopkins ever went outside a chain of com- 
mand to do a job. He was of the opinion that Hopkins would have called General 
Marshall or General George if he wanted to expedite an air .shipment. Mr. 
Sherwood has never seen White House stationery with Hopkins' name printed 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 191 

on it. He said he never saw anything signed "H. H." and never heard Hopliins 
mention General Groves. In this connection, General Groves testified before the 
Committee on Un-American Activities of the House of Representatives, Decem- 
ber 7, 1949, as follows : 

" * * * At no time, to the best of my recollection and belief — and I am 
sure I would have remembered it — did I ever meet Harry Hopkins, talk to him 
on the phone, receive any letters from him or write any to him, or have any 
dealings with anyone who pretended to be talking for him. There may be letters 
on file that are contrary to that, but if there are, they were of a routine type. 
I can find no one from the people who were the closest to me during that period 
in the office who remembers any such contact. I do know, of course, that Mr. 
Hopkins knew about this project. I know that. But as far as any dealings with 
me, or, as far as I know, with any members of my staff, they didn't occur. 

"Furthermore, I think it is important to realize that our organization, both 
in Washington and in New York, was so closely knit, and things were under 
such a tight centralized control, that I can't imagine any request or eftort by 
Mr. Hopkins along that line ever occurring without my knowledge, unless some- 
one in the office was lacking in the integrity he should have had, and we never 
discovered that in our organization. * * *" 

In an interview by joint committee staff members with Mr. Jordan in New 
York on December 9, 1949, he stated he was uncertain as to the exact phraseology, 
initials, and stationery which he had described on the Fulton Lewis broadcast 
of December 2, 1949, as "a letter on White House stationery" with "the name 
Harry Hopkins printed in the upper left-hand corner." 

Henry A. Wallace. — In his radio broadcast on December 5, 1949, Fulton Lewis, 
Jr., stated that "the individual who overruled General Groves' blockade and 
ordered the atomic materials sent to Russia" was Henry A. Wallace, former 
Vice President of the United States. 

In a telephone interview from his home in South Salem, N. Y., on December 9, 
1949, Mr. Wallace stated that he "never told Groves to do anything," and that he 
had talked to General Groves only once on atomic matters and that this con- 
versation was about a progress report and had nothing to do with shipments 
to Russia. 

Mr. Wallace was a member of the three-man top policy group delegated by the 
President in the fall of 1941 to determine the course of the atomic-energy project. 
In this capacity, Mr. Wallace reviewed the report of Dr. Vannevar Bush on 
June 13, 1942, recommending expansion of the project. Out of this report, after 
its approval by the President, grew the Manhattan district headed by General 
Groves. While unable to attend the first policy confei'ence on September 23, 
1942, Mr. Wallace did receive the first progress report from General Groves. 
Mr. Wallace and General Groves do not recollect any further contact between 
Mr. Wallace and the atomic-energy project. 

In the interview with a joint committee staff member on December 5, General 
Groves stated : "All our dealings on lend-lease were with General Wesson." In 
his testimony before the House Un-American Activities Committee on December 
7, 1949, General Gro\es testified that "at no time did Mr. Wallace bring any 
pressure to bear on me directly, and at no time was I aware that any indirect 
pressure was brought to bear by him." 

Royall Edward Norton. — In connection with Mr. Norton's reference on the radio 
broadcast of December 14 to a blueprint chart of the atomic structure of ele- 
ment "92," it may be recalled that the first "Periodic Chart of the Elements" 
was promulgated in 1870 by the Russian Chemist Mendeleeff. This and subse- 
quent revisions and refinements are standard equipment in most high-school and 
college chemistry classrooms. They are available from publishers of scientific 
literature and at most technical libraries. 

These charts describe the electron shell groups, the isotopes, the weight, size, 
configuration, crystal lattice, boiling point, density, and other characteristics 
of each element. It is conventional practice to reproduce the.«e charts or parts 
thereof in blue or ozalid prints to hang on laboratory walls. 

VI. SUMMARY 

Review of the data examined and interviews conducted In connection with this 
inquiry indicates that two shipments totaling 1,420 pounds of uranium salts 
and one shipment of 2.2 pounds of uranium metal were made to Russia under 
lend-lease with the knowledge and consent of all agencies and parties concerned 
in 1943 and 1944. In addition, two shipments of heavy water, totaling 1,100 
grams, were made to Russia during the war within existing legal provisions for 
such exports. 



192 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 



The joint committee staff could find no indication that documents, maps, blue- 
prints, or classified papers other than those authorized in connection with the 
wartime agreements with Russia were shipped during the war through Great 
Falls, Mont. At the same time, the volume of material in transit and the exist- 
ence of channels covered by diplomatic immunity through which unauthorized 
shipments might have reached Russia preclude any positive statement that 
nothing ever went to Russia without approval via Great Falls. 

Persons Contacted During Inquiry 

Arneson, R. Gordon, Special assistant to Under Secretary of State 
Boiling, Maj. Gen. A. R., Deputy Chief, Army Intelligence Division 
Burman, Lawrence C, Assistant Chief, Raw Materials Division, Manhattan 

Engineer District 
Burns, Gen. James H., executive officer to Harry Hopkins 
Bush, Dr. Vannevar, Top Policy Committee 
Carroll, Gen. Joseph, Air Forces Intelligence 

Consodine. William, Manhattan Engineer District security officer 
Dow, Frank, Commissoner of Customs 

Farrell, Gen. Thomas, Deputy to General Groves, Manhattan Engineer District 
Foster, C. W., president, American Pacific Industrial Co., New York 
Groves, Gen. Leslie R., Manhattan Engineer District 

Hazard, John, Secretary to Soviet Protocol Committee, State Department 
Hillenkoetter, Admiral R. H., Director, Central Intelligence Agency 
Hyman, Sidney, Harry Hopkins' personal secretary after retirement 
Johnson, Lt. Col. Allen C, Assistant to General 'Groves, Manhattan Engineer 

District 
Jordan, George Racey, Major, United States Army Air Forces 
Lansdale, John, Manhattan Engineer District security officer 
Lubin, Isadore, Assistant to President Roosevelt 
Merritt, Dr. Philip L., Chief, Explorations Branch, NYAEC 
Moore, William A., Senior Administrator, Soviet Supply Lend-Lease 
Nichols, Maj. Gen. K. D., Assistant to General Groves, Manhattan Engineer Dis- 
trict 
Nichols, Louis B., Assistant Director, FBI 
Perlman, Philip, Solicitor General, Department of Justice 
Potter, J. Seward, S. W. Shattuck Chemicals Co., Denver, Colo. 
Pregel, Boris, president, Canadian Radium & Uranium Co. 
Rosenberg, Herman, Chematar, Inc., New York 
Sherwood, Robert C, biographer of Harry L. Hopkins 

Silver, Philip, lieutenant. United States Army Liaison at Fairbanks, Alaska 
Symington, W. Stuart, Secretary of the Air Forces 
Truesdell, George E., records custodian, Russian Branch, Lend-Lease 
Volpe, Joseph, Jr., general counsel, AEC 
Wallace, Henry A., Vice President of the United States 
Witsell, Maj. Gen. E. F., Adjutant General, United States Army 

Go\^ENMENT Agencies From Wnicn Records Data Was Secured or Sought 



Atomic Energy Commission 
Bureau of Customs 
Department of the Air Force 
Department of the Army 
Department of the Navy 
Department of State 



Foreign Economic Administration 
Lend-Lease Administration 
National Archives 
Soviet Protocols Conmiittee 
War Production Board 



Private Companies Contacted During Inquiry 

Canadian Radium & Uranium Corp., New York, N. Y. 

Chematar, Inc., New York. N. Y. 

Hugh S. Cooper Metallurgical Laboratory, Cleveland, Ohio. 

A. D. MacKay Co., New York, N. Y. 

Manufacturers Chemical Co., New York, N. Y. 

S. W. Shattuck Chemicals Co., New York, N. Y. 

Stuart Oxygen Co., San Francisco, Calif. 



TART III 

NONESPIONAGE CASES 

1. The Case of the Plutonium Souvenir (Dr. Sanford Simons) 

Born in Xew York in 1922, Sanford Simons was graduated in 1944 
from the Missouri School of Mines and Metallurgy. After doiiig re- 
search work at Battelle Memorial Institute, he was stationed at Los 
Alamos as an enlisted man in the United States Army from August 
19-14 to March 1946. He remained at Los Alamos as a civilian scientist 
until July 1946. Following a period of private employment as a con- 
sulting engineer, he joined the research staff of Denver University. 
When arrested, he was engaged in upper atmosphere research as part 
of a Denver University contract with the Air Force. 

On August 22, 1950, the Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested 
Simons and charged him witli illegal possession of fissionable mate- 
rials — a crime for which the McMahon Act fixes a maximum penalty of 
5 3^ears in prison and a $5,000 fine. Specifically, it was charged that 
while at Los Alamos, the 28-year-old scientist had stolen a glass vial 
containing plutonium, and had buried it under his home. It was not 
alleged that Simons had any connection with an espionage network, 
nor was it charged that he was associated with Communist or subver- 
sive organizations. 

Simons declared that he had always liked to collect "mineral sam- 
ples," and said that he took the plutonium as a "souvenir." He also 
stated that he had taken samples of uranium from Los Alamos for the 
same reason, and that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had re- j 

moved the uranium from his home 2 years previous to his arrest. He 
said he had hidden the radioactive plutonium under his house because 
he feared that one of his children might come in contact with it. 

On October 20 Simons entered a plea of guilty. At his trial, held 
on November 22, his attorney declared tliat curiosity alone had 
prompted Simons' thefts. The trial judge ruled, however, that Simons' 
action "did constitute a crime and he did know better." 

Simons was sentenced to 18 months in Federal prison. He did not 
appeal the sentence. 

193 






2. The Missing Brief Case 

On August 8, 1950, Mr. Frank Greenlees, Assistant Director of the 
Minister of Supply's atomic research plant at Risley, England, trav- 
eled by train from London to Blackpool. He carried with him a suit- 
case containing secret atomic energy documents. Mr. Greenlees left 
the case in the corner of his compartment during a 3-minute absence 
while he walked along the coach corridor. When he returned, the case 
was gone. 

Three days later, the suitcase — with all documents intact — was 
located at Folkestone, on the English Channel. AVilliam Ralph Wake- 
ham was arrested the same day and charged with theft of the suit- 
case. The police were satisfied that the theft was not linked to espio- 
nage, and that Mr. Wakeham was an ordinary sneak thief, unaware of 
the contents of the stolen case. The day following his arrest. Wake- 
ham slashed his wrists and swallowed a razor in an unsuccessful sui- 
cide attempt. 

He subsequently plead guilty to the charge of stealing the suitcase 
and was sentenced to 4 years in prison. 

194 



3. The Souvenir Photos 

Tlie following cases all relate to the theft of classified documents and 
photographs by enlisted men serving with the United States Army at 
the Los Alamos Laboratory, during the war. All involved charges 
under title 18, United States Code, sections 100 and 234, Theft and 
Unlawful Removal of Government Records. None of these cases was 
prosecuted under the McMahon Act, and at no time was it alleged that 
the participants in these crimes were connected with any espionage 
network, or motivated by any desire to pass on restricted data to a 
foreign nation. 

1. Arnold F. Kivl. — While serving as an enlisted man at Los 
Alamos, Kivi removed highly classified photographs and retained 
them in his personal possession. Following investigation by the FBI 
he was arrested and pleaded guilty. On October 16, 1947, he was 
sentenced to 18 months imprisonment in the Federal Correctional 
Institution of Danbury, Conn. 

2. AJeccander Van der Luft. — From 1944 until March 1946, Luf t was 
stationed at the Los Alamos project. Investigation revealed that dur- 
ing this period he had removed highly classified documents. On 
August 21, 1947, he pleaded guilty to this charge and was sentenced to 
4 years probation. 

3. Ernest Dineen Wallis. — Upon his departure from Los Alamos in 
March 1946, Mr. Wallis removed classified negatives of official photo- 
graphs. He was indicted at Albuquerque on July 24, 1947, and in 
April of the following year, was given a suspended sentence of a year 
and a day by the Federal court in Chicago. 

4. Fred Gerard Michaels. — While serving at Los Alamos from De- 
cember 1943 until June 1946, Michaels made photographs for his per- 
sonal use from classified negatives in the possession of Wallis. He was 
arrested on February 13, 1948. On April 1, 1948, the United States 
attorney at Albuquerque dismissed the charges filed against Michaels 
and the case was closed. 

5. Ernest Lawrenoe Paporello. — During his stay at Los Alamos, 
Paporello removed classified photographs. He was arrested and ar- 
raigned on January 15, 1948. He pleaded not guilty to the informa- 
tion filed against him and on March 11, 1948, was sentenced to 6 
months' imprisonment and fined $250 on each of two counts, with the 
prison sentences to run concurrently. 

6. George Wellington Thomfson. — Thompson served as an enlisted 
man at Los Alamos from August 1943 to September 1945, and was 
subsequently employed as a civilian at Los Alamos and Sandia until 
March 1947. The investigation of Wallis and Kivi revealed that 
Thompson had in his possession classified negatives and photographs, 
which had been removed from Los Alamos. He was arraigned on 
January 13, 1948, and pleaded not guilty. On March 11, 1948, Thomp- 
son was convicted and fined $125 on each of two counts. 

195 



4. The Falsified Security Questionnaire 

Ernest Jewell Koch was intermittently employed by subcontractors 
of the Atkinson & Jones Construction Co. at Hanford, Wash., between 
February 1948 and April 1950. 

He was never an employee of the Atomic Energy Commission, and 
he never received a clearance and never had access to restricted data. 

Like all other persons employed by the Atomic Energy Commission 
or by contractors participating in the project, Mr. Koch was required 
to fill out a personnel security questionnaire when he made application 
for employment. 

In filling out this questionnaire, Mr. Koch concealed the fact that 
he had been a member of the Communist Party. 

Title 18, section 1001, United States Code, Fraud and False State- 
ments Chapter, provides : 

Whoever, in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency 
of the United States knowingly and willfnlly falsifies, conceals, or covers up by 
any trick, scheme, or device a material fact, or makes any false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statements or representations, or makes or uses any false writing or 
document knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent state- 
ment or entry, shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than 
5 years, or both. 

On January 9, 1951, Mr. Koch was convicted under the statute and 
fined $250 and placed on probation 3 years. 

196 



APPENDIX 

The following is quoted from Parliamentary Debates, House of 
Commons Official Report, Session 1950 (472 H/C. Deb. 5s, page 744, 
March 13, 1950) : 

Communist Party, Great Britain 

45. Sir W. Smithers asked the Prime Minister if. in view of the result of the 
Fuchs trial, he will introduce legislation to outlaw* the Communist Party in 
Britain. 

The Prime Minister (Mr. Attlee). No, sir. 

Sir W. Smithers. In view of the alarm and despondenoy created in most parts 
of the world by this trial, and in view of their records, will tlie right hon. Gen- 
tleman, as a first step, ask for the resignation of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
the Secretary of State for War, and the Minister of Defence before they can do 
any more damage to this country ; and will he rememlier the Ides of March? 

Mr. Blackbx'r.n. Is my right hon. Friend not aware that Dr. Fnclis was first 
given a .security appointment by a Conservative Minister of Supply, Sir Andrew 
LXincan. at a time when the "Daily Worker" had, in fact, been suppressed. 

The Prime Minister. No, Sir, that was not the Minister. 



The following is quoted from Parliamentary Debates, House of 
Commons Official Report, Session 1950 (472 H. C. Deb. 5s, page 1228, 
March 16, 1950) : 



Aliens 



naturalisation 



10. Mr. Norman Bower asked the Secretary of State for the Home Department 
if, in future, he will publish the names of sponsors of candidates for naturali- 
sation. 

6. Mr. Martin Lindsay asked the Secretary of State for the Home Depart- 
ment if he will state the names of those who sponsored Dr. Fuchs for British 
nationalisation. 

Mr. Ede. There is no statutory requirement that an application for naturalisa- 
tion should be supported by sponsors and I do not think that any useful purpose 
would be served l)y the publication of the names of the persons who, in fact, 
support the applicant. The assumptions underlying these questions seem to be 
that great weight is attached to the standing of the sponsors and that the 
Secretary of State has to rely to a large extent on the information supplied by 
them. In fact, the most careful inquiries are made through the police and by 
other means and where necessary other G ivernment Departments are con- 
sulted before he reaches his decision. No application would be granted merely on 
the recommendation of sponsors however distinguished. 

Surgeon Lieut.-Commander Bennett. On a point of Order. May I, with all 
Ihe humility due from a new Member, ask you. Mr. Speaker, if Question No. 6 
is in Order, as I have no reason to understand that the Government ever intended 
to "nationalise" Dr. Fuchs? 

Mr. Speaker. Question No. 6 was answered with Question No. 10. 

Note.— The materials in the appendix are reprinted for purposes of furnishing additional information 
and background. No responsibility Is assumed for the accuracy or authenticity of such materials; and 
expressions of opinion or statements of conclusions, where they occur, are not to be imputed to the compilers 
of the appendix. 

197 



198 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The following is quoted from Parliamentary Debates, House of 
Commons Official Keport, Session 1950 (472 H. C. Deb. 5s, page 1545, 
March 20, 1950) : 

Dk. Fuchs 

46. Mr. Henry Strauss asked the Prime Minister whether His Majesty's 
Government received any warning regai'ding Dr. Fuchs from His Majesty's Gov- 
ernment in Canada when the Canadian Royal Commission was sitting in 1946. 

The Prime Minister. No, Sir. 

Sir W. SxiiTiiERS. May I ask the Prime Minister whether lie has read the lie- 
port of the Royal Commission on the spy trial in Canada, and whether he is 
aware that in that report the Russian Ambassador in Canada was implicated, that 
this same Ambassador is now Ambassador here in Britain and that M. Zarubin 
has now gone to Russia ; and is that the reason? 



The following is reprinted from Parliamentary Debates, House 
of Commons Official Report, Session 1950 (475 H. C. Deb. 5s pages 
1383-1384 and'1985, May 18, 1950) : 

Dr. Klaus Fuchs 

42. Mr. G. Thomas asked the Secretary of State for the Home Department 
to what extent permission has been granted to foreign representatives to ques- 
tion Dr. Fuchs ; and whether he will make a statement. 

69. Mr. Donnelly asked the Secretary of State for the Home Department what 
are his regulations governing the questioning of prisoners in British jails by 
police of other countries ; and to what countries are these facilities granted. 

72. Mr. Wyatt asked the Secretary of State for the Home Department what 
conditions will govern the interrogation of Dr. Klaus Fuchs, at present in one of 
His Majesty's jails, by officers of the United States Federal Bureau of Investiga- 
tion ; and what precedents there are for interrogation of His Majesty's prisoners 
in England by officials of a foreign Power. 

74. Mr. Feknyhough asked the Secretary of State for the Home Department 
if he will make a statement to the House in connection with the permission 
which has been granted to officials of the United States Federal Bureau of In- 
vestigation to question Dr. Klaus Fuchs, the atomic scientist at present serving 
a 14 years' sentence of imprisonment in His Majesty's prison. 

Mr. Ede. I would refer my hon. Friends to the reply given on 11th May to my 
hon. Friend the Member for Northfield (Mr. Blackburn), to which I have noth- 
ing to add. 

Mr. Thomas. Is my right hon. Friend aware that this distasteful departure 
from normal procedure is watched with some anxiety by the public, and can he 
say whether the prisoner concerned will be legally represented when foreigners 
are questioning him in our prison? 

Mr. Ede. This prisoner's activities were also exceedingly distasteful, and it 
is necessary that the State should take such steps as it can to protect itself 
against such activities. This man need not answer any questions unless he 
chooses to do so. He will not be interviewed unless he expresses a willingness 
to be interviewed. 

Mr. Fernyhough. Does not my right hon. Friend think that this is rather a 
reflection upon our own M.I. 5 and Scotland Yard, and would they not have been 
capable of interviewing this man and getting from him, if he is prepared to 
volunteer it, the information which the Americans are seeking? 

Mr. Ede. No, Sir. There is no reflection on the police services of this country 
in this matter, but some of the offences which this man has committed were 
committed in the United States of America, and I think it is desirable, in the 
interests of both countries, that as far as possible his activities should be in- 
vestigated. 

Mr. Donnelly. What are the normal regulations governing cases of this kind? 
Could my right hon. Friend also say to what countries these facilities are normally 
extended? 

Mr. Ede. Tliis is the first time that such facilities have been granted because 
this is the first time that such an offence has been committed. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 199 

Mr. Sydney Silverman. Can my right hon. Friend say why it was not thought 
suflBcient for the information which the United States police want to get from 
this man to be put to him by our own police forces? Can he also say whether 
any arrangements have been made to provide himself with a copy of any state- 
ment which may now be made? 

Mr. Ede. a British officer will be present if this interview takes place, and 
it will be conducted according to British practice. It is important— I should 
have thought that my hon. Friend the Member for Nelson and Colne (Mr. S. 
Silverman) would have recognised it — that some questions should be followed 
up by supplementary questions and it is, therefore, desirable that a person who 
can supply the information for an appropriate supplementary question should 
be there to put the question. 

Mr. Hector Hsughes. Will my right hon. Friend take care that at any such 
Interrogation there will be present responsible British scientists, so that full ad- 
vantage may be taken of any further information elicited? 

Mr. Ede. No, Sir, I do not think that that would be desirable. I think that if 
an officer representing the British police or the British security service is present 
that will be enough. 



The following is quoted from Parliamentary debates, House of 
Commons oiRcially reported, Session 1950 (475 H. C. Deb 5s, pp. 567, 
568, May 11, 1950). 

De. Klaus Fuchs 

45 and 46. Miss Irene Ward asked the Prime Minister (1) whether he can 
give an assurance that steps have been taken to ensure that the spy operations of 
the four names, other than Dr. Fuchs, sent by the Canadian authorities, have 
ceased ; 

(2) why action was not taken to remove Dr. Fuchs from his position in atomic 
research following the notification of his name as a spy by the Canadian au- 
thorities. 

48. Mb. Hollis asked the Prime Minister what representations were received 
from the Canadian Government after the Canadian spy trials concerning the 
unreliability of Dr. Fuchs ; and what action was taken on those representations. 

The Prime Ministe:r (Mr. Attlee). I have nothing to add to the statement 
made in another place on 5th April by my noble Friend the Lord Chancellor, of 
which I am sending the hon. Members copies. 

Miss Ward. Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that the Canadian Minister 
of Exteranl Affairs has recently repeated the information whieli, he asserts, 
he gave to His Majesty's Government, and could the Prime Minister state the 
date on which he received this information and what action was taken on its 
receipt? 

The Prime Minister. If the hon. Lady will study the reply which was given 
by my noble Friend in another place, she will see that she is under some mis- 
apprehension as to the exact facts. 

Earl Wintekton. Can we have an assurance from, the Prime Minister that, 
assuming that some of us raised the question of this very mysterious action in 
Debate in tliis House, we should not be told that the Prime Minister or Lord 
President were not prepared to answer because a full statement had been made 
in another iilace? This is a rather important constitutional point. 

Me. Emrys Hughes. In view of all this horror and indignation about spying, 
could the Prime Minister assure us that the £3 million which is spent on our 
Secret Service is not spent on bribing people of other countries to spy? 

Mr. Nigel Da'vies. In the interests of national security will the Prime Minister 
assure the House that in future no one will be employed on atomic research who 
is known at any time to have been a Communist or fellow traveller? 

The Prime Minister. I am quite sure if the hon. Member studies the full 
account which was given by my noble Friend in another place he will see that 
this was a wholly exceptional position, in which no one had any reason to sus- 
pect tliat this person was a Communist except from a vague allegation by Nazis 
of a great many years before. 

Sir Waldron Smithers. May I ask the Prime Minister if, in dealing with ■ 
these difiicult questions, he will seek the advice and guidance of the Secretary 
of State for War, with his tremendous and unusual qualifications? 

81095—51 14 



200 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The following article from the New York Times magazine of 
March 4, 1951, is reprinted by permission of the New York Times 
Co. and the author, Rebecca West : 

The Terrifying Import of the Fuchs Case 

one year after his sentencing we see he united explosive knowledge and an 

immature mind 

(By Rebecca West) 

London. — It is a lie that tliere is no new thing nnder the sun. The past had no 
product to match Dr. Klaus Emit Fuchs, who was sentenced to 14 years' imprison- 
ment at the Old Bailey on March 1, 1950, for having handed information about 
the A-bomb to an agent of the U. S. S. R. He represents a danger, to humanity 
such as it has never had to face before, and "humanity" is the right w^ord. For, 
though he was punished for having given by theft to the U. S. S. R. the power 
to intlict damage on the populations and territory of the West, he is a threat to 
the U. S. S. R. as much as to any other part of the world. Nobody is in a position, 
anywhere on this globe, not to feel frightened by the menace disclosed by the 
existence of Dr. Fuchs. This is not just because he is a Communist spy ; it is 
because he was a particular kind of man. An odd kind of man. 

Some measure of his oddity is given by the opening of the statement he made 
to the security officers on his detention. He began by giving them the date of 
his birth and assuring them that he had had "a very happy childhood." Now, 
British policemen seem much milder than American policemen and are certainly 
more stolid. But it is unlikely that they looked at Dr. Fuchs in a maimer sug- 
gesting that it would take a weight off their mind if they could learn that he had 
not been unhapiiy when he was a small boy. It is unlikely, too, that most people, 
charged with a crime involving long-standing and heartless fraud and certain to 
cause hideous consequences, would fail to recognize that society might have 
other anxieties which it would like to settle first. This is a strange bird. 

It is a pity that the authorities have not given the public a fuller warning 
of what Dr. Fuchs did, and of what he is. W. L. Laurence has said in The Hell 
Bomb that Fuchs' admission of what he told the Russians about the A-bomb and 
the H-bomb has not been published for security reasons. The argument is that 
it is not certain whether Fuchs told the Russians all that he says he did, and 
that it is possible that he may actually have put into his admission certain facts 
which he had not told the Russians, so that if it were published they would then 
learn some fresh information. But Mr. Laurence very sensibly pronounces this 
great nonsense, on the ground that Fuchs obviously told the Russians all he 
knew and is unlikely to have had some barrel scrapings by him for use in his 
admission. 

In any case, it is not necessary to know the details of the information given 
by Dr. Fuchs to the U. S. S. R. to realize his deadly significance. But there are 
three things which the authorities ought to make plain. First : the general 
nature of the information he gave to the Russians, whether it related to the 
H-bomb as well as the A-bomb, how many scientists had worked to get that in- 
formation, the size and cost of the equipment they had used in the process, 
and how" many years of work and how much expense he saved the Russians by 
giving them this stolen information. Second : his remarkable eminence as a 
scientist. And third: the poverty of his general intelligence and the immaturity 
of his character. It is this third fact, the nature of the man, which makes him 
more terril^le than fiood or lightning or any of the familiar cataclysms. 

To understand Dr. Fuchs we must note that this is no case of the godless 
scientist cradled in materialism. Klaus Emil Fuchs came from a pious home 
His father, Emil Fuchs, was a preacher well known in Germany since the be- 
ginning of the century ; first as a Lutheran pastor and then as a Quaker. 
He was a true mystic, illumined by the love of God, and his courage in earthly 
affairs was superb. He was the first pastor to join the Social Democratic 
Party, and between the wars he was well known as a speaker for a group 
known as tlie Religious Socialist. He defied the Hohenzollern rule and de- 
fied Hitler. He was also a loving husband who made a delightful home for 
his sons and daughters. But in the opinion of some of those who liked him 
best he was not very intelligent, and his writings show that he was intensely 
egotistical and self-satisfied. His virtues are so great that it would be foolisii 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 201 

to mention his failings, were it not that tliey have a bearing on his son's 
career. 

Klaus Emil, born in 1911, was his youngest son. He studied at Leipzig 
University, and then, when his father was made professor of religious science 
at a teachers' training college in Kiel, moved to the university there. At lioth 
places he was deeply involved in the useless and silly and violent political 
activities by which German undei'graduates did so much to destroy the coher- 
ence of their own country and the peace of the world. College is a grand 
place for political discussions and a terrible place for political action. When 
college students go in for deeds, not words, cold-blooded adults get hold of 
them and without mercy use them as catspaws. 

In Germany at that time the Communists were indulging in a campaign 
against the Social Democratic Party, although they should for obvious reasons 
have joined with the Social Democrats and the various schools of Liberals in 
an unbroken Popular Front against the Nazis. Their secret reason for this 
was a tragic and ridiculous miscalculation : they wanted Hitler to come to 
power, in the mistaken belief that the Nazi regime would collapse immediately 
and leave Germany ripe for capture by communism. But they put up a noisy 
and hypocritical pretense that they were attacking the Social Democratic Party 
not because it was doing too much against the Nazis to suit them but too little. 

Klaus Emil was completely taken in by this fraud, and very active under its 
influence. The political follies committed in the dying Weimar Republic are 
as unpalatable as yesterday's melted ice cream, but Klaus Emil's career must 
be followed because it led him and us to our present situation. He ran about 
with the high-speed inconsistency characteristic of German political life. He 
joined the students' section of the Social Democratic Party, but left it because 
the party supported a policy of naval rearmament, and he had been brought 
up to be a pacifist. But very soon afterward he joined a society with a mixed 
membership of Social Democrats and Liberals, which was in fact a semimilitary 
organization with a taste for street fighting. 

Then he moved to Kiel and went bade to the Social Democratic I'arty, but pres- 
ently left it again and offered himself as a speaker to the Communist Party with- 
out joining the party, and at the. same time becam'e a member of an organiza- 
tion, much frowned upon by the Social Democrats, in which i-ebel members of 
their party joined with ('ommunists in tlie dangerous game of fraternizing with 
those students belonging to the Nazi Party wliom they thought "sincere" and 
possible converts. 

This was a nasty organization in which everybody was trying to double-cross 
everybody else. Then, when the Communists had so greatly weakened the Social 
Deni'ocratic I'arty that it cou'd do nothing to fight the Nazis, Klaus Emil left it 
in disgust at the impotence and joined the Conununist Party. The record reads 
like a recipe for mincemeat, but produced nothing wholesome. 

When Hitler came into power in V.VAS Klaus Emil was engaged in a compli- 
cated and futile campus intrigue, in which he showed a great deal of courage, 
particularly considering that he was of feeble physique, but little sense and 
even less fastidiousness. When he was in tlie train on his way to Berlin to 
attend a secret conference of anti-Nazi students he read of the l)uriung of the 
Reichstag, saw that the hunt of the Communists had begun, took the hammer 
and sickle badge out of his coat, and went into hiding. 

He was presently drawn into the operations of a mechanism which was one 
of the most brilliant achievements the Communist Party has to its name. After 
they had helped the Nazis get into power, they worked to get control of the 
organizations set up to care for the refugees from IS'azi tyranny in all the coun- 
tries to which they fled. They then saw to it that the Communist refugees re- 
ceived preferential treatment, that the non-Communist refugees were exposed 
to Communist propaganda and learned to look on Communists as their bene- 
factors, and that the Conununists and non-Communist refugees alike served the 
ends of the Communist Party. 

All this they did with a pickpocket ingenuity, covering up their activities from 
the observation of the non-Commamist members of these organizations, who were 
merely furnishing the bulk of the money and the personal service. Klaus Emil 
was told by his party that he must g<t abroad and finish his studies, because 
when the Nazis had been thrown out the Comnmnists would need members with 
high technical (pialihcations to build up Soviet Germany : and 1 e was first sent to 
France and then to England, where he was befriended by the Society for the 
Protection of Science and Learning, a body consisting almost entirely of non- 
Comm-unists. 



202 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

It must be emphasized that at no time did Klaus Emil have grounds for com- 
plaint against Great Britain. He never found it niggardly, or on the side of 
reaction. He was sent to Bristol University, where he got his doctorate of philos- 
ophy in mathematics and physics, and then to Edinburgh University, where he 
got his doctorate of science, and was given a Carnegie research fellowship. When 
war broke out between Great Britain and Germany the aliens tribunal, before 
which he appeared to show cause why he should not be interned, accepted his 
membership in the C<»mmunist Party as proof that he was anti-Nazi. 

It is true that in 1940, when the Germans invaded the Low Countries and 
France, he was interned and taken to Canada. But this was the treatment 
which was applied both to refugees who were thought specially suspicious and 
those who were thought specially meritorious, and in his case it was certainly 
a proof that the authorities believed him worthy of being saved from a possible 
German invasion of Britain. 

In 1942 he was allowed to return to Great Britain, where a position was wait- 
ing for him at Glasgow University. Soon afterward he was asked by Professor 
Peierls, a very eminent German-born refugee physicist, to come to Birmingham 
University to help him in some war work. This proved to be atomic research. 
In June of that year he signed the usual security undertaking, and applied for 
naturalization as a British subject a month later, taking the oath of allegiance 
to the King in due course, while at the same time he made arrangements to 
band over all particulars of the research to couriers who he knew would deliver 
them to the Soviet authorities. 

For the next S years he carried on this work in atomic research, first in Eng- 
land, then for 3 years with Professor Peierls in America, then again in England 
for 4 years as head of the theoretical division of the atomic energy project 
at Harwell. During the whole of this time he never flagged in his treachery. 
As steadily as the results were produced, so he handed them over to his Com- 
munist couriers. 

His arrest on February 2, 1950, gave the thoughtful two reasons for terror. 
The first was the inadequacy it disclosed in the security measures taken by 
both Great Britain and America. The British should not have allowed Klaus 
Emil to take employment in a government atomic research project only 4 years 
after he had avowed to the aliens tribunal that he was a Communist and there- 
fore repudiated all obligations of loyalty save those imposed by the Communist 
Party. 

This act of carelessness should have been corrected when Gouzenko fled from 
the Soviet Embassy in Ottawa ; for the name of Fuchs was scribbled in a note- 
book which was one of the exhibits in the Canadian spy-ring case. Moreover, 
in 1945, Elizabeth Bentley went to the FBI and told the story of her activities 
as a Communist agent, and this included an account of a courier system in 
which she was a link ; and this system was intertwined with that by which 
Fuchs had passed to the Soviet authorities the results of the Los Alamos 
researches. It is a pity that no word about Fuchs crossed the Atlantic till 1949. 

The second reason for terror was the statement Fuchs made. Here was one 
of the most gifted scientists of our time, with power to be part creator of lethal 
weapons transcending all the previous malice of mankind, and to be as danger- 
ous in his work as a single-handed traitor, because of his rare and exalted gifts. 
And his statement read like the ramblings of an exceptionally silly boy of IG. 

He was 38 years old. He was suspected of an appalling crime. He began 
by assuring the special branch officers of the happiness of his childhood, and 
went on to relate how brave he had been when he was a boy. It appeared 
that there was once a celebration at his school on the anniversary of the founda- 
tion of the Weimar republic ; and as a protest many of the pupils arrived 
wearing the imperial badge, so he had put on the republican badge, and the 
other children had torn it off. 

He recalled that ; and he recalled, in the minutest detail, all his foolish and 
futile political activities at his universities. And in the course of this merci- 
less recapitulation, which must have made the security officers groan aloud, 
he betrayed an unusual degree of political ignorance. 

Every student of contemporary history knows that Communist strategy in 
Germany during the early thirties aimed at splitting the Popular Front and 
letting Hitler in so that he could be got out again by a revolution which the 
Comnmnists would turn to their profit. Indeed, it is so well known that it would 
be virtually impo.ssible for a non-Communist to write of those times without 
taking it as established historical fact, or for a Communist to write of them 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 203 

without attempting to disprove that assumption. But it is plain that Klaus Emil 
had never even heard of this interpretation of the events in which he took part. 
He wrote of them as naively as if he were still 20 and they had never been 
discussed. 

Some of these tedious fatuities of his youth he recounted to the security officers 
for the sake of their moral, rather than their political, implications; and that, 
too, was a curious self-betrayal. Throughout the statement Klaus Emil expressed 
himself with extreme egotism and vanity. Even if we take into account the 
strong strain of self-satisfaction running through his father's writings, and 
remember also that he had spent all his childhood in minor industrial towns 
where his father was the unchallenged intellectual and moral leader, his. sense 
of being an elect being must be pronounced extraordinary, particularly in a man 
of 38. 

But it worried him, when what he had been doing was brought out into the 
open and he had to discuss it, that such a perfect character as his own should 
have been capable of practicing the continued deception, which, as he admits 
with an air of being fair-minded, had been a part of his treachery. He ex- 
plained to the security officers at enormous length that this was all due to a 
mildly dirty trick he had played on some Nazi students during liis campus intrigue 
in 1933. He had not given them fair warning that he was going to publish an 
attack on them for a course of action which, had they received such a warning, 
they might have abandoned. He had omitted to resolve this point in his mind, 
he said, and so he had set up a mental process which he described as "controlled 
schizophrenia."' It was, in fact, plain lying and cheating, but these were too 
realistic terms to be used in the "Cloud-Cuckoo-Land" whei'e he had made 
his home. 

There was no limit to his sense that power should be his. At one point in his 
statement he rebuked the British authorities for not letting the internees in the 
Canadian camp read newspapers. He ignored the practical reason for this, which 
was the difficulty of keeping discipline and protecting the non-Nazi internees from 
the Nazi internees, had the news continued to be bad over any length of time. 
Gravely he complained that it had prevented him from learning the truth about 
the real character of the British ; and it is implied that had he known more about 
them he might have spared them, might not have aided their enemies to drop 
A-bombs on them. Not for a moment did it cross his mind that perhaps it was not 
for him to smite them or to spare them. 

As he demanded power, he showed why he, of all people should not have had it. 
This is not a superman claiming to govern the inferior masses, it is a subman who 
can only claim superiority to the masses in regard to specinl gifts quite irrelevant 
to government. His general ideas were childish ; there is a passage on Marxist 
philosophy which would be considered poor at the least distinguished Youth 
Congress. He does not appreciate tlie material consequences of his treachery ; 
he expressed concern that what he had done might "endanger" his friends, but 
he apparently meant simply that he might endanger their prospects of retaining 
their employment at Harwell, not that they miglit presently be blown up by 
A-bombs dropped by the U. S. S. R. But the fact about Klaus Emil which makes 
his appetite for government most appalling is one which might have been imagined 
to be a reassurance. He is not what he is supposed to be. He is feared as a 
fanatical Communist. But he is not even a loyal Communist ; and therein lies his 
novel and terrible significance. 

The statement shows that he is too infatuated an egoist ever to have given 
himself to any party. If he betrayed Great Britain and the United States to the 
U. S. S. R„ it was only because they were the handiest objects for betrayal. He 
felt himself qualified to manage any society's business better than it could itself, 
and as he found himself in the center of the western society composed of Great 
Britain and the United States, he had to mind their business. Because he decided 
that the best way to exercise his supermanagerial powers was to attempt to 
destroy Great Britain and the United States, it is not to be supposed that he 
considered the U. S. S. R. worthy of survival. It would have to take its turn. 
He wrote in his statement : 

"I came to a point wliere I knew that I disapproved of many actions of the 
Russian Government and of the Communist Party, and I still believed that they 
could build a new world and that one day I would take part in it, and that on 
that day I would also have to stand up and say to them that there are things 
which they are doing wrongly." 

The word "also" is difficult to account for syntactically, but it would have to be 
a very obtuse reader who did not see what Klaus Emil meant. 



204 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

What he was saying was that he had spent the summer of his days planning, 
in the cause of virtue, an unparalleled stimulus to the death rate of the Western 
world, and he intended to si^end, still in the cause of virtue, the autumn of his 
days in rendering a like service to the Slavs. This holds out to us a far worse 
prospect than we saw before us when we regarded Klaus Emil as a fanatical 
Communist. In that case he would have aided the U. S. S. R. to impose a certain 
pattern on the world ; a botched and loutish pattern, but still a pattern. But 
Klaus Emil's statement shows that what he meant to do was to invoke chaos ; 
and at last we see just how serious a problem is propounded to us by the existence 
of the traitor scientist. 

Till now we have looked at this new figure too exclusively in relation to ideo- 
logical and international conflicts. We have considered the British and American 
traitor scientists simply as persons attracted to communism, and their opposite 
numbers in the U. S. S. R. and the satellite countries as persons atti'acted to 
democracy. This was a view which was naturally engendered by- study of the 
cases of Dr. Alan Nunn May and the scientific workers involved in the Canadian 
spy ring. But the case of Dr. Fuchs reminds us that special gifts are sometimes 
found in persons of a low standard of general intelligence and character, and 
we see tliat a number of flibberty-gibbets might be engaged in atomic research 
who, like Dr. Fuchs, would indulge in treachery for the most trivial of reasons. 

One can well imagine that an unbalanced egoist like Klaus Emil might decide 
to hand over the means of conquering the world to President Peron ; and though 
Klaus Emil is certainly not insane, his statement may well make the prudent 
wonder where nature's recklessness ends, and whether we might not have a 
lunatic occupying a high position in some project. Many of us can remember a 
very famous pianist who carried on a long and arduous career while certifiably 
insane ; and it does not seem impossible that a gifted scientist might decide to use 
the result of his researches to set fire to the world in order to please the R"d 
Indian who is his spiritualist aunt's control, or the holy men in Mars whom his 
ouijaboard has indicated to him as waiting for the signal of the terrestrial flames 
to come down and bring us salvation. 

It cannot now be argued that an individual scientist would be innocuous 
because he would have to work single-handed ; he could cause vast destruction 
by sabotaging his own work in order to leave his employers defenseless before 
an enemy, or he could gather collaborators by the pretense of a saner mission. 
Considered internationally, we are all in peril in this situation, whether we are 
western democrats or Russian Communists. Considered nationally, we are all 
in peril in this situaticin, whatever our political views, however far we may be 
to the right or to the left ; and it is to be noted that such is the injustice of the 
world that few people are in a more perilous position than the same scientists 
who work alongside their disordered colleagues. 

Our civilization has, therefore, a new task before it. It has to reconcile the 
need of the community for protection from the maniacal use of science with the 
need of scientists for the fullest measure of freedom in their work. But it will 
be impossible to perform this task unless the nature of the problem is fully under- 
stood ; and the case of Dr. Klaus Emil Fuchs should be studied in all its strange- 
ness in order that we may realize how strange a passage of time we are now 
traversing. 



The following article from The Sign magazine, August 1950, is 
reprinted by permission : 

The Secret Lives of an Atom Spy 

fob an ideal which turned to ashes, dr. klaus fuchs sacrificed honor, 

friends, and a trusting world 

(By Kurt Singer) 

On the historic morning of November 7, 1949, a neatly dressed, tall man of 
most nnhistoric appearance walked down London's Charing Cross Road to 
Cambridge Circus. No one notices as two men pass and pause, a cigarette is lit, 
a word exchanged, and they walk off together toward Trafalgar Square. No one 
notices as the taller man, lean, bespectacled, hands in pockets, shakes his head 
slowly and finally turns away. Perhaps only a single stranger is momentarily 
interested in the gesture of the shorter, dark man, wlio raises his hand to the 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 205 

arm of his companion. But tlie taller man does not hesitate. He hurries 
clown the stairs of the subway. The shorter man looks after him for a brief 
moment, anjirily, and then rounds the corner past the Nelson Monument. 

This is the way, in our time, the secrets of our deadly alchemy are bartered 
for a price. But'for Dr. Klaus Fuchs, sitting in the train looking impassively at 
the underground advertising, telling of beer, coats, and underwear, the fee, 
like the secrets, was not measured in a calculalile monetary exchange. 

Fuchs was not interested in the few hundred pounds thrust upon him by 
tlie professional foreign agent. This he accepted as the badge of his submission 
to Laurenti Beria, head of the Soviet Secret Service. The price Fuchs demanded 
was a world, one world, one Communist world — a world in which the boy of a 
war-torn childhood, the youth of Nazi terror and German discontent, the man- 
hood of frustration and suspicion might all be finally synthesized in the maternal 
bosom of a great and secure world — Communist harmony. When Klaus Fuchs 
was 3 years old, the German Army unleashed upon Paris the forerunner of the 
atom bomb, a most terrible weapon, the big Bertha, firing giant shells a distance 
of 75 miles into the beautiful heart of the French capital. 

His pacifist father hated war. Emil Fuchs was a Protestant minister, a re- 
ligious Socialist, standing in the shadow of Tolstoi and Gandhi. 

The boy Klaus in the provincial town of Ilusselsheim, near Frankfurt, was 
strictly forbidden to .join the cheering of the .soldiers off for the front. Little 
Klaus liegan life as the outsider, the observer, the nay-sayer. He had no close 
boyhood friends and except for his three elder brothers and sisters he lived 
in viitual isolation, shielded from the contagion of hysterical patriotism and 
living in an aseptic world of his father's making. 

His father's house had emphasized values of brotherhood, duty, international- 
ism, peace, religion, but there was little flexibility or humor in the teaching. 
Life was gray, grim, earnest, boring, and there was no time for carefree joy or 
laughter. 

Tlie first war was followed by the annihilating inflation, and the roots of 
nazism flourished in the economic swamp which Germany had become. Even 
in the primary school, politics was an urgent reality, and the pacifist's son Klaus 
was the butt of soldiers' sons, who made fun of the timid, studious boy. The 
troubles of Germany turned his father inward to reflection and religious experi- 
ence. He became a Quaker in 1925. Klaus found no comfort there. Instead, 
it was clear to him that the boys who fought back and did not fear the violent 
little nationalists were the Reds, the Communists. 

Later, at Kiel University, when the Nazis were already a major political force, 
Klaus joined the Young Communist League. Against his father's Quakerism 
he embraced the doctrine of the class struggle. But he was never a great reader 
of Marxist literature. His field was science and, like so many brilliant mathe- 
maticians and physicists, the experimental and analytical techniques he used so 
scrupulously in the lecture halls and laboratories, he abandoned completely when 
confronted with political argument. He accepted all the worn cliches of Com- 
munist propaganda. Russia was the worker's fatherland ; all weapons were 
permissible in the class struggle ; the Connnunists were fighting for a classless 
society ; there was no such thing as absolute truth or objective science ; art and 
science were class weapons ; the artist and scientist who believed in communism 
were in uniform and must take part in the world struggle. 

Klaus saw the Nazis seize power, he knew at close hand the terror they wielded. 
His father was sent to a concentration camp for 9 months and his sister, an 
artist driven to a nervous breakdown by Nazi persecution, committed suicide 
by leaping under a train. 

His father urged Klaus to escape from Germany so that he might continue his 
studies abroad, but Klaus remained working in the Communist underground 
movement. It was not activity that appealed to him. The disorganized life, 
being hunted from pillar to post, the need to abandon organized studies, did not 
suit the young student-scientist. 

After a short while he crossed the frontier into France and from there he came 
to Britain. He went to Bristol University, where he specialized in mathematics 
and physics and was awarded a doctorate in philosophy. His lodgings in H-imp- 
ton Roads, Redland, Bristol, were the typical student's retreat, untidy, strewn 
with papers and books. It was a simple life and a happy one, on the whole Too 
happy, perhaps, for Klaus to justify his conscience, for his father was in Germany 
where he had chosen to stay, although American Quakers had offered him a 
chance to get out. Emil Fuchs had replied to them that his place was In Ger- 
many, in the fight against Hitler. Where, then, was the place of his son, Klaus? 



206 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Somehow, the student had to justify to his father that his departure from 
Germany was not a flight from fear, but a tactical withdrawal to a place from 
which he could renew his role in the struggle. For the first time, he was living 
in conditions of freedom and reasonable stability. Politics In Britain did not 
have tlie violence or the upsets that he had known in Germany. His fellow 
students were not consumed by bitterness nor deeply involved in doctrinal debate. 
Klaus, quiet and sensitive, emotional to an extent which his poker-faced appear- 
ance belied, was attractive to certain types of girls. 

Lonely and abstracted, he aroused the maternal impulse, and during his years 
in Britain he was never without female friends who admired and fussed about 
him. At the same time, his studious, ingrown personality did not make him an 
exciting friend; his conversation did not often go beyond scientific small talk 
and university gos.sip. To his friends, Klaus was frankly a bore, but a. nice bore. 

Then his field of research widened. In 1938 he went to Edinburg University, 
where he took his degree as doctor of science. His original researches in atomic 
and nuclear physics were placing him in the forefront of the younger scientists, 
and he published papers in the Proceedings of the Royal Society. The refugee- 
immigrant was making a name for himself in scientific circles. 

On September 1, 1939, Hitler invaded Poland and the war was on. Klaus 
Fuchs suddenly found that he was. finally, regarded as a German enemy alien. 
A few months later, despite his feelings against Hitler, his antipathy to national- 
ism, his years in British universities, he was told to pack a bag and get ready for 
internment. To him, British tolerance was a sham, as his Communist friends 
had told him. In the show-down, the British ruling classes were ruthless, heart- 
less, barefisted — Fascist. The effect of internment on Klaus, the trip as an 
internee in the North Atlantic through waters infested by submarines, was to 
revive the Communist allegiance which had become quiescent. It also added 
the excitement of martyrdom to his essentially adolescent nature. 

In his Nissen hut, in the Canadian camp, it was not difficult for Klaus to 
imagine that "fate" had pointed out to him the error of his backsliding ways. 
It is certain that he emerged from internment with his Communist faith renewed. 
Separated from his friends in Britain, surrounded by many of his coimtrymen 
who were grieved that though anti-Nazi they were treated as enemies. Klaus 
looked again toward the distant, greener fields of the Soviet paradise. 

When he was able to resume his work, his old convictions were firmly fixed. In 
1941, he was released froiu internment to continue his work, research wliich was 
to help in the development of the atom bomb. Although it was known that he 
was communistically inclined, so high was his qualification that he was allowed 
into the most secret consultations. Security officers, after careful screening, had 
reported that there was no danger he would become a foreign agent. 

Meanwhile, British Militai'y Intelligence was receiving reports of an extensive 
German plan to build a new weapon, an atom bomb, which would be decisive in 
the war. 

In occupied Norway, secret undergroimd agents reported the construction of 
strange, heavy-water plants, where hundreds of German scientists had been put 
on special duty. British-Norwegian commando teams went into action to cause 
as much physical destruction as possible for the new German production centers. 

At the same time, a meeting was called in London to lay the plans for an 
answer to German atomic research. To this, the deepest secret of the war, 
Klaus Fuchs, the Communist, v^^as given access. The Communist, now ready to 
conduct espionage for Russia, was given material to work with. At his trial, 
Mr. Curtis-Bennett, his defense attorney, said : "Anybody who had read any- 
thing about Marxist theory must know that a man who is a Communist, whether 
in Germany or Timbuctoo, will react in exactly the same way. When he gets 
information, he will automatically and unhappily put his allegiance to the Com- 
munist idea first." 

Amazingly enough, although it was on record at the Home Office that he 
was a member of the German Communist Party, a year after being released from 
internment, Klaus Fuchs was naturalized as a Briton. The superb resistance of 
the Red Army to the German invaders, the atmosphere of allied amity, all made 
it easy for Fuchs to submerge the vestiges which remained of his British 
"conversion" while accepting its citizenship. 

His work with Prof. Rudolph Peierls, one of the outstanding atomic research 
scientists, during 1941, showed that he was clearly a genius in his field, "more a 
candidate for a Nobel peace prize or membership of the Royal Society," as Mr. 
Curtis-Bennett said at his trial, than a likely traitor. Fuchs lived happily with 
Professor Peierls and his family in a large, detached house in Birmingham. 
The young scientist was a favorite with the children. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 207 

Dr. Klaus Fnchs was now close to the pinnacle of the atomic pyramid : the 
abstruse and most vital theoretical side of the bomb. The information which he 
acquired in this position, as well as his own brilliant discoveries, meant years 
of toil to a nation still yoiing in atomic problems like Russia : what Fuchs had 
to offer meant the savintr of possibly a decade of research. 

As a nicmber of the Britisli atomic team, Fuchs was assigned to go to Amer- 
ica to deal with their "opposite numbers." Despite the later recriminations 
of the FBI, the fact is that, not content with the British repo-rts on Fuchs' relia- 
bility, the FBI did its own scr.^enng and passed him as suitable. 

Fuchs was regarded as a dependable collaborator, a little "idealistic" perhaps, 
but notbing to worry about. The extensive Soviet espionage network in the 
United States was thus given a present of the man who was to be its most 
imi)ortant link with the atomic mystery. 

In England he had already been approached by Soviet agents in London and 
Birmingham. Now, assigned to Los Alamos, the atomic experimental center 
in New Mexico, his value was considerably enhanced. For nearly 18 months, 
Fuchs worked with the United States physicists and all the time a Soviet inter- 
mediary was never far away. 

American atomic security was as liighly organized as a stratoliner (FBI, Army, 
Navy Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commis.sion, Civil Service Department, con- 
gressional investigations). Yet Fuchs, methodically and regularly, kept liaison 
with Soviet agents in two cities, Boston and New York, according to his con- 
fession, and probably more, according to the statement of Sir Hartley Shawcross, 
the attorney general. 

In 1946, Dr. Klaus Fuchs returned to Britain, carrying the prestige of his 
considerable achievement in the atomic project. He was given the high post of 
head of the theoretical physics division of the Atomic Energy Establishment at 
Harwell. He was a scientist's scientist, devoted to the welfare of his colleagues, 
a steady contribi;tor to the Proceedings of the Physical Society and of the 
Royal Society. He apportioned jobs, passed on the qualifications of applicants, 
selected people for promotion. As chairman of the Staff Association Conuuittee 
at Harwell, he presided over matters affecting personnel with a fine impar- 
tiality, liked by his employers and associates. 

At the peak of his career, Dr. Fuchs examined his course and decided that there 
was the possibility of a doubt creeping into his faith in communism : the sin 
of pride before the party in the Communist book of rules and regulations. 

As a pledge of his subservience, Fuchs accepted a few hundred pounds pay- 
ment from the Soviet agent. There had never been a road back for Fuchs ; this 
was his way of demonstrating that he did not want one. 

The fact is, however, that at this same time the first real doubts were creeping 
into his mind. He confessed later : "In the postwar period I began to have 
doubts about the Rus.sian policy. During this time I was not sure I could go 
on giving information I had." 

He participated in Harwell's social life, a little stuffily, unbending, awkwardly, 
but then genius has its mannerisms. It is nonsense to assume that his un- 
marked, repressed personality was a pose to assist his espionage. It was, how- 
ever, a very useful weapon in the Soviet network. Fuchs, lonely, engrossed, 
inhibited, was actlially alive only to a very small circle of intimates, who accepted 
the "flatness" as the hallmark of so many great scientists. 

He said that he had divided hi.s life into two compartments in his mind — the 
Conmiunist and the British scientist. Some time in 1949, the wall separating 
these compartments broke under the pressure of his postwar doubts about com- 
munism, and his growing conviction that the life he was living among ordinary, 
decent, friendly Britons was, after all, more real and better than the Soviet 
paradise. The Communist ideal had receded into illusion, to be replaced by 
the reality of Russian imperialism haunting P^urope. This change did not come 
easily with Fuchs. His friends knew that he was on the verge of a nervous 
breakdown. 

The rest was inevitable. His defense gone, his Communist creed abandoned 
(and it is not likely that the meaning of his absences from his rendezvous was 
not understood by the Soviet comrades). Fuchs capitulated at the first interroga- 
tion of the intelligence authorities, somehow believing childislily that if he 
told what he knew he would "be allowed to remain at Harwell." 

He was condemned out of his own mouth. "Is it right," Mr. Curtis-Bennett 
for the defense asked William James Skardon, the security investigator, "that 
before you took a statement from him there was no evidence upon which he 
could be prosecuted?" 

"That is right," was the answer. 



208 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

There was no road back for Fuchs, no way to redeem the betrayal of friends, 
no way to make his peace with the world he had bartered in exchange for 
the ideal which had turned to ashes. 

.Still confused, still not grasping the full meaning of the verdict, the balding, 
unliappy man made his last little accented speech in Old Bailey. "I bave 
iiad a fair trial and I wish to thank you, my Lord, my counsel, and the Governor 
for their considerate treatment." 

He received bis 14 years, but somehow there was a different echo, a strange 
and curious echo ; reminding of Budapest, Sofia, and Moscow, it hung in the 
air of the English courtroom. Then Fuchs was taken away, the man of many 
strange lives. 



The following article from the New York Times magazine of March 
12, lf)50, is reprinted by permission of the New York Times Co, and 
the author, Stephen Spender. 

The Inner Meanings of the Fuchs Case 

(By Stephen Spender) 

London (by wireless). — To watch Dr. Klaus Emil Julius Fuchs at the Number 
One Court of the Old Bailey, seated in the prisoners' dock opposite Lord God- 
dard, the Lord Chief Justice (flanked by the city of London sword bearer and 
mace bearer in their traditional medieval costumes), was to witness the twisted 
forces of a world of immense destructive power, embodied in one man, confront- 
ing the ceremony, dignity, and decency of an older world calling him to justice. 

One of the most powerful men in the world — the little man was described by 
his colleagues as "gentlemanly, inoffensive and a typical scholar" — who had per- 
haps altered the course of history, was sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment as 
a common criminal. The trial was a triumph of surviving institutions, human 
personality, and the law. 

Nevertheless, it was haunted by formidable specters which dwarfed evpn the 
pageantry provided by t'le city of London; specters not only of conmiinism, 
but also of the new forces of modern warfare, which could blow sky-high the 
whole world of values by which Fuch was tried (and perhaps the Communist 
values as well). 

When Fuchs first appeared before a magistrate's court reporters described 
him as insignificant. At the Old Bailey he did not strike me in this way. He 
had, it is true, an abstracted, earnest, passive appearance — not at all flam- 
boyant — the face of a student of affairs, with a very faint look of moral self- 
satisfaction concealed under the pale, attentive look of humility of the theolog- 
ical student. He listened to his own trial with a bowed^attentiveness, some- 
times shutting his eyes for minutes on end, at other times looking up with an 
expression almost of gratitude and always as if he understood completely the 
necessary and inevitable reactions of the court to himself. 

The psychology of Fuchs may have been extremely abnormal. Nevertheless 
it was the product of a combination of circumstances which are disquietingly 
characteristic of Europe in the last 20 years : a complex of psychological, politi- 
cal, and tragic factors all acting on one man. 

Fuchs is the son of Prof. Emil Fuchs, formerly a Lutheran pastor at Eisenach 
and later a professor at the University of Kiel. Emil Fuchs has been for a 
long time in close contact with English Quakers and it is through one of them 
that I have obtained some account of him. He is described as a man of great 
moral courage, a Tolstoyan Christian who, though disapproving of communism 
politically, regards Christianity as a Communist way of life. Thus young Klaus 
Fuchs grew up in an extremely ascetic, idealistic, and serious home environment. 
It is diflicult not to conclude that Fuchs' relationship with his father plays an 
important role in his psychology. His father is a theologian, and Fuchs un- 
doubtedly made a religion out of communism, by belonging to which he was 
acquitted of personal problems and automatically put on the side of the his- 
toric force which lie supposed to be good, however much evil it invovled him in. 

My informant, who knew Fuchs' father very well and had met young Fuchs 
and corresponded with him, described the son as "politically innocent." In 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 209 

addition, there was a strong strain of insanity in the family on the mother's side, 
and this may have tipped the scales to make an already fanatical young man 
accept the idea of treachery. 

It brought grief to Emil Fuch that his son should have become engaged in 
war research. However, in 1949 when the father visited his son in England, 
their meeting was most cordial and Professor Fuchs went away convinced that 
his son's conscience was completely clear. My informant was certain that the 
father did not mean he knew his son to be a traitor. 

Fuchs' childhood was passed in the Germany of the First World War and 
the postwar period of unrest. He was passionately opposed to the Nazis and 
when he was a student was a leading agitator among his fellow-students 
against them. 

Shortly before Hitler came to power he saw how the Socialist Government 
of Prussia could be hustled out of office by six policemen without the Socialists 
or anyone else protesting. He decided then that the only effective opponents 
to the Nazis were the Communists. From this moment the whole of his idealism 
became attached to communism. 

Meanwhile Fuchs' feelings were intensified by the persecution of his family 
by the Nazis. In 1932 he, himself, came to England as a political refugee ; his 
father was sent to a concentration camp ; a sister committed suicide. 

The Germany from which Fuchs emerged was marked by the ruin of the middle 
classes by unemployment and despair; it was a Germany which seemed to offer 
no hope to its young people unless possibly by means of political revolution. It 
was a period when German students and even school children were largely politi- 
calized and taught by their political leaders to interpret all situations in terms 
of their particular brand of political panacea. Children acquired from the poli- 
ticians the terminology by which they judged all men and all things in abstract 
pseudo-political terms. This alone gave them a faith and something to live for 
which took them away from their own desperate situation. At the same time, 
by giving them, at an early age, an easily acquired ideology for judging the whole 
woi'ld. it deprived them of the incentive to mature intellectually. 

Fuchs is also typical of the Germany of his time in his gift for self -dramatiza- 
tion. His confessional document shows amazing power to cast a role for him- 
self, to analyze his own motives, to dramatize his actions, and to state his con- 
flicts. The most effective of his self-dramatizations is his diagnosis of the state 
of mind in which he found he could betray the secrets of his friends while remain- 
ing on warm terms with them — a "controlled schizophrenia." 

At his original Bow Street hearing, Mr. Travers Humphreys, the public prose- 
cutor, was so impressed by this analysis that he describc^d Fuchs as having a 
mind "possibly unique and creating a new precedent in the world of psychology." 

This description seemed to me so improbable that I asked two well-known 
psychiatrists and a brilliant young criminal lawyer to comment on it. The head 
psychiatric consultant at a great London hospital said that the divided personality 
of Fuchs was typical of cases he met every day. Essentially it was no different 
from the frequent one of the husband who is an excellent family man, but who 
also keeps a mistress of whom his wife knows nothing. 

The criminal lawyer agreed with this diagnosis. In his work he often met 
attractive and reasurring persons who turned out to be blackmailers or forgers. 

The other psychiatrist said that the split in Fuchs' mind could perhaps be 
described as dissociation, but not at all as "controlled schizophrenia." A schizo- 
phrenic does not with one part of his mind know and with the other part do. 
Fuchs con.sciously managed to keep what he knew and what he did in separate 
mental compartments. 

This phychologist also said that atomic scientists, because they understood 
how to control enormous external powers, must be subject to the pressure of a 
great conflict if ever the question arose in their minds of whether the government 
for which they worked was the best trustee of these powers. 

He drew a curious and interesting parallel between the control of the psycho- 
analyst over the dynamic interior forces of the individual subconscious mind and 
the control of the atomic physicist over external forces. "The psychoanalyst is 
subject to strains which often disrupt his own personality, and I imagine this 
might also be the case with the scientist if he begins to question the use to which 
his work is put." 

One small point in Fuchs' defense seemed to me significant. His counsel men- 
tioned that he had been interned in 1940, and wished it to be stated that he felt 
no bitterness over his internment. All he wished mentioned was that he had 
not, between 1940 and 1942, been able to witness the reaction of the British 
people to the threat of invasion. 



210 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Now the way in which this point was raised as one favorable to Fuchs is a 
clue to his mentality. He did not blame the British for interning him, for he 
understood that within their situation the Government was obliged to detain 
without judicial process foreigners who might, in the event of invasion, prove 
dangerous. 

That is reasonable, but is it not a shade too mvich so? Might it not have been 
more human to assert that a slight .sense of grievance had helped him to take 
the course he later took? And is it not characteristic of Fuchs that he shoiild 
have made such a point of understanding a situation in which the British, 
through historical exigency, were forced to act unjustly? 

For, by the same process of reasoning, he regarded all political and public 
action as a result of historic situations which have nothing to do with the 
feelings, the scruples, the humanity of individuals ; and the very action which 
was criticized by the British themselves as unjust was fully pardoned by Fuchs. 
The question for him was not whether a society behaved badly, but whether it 
functioned efBeiently and in response to circumstances dictated by the recogni- 
tion of necessity; above all, whether it was a modern machine, adapted to run 
along the lines of history railroaded over human scruples by the Communist 
Party officials. 

By the same method of ratiocination, Fuchs found himself in 1944 enjoying 
complete confidence in the Russian system, because he was convinced that the 
"Western Allies deliberately allowed Germany and Russia to fight each other 
to the death. Therefore, I had no hesitation in giving all information I had." 

The sympathy for our Russian allies which was so much a reality in Britain 
and the United States at that time, the bombing of German cities by the Allies 
in preparation for a second-front invasion of Italy — these weighed as nothing 
against the magnetic attraction of an abstract, mechanistic interpretation of 
events. Fuchs found a kind of moral security in holding a theoretic view which 
repudiated all evidences of emotion conflicting with it. In a competition of 
the Harwell atomic station magazine, one writer hit on this side of Fuchs' 
character : 

Fuchs' 
Looks 
An ascetic 
Theoretic. 

The innermost core of Fuchs' character was his wish to attain "freedom" 
by applying his theory of society to himself. "It appeared to me that I had 
become a free man because I had succeeded in establishing myself completely 
independent of the surrounding forces of society." 

By this rather obscure statement he meant that he had brought his own per- 
sonality in line with his theoretic view of society. He was dominated by a social 
theory and, therefore, on the level on which he acted politically, he was freed 
from all conceptions of "bourgeois morality," all personal loyalties. He could 
betray the country which had sheltered him from Nazi persecution. He could 
give away the secrets of his friends without even being embarrassed (at the 
time) by the feeling that this disturbed his warm relationship with them. 

Another most impoi-tant point is to remember the tremendous pressure of 
ideologies on the minds of scientists who have awakened conciences and are 
acutely aware of their responsibility toward history and the world. The confes- 
sion by Fuchs is above all an indication of that pressure of two-world ideas 
acting upon the mind of an extremely intelligent, if neurotic, person. It would be 
deceiving ourselves to neglect the tact that there was moral pressure from both 
sides — the East and the West. Having first chosen the East, Fuchs then dis- 
covered "something decent in human nature" and made his confession to the 
West. 

In his statement Fuchs expresses far more contrition at having betrayed his 
friends than at having handed over our most important secrets to a potential 
enemy. In court when the judge, before pronouncing sentence, ask?d him 
whether he had anything to say, he murmured in a low voice that there were other 
crimes he had committed, crimes against his friends. 

At Harwell he had good friends, some of whom visited him at Brixton while 
he was awaiting trial. So presumal)ly they had confidence in their personal rela- 
tionship with him. He lived a quiet life at Harwell but obviously the few parties 
to which he went and the people he met in his work played an important, almost 
decisive, part in his development. The force of his self-diagnosis of "controlled 
schizophrenia" is that it was toward these friends that he felt disloyal, not toward 
the British Government. There is really nothing in his confession to show that 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 211 

he felt anv real contrition of having betrayed our secrets to a potential enemy. 
Perhaps this is why he found it possible to have a clear conscience. As my 
Qualier friend explained to me, "He had a clear conscience when he was divided 
bet\veen Russia and his friends and now he has a clear conscience because he has 
made a clean breast of everything." 

Such a state of mind seems extremely childlike and comes within what the 
psychiatrist ca'ls "infantilism." There are only two possible exi)lanations for 
the character of Fuchs : One is that he was diabolically insincere in everything 
he did, including his confession ; the other that he was sincere. Of the two it 
is the more disturbing to think that he was sincere. But everyone who knew 
him seems to think that this was the case. According to his own lights, he 
was a man acting in accordance with a conscience all the way along. 

Though not a "controlled schizophrenic," Fuchs was undoubtedly neurotic. His 
neurosis took the form of trying to escape from personal guilt into the abstract 
morality of a theory of history which freed those individuals who bound them- 
selves to it from all loyalties based on relationships between individual human 
beings and on respect for the individual. As one of my psychologist consultants 
remarked, "the nominal reward of £100 which, on one occasion, he accepted from 
his Russian employers was a way of putting a seal on what he must have con- 
sidered a pact with the devil." The devil for him, though, was the devil beyond- 
good-and-evil, the devil of histoi-y, the devil which knows only the difference 
between the right and wrong side of the "revolution." It was a righteous devil. 

In order to understand the nature of the choice involved the reader must ask 
himself : If I had the power to press a button which would give victory to one 
side in the present conflict betwen ideologies and if I had to consider not just 
the future of my own country but that of the whole world would I be convinced 
that the side I am woi-king for is the right one? The very existence of such a 
question would put one above and outside one's own nation. The atomic sci- 
entists are isolated in more ways than one. They are isolated in their secrecy, 
and also in their responsibility for uses to which their researches will be put. 

And, although now the cry for more and more security is inevitable, it is well 
to remember that the only safety for the world lies in human beings developing 
a world point of view, which is the implication of the technical powers for con- 
tructing a new, or destroying an old, world that we now possess. If the Rus- 
sians, at present, stand in the way of one world, then our hove of safety lies 
in developing a constructive faith which will challenge the nihilism of traitors 
like Fuchs at least as much as in police measures. 



The following is reprinted from Parliamentary Debates, House of 
Commons OfRcial Report, Session 1945-46 (422 H. C. Deb. 5s, page 
2091, May 16, 1946) : 

Dr. Allan May (Sentence) 

44. Mr. W. J. Brown asked the Secretary of State for the Home Department 
whether he will review the sentence of 10 years' imprisonment passed on Dr. Allan 
Nunn May. 

Mr. Ede. I have considered this case, but I have been unable to find any grounds 
upon which I should be justified in recommending an interference with the 
sentence which the court thought it right to impose. 

Mr. Brown. In view of the fact that it is perfectly obvious from the evidence 
that this man is not a common criminal, and is not a traitor in the ordinary 
sense of the word, and that he has suffered a much heavier sentence than has been 
applied to many people who have sold this country for money ; and further, in 
view of the fact that this whole issue of atomic bomb secrecy constitutes an 
extremely doubtful ethical area, ought not the right hon. Gentleman to have 
another look at this matter? 

Mr. Ede. It was open to this man to appeal against the sentence. He would 
have run certain risks had he done so. It is still open to him to apply for an 
extension of the time within which to lodge such an appeal. I do not accept 
the implications of all the statements made by the hon. Member for Rugby (Mr. 
W. J. Brown). I can understand, although I could not condone, the attitude of 
a man who said he was willing to make knowledge which he had acquired .gen- 
erally available. This man did sell knowledge, which he had acquired in the 
service of this country, to a foreign Power, for their private and particular use. 



212 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

The following is quoted from an address by Mr. Mackenzie King 
before the House of Commons, Dominion of Canada, on March 18, 
1946. (Official Report of Debates, Dominion of Canada Parliament, 
House of Commons, vol. 1, 1946, pp. 53-54.) 

One other thing wl ieh is being said is that the alleged actions of the persons 
beini? detained were due to the secrecy with respect to the atomic bomb. I had 
a letter only yesterday from the secretary of one of the councils of Soviet- 
Canadian friendship, stating that all this had grown out of the fact that Russia 
was being denied information which the United States, Britain, and Canada had 
witli respect to the atomic bomb. May I impress upon the house this fact — the 
disclosures of whicli I have been speaking tonight go back to 1943 and 1944. 
The organization for the purpose of espionage of which I have been speaking 
has been in existence for 3 or 4 years in this country, and the greater part of 
the information which it obtained or sought to obtain was secured before anyone 
knew anything about the atomic bomb outside of those in the immediate know. 
The attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki were, if I recollect aright, on the 6th 
of August and at a later date in that month, the 9th of August, I think. Docu- 
ments in the possession of the Government are in large part prior to that time 
altogether. This espionage business has not arisen out of the atomic bomb in 
any way or any secrecy in connection with it. Now that the atomic bomb is a 
known factor, undoubtedly information is being sought in that connection, but 
the espionage net which has been referred to tonight has been in existence for a 
much longer time than the past 7 months. It was the 8th of September when 
the documents came into the possession of the Government. 



The following is reprinted from Science, June 28, 1946, by per- 
mission : 

The sentence imposed upon Allan Nunn May by the British Government has been 
strongly criticized by the executive committee of the Association of Scientific 
Workers of Great Britain in a communication directed to the American Associa- 
tion of Scientitic Workers in the United States. The British association does not 
seek to justify Dr. INlay's breach of the Official Secrets Act, but feels that the 
sentence of 10 years penal servitude is out of proportion to the offense in view 
of the following facts. The maximum sentence in the proposed British atomic 
energy bill is only 5 years penal servitude ; less severe sentences have l)een im- 
posed upon persons who. had actively aided the enemy; the person to whom Dr. 
]\Iay gave unauthoiized information was a representative of an allied govern- 
ment ; little consideration seems to have been taken of Dr. May's positive con- 
tribution to atomic bomb research ; Dr. May was in a position to give funda- 
mental scientific information only, having had no connection with the know-how 
of atomic-bomb manufacture. 



[From the London (England) Times, September 3, 1946] 

Espionage in Canada — Widespread and Highly Organized System — Report of 

THE Royal Commission 

(From a correspondent) 

M K-li of the 7o3-page report by the Royal Commission appointed in Canada to 
investigate the espionage network revealed by a Russian cipher clerk, Igor 
Gouzenko, published in Canada at the end of .Tune, is given to reproduction of the 
cross-examinations of the various suspects ; but thei'e are also several chapters 
summing up the evidence thus gained an 1 analyzing the state of affairs that it 
reveals. The Commission fcmnd that the major part of the information was 
transmitted to the Russians through the agency of Canadian public servants, 
highly educated men, working under oaths of allegiance, and yet ready, after 
persuasion, to betray the secrets of their country to a foreign i)ower. How was 
this accomplished and what does it i^ortend? 

The answer is sunnnarized in the Commissioner's findings: "Membership in 
Communist organizations or a sympathy toward Communist ideologies was the 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 213 

primary force which caused these agents to agree" to carry on espionage at the 
behest of the Kussiaus. The Commission also found that a fifth column exists 
in Canada, organized and directed by Kussian agents in Canada and Russia, 
and that within this there are several spy rings. This organization is nothing 
new, but is the result of a long preparation by trained and experienced men using 
the Communist movement as the direct source of recruitment for the espionage 
network. Thus in every case but one, the Canadian agents working for Colonel 
Zabotin the Soviet military attache in Ottawa, were memb;^rs or sympathizers 
with the Communist Party. The Connnunist study groups in Ottawa, Montreal, 
and Toronto were, in fact, "cells," and as such, recruiting centers for agents. 

THE MACHINE AT WORK 

A good example of the machin? at work is the case of the three Canadian 
scientists, Halperin, Durnforth Smith, and Mazerall, two of whom were meinbers 
of a Communist cell which was largely composed of scientists employed at the 
National Research Council in Ottawa. Before the end of March 1945, no member 
of this group apparently contemplated espionage; then the Soviet Military In- 
telligence Organization expressed its desire for additional spies engaged in 
Canadian scientific research, and with a few weeks, and without the initiative 
of the scientists themselves, a political discussion group was transformed into 
an active espionage organization. 

The report shows that the technique of this approach varied in individual 
cases, but that it was nearly always founded upon the basis of ideological sym- 
pathies. Money, at least in the early stages, played little or no part. The 
evidence before the Commission showed that within the framework of a Canadian 
political movement, the Labor-Progressive Party (Communist Party of Canada), 
'■development" courses would take place, fostered by Canadians from the 
espionage netwoi-k itself, and aimed at preparing suitable people for active 
participation in spy work. To begin with, certain selected sympathizers from 
among certain categories of the population would be invited to join secret "cells" 
or study groups, and to keep their adherence to the Communist Party secret from 
nonmembers. 

One of the reasons for this secrecy would appear to be that it enabled the 
Connnunist I'arty to gain control, through the election of its memlters to directing 
committees or other positions of responsibility, in as many fcn-ms of public 
organization as possible — trade unions, professional associations, youth move- 
ments, and so on. A typical example is that of the Candian Association of 
Scientific Workers on the executive of which were several of the agents arraigned 
before the Connnission, including Dr. Allan May and Professor Boyer, who was 
national president of the association. 

Another, and still more sinister, reason for the technique of secret membership 
descrilied above was to accustom the young Canadian Communist to what the re- 
port describes as "an atmosphere and an ethic of conspiracy," the gradual 
effect of which was to bring the subj >cts to a state of mind where they could 
throw ofl the moral obligations which they had accepted when entering upon 
their public duties. Once the victim was within the "cell," he was subjected to a 
course of study calculated to undermine his or her loyalties. But while this 
process was continuing, he or she might be quite unaware of the broader 
ramifications and real objectives of the organization. One of the agents, 
for example, Mazerall. testified that he was initially invited by a Iriend 
to join an "informal discussion group," and that for some time he did not 
realize it was a Communist cell. Indeed, in any of the small study groups, 
the extent of the secret section of the Communist Party would not be re- 
vealed to the junior members; the whole purpose of the cell organization as 
an operating ground for the fifth column would, as the report points out, have 
been frustrated had the rank-and-file members of these groups known the real 
policies and objectives of the conspiracy. 

This principle extended even to senior members of the party, and to those 
actively engaged in espionage, who would be led to believe that their activities 
were exceptional, and left quite unaware of the scope and size of the general 
plan. Thus Lunan, one of the principal agents, testifying before the Commission, 
said : "I had no idea of the extent and scope of this work. I was amazed when 
it first became clear to me during my interrogation. I never thought of myself 
as being more than one person in a small group of five people." Only the leaders, 
such men as Sam Carr, the national organizer of the Labor-Progressive Party, or 
Fred Rose, the Quebec organizer, would have a full idea of the real extent and 
objectives of the organization which they helped to direct. 



214 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

DEFECTION OF LOYALTY 

The development course within the study group seemed to lead, as has been 
said, to a loosening of loyalties, then to a sense of internationalism, and finally 
to an acceptance of Conamunist doctrine and leadership as something transcending 
all national oblijjation. Professor Boyer must reacted well to this treatment, 
since he gave as his reason for imparting- secret information to Fred Rose, in spite 
of his official oath of secrecy, that he thought his action would further '•inter- 
national scientific collaboration." Mazei'all also had been worked upon in the 
same way : "I did not like,"' he said in his testimony, "the idea of supplying in- 
formation. It was not put to me so much that I was supplying information to the 
Soviet Government, either. It was more that as scientists we were pooling 
information." 

A further result of development was the inculcation of a sense of complete 
obedience to party doctrine, and especially to party leaders. This latter idea 
apparently extended to the point where loyalty to the leaders of the Canadian 
Communist Party could be shown to take precedence over national loyalty, and 
over official oaths of secrecy. Kathleen Willsher, the agent who was employed 
in the office of the High Com,missioner for the United Kingdom in Ottawa, told 
the Commissioners that she believed the secret information she gave to Mr. Fred 
Bose was for the guidance of the national executive of the Communist Party 
of Canada. Her actual words are particularly interesting, since they illustrate 
tl:e conflict of loyalties and the struggle with conscience which, in this agent, 
must have provided first-class material for the conspirators to work upon : 
"I felt I should contrive to contribute something toward the helping of this policy 
(that of the Communist Party) because I was very interested in it. I found 
it very diflScult, and yet I felt I should try to help." 

A "fifth column" 

The picture that this widespread and highly organized system conjures up 
represents only one aspect, one spy ring, of the Russian fifth column in Canada. 
The existence of other parallel undercover systems, run by NKVD (the secret 
political police of the Soviet Union), Naval Intelligence, and the Central Commit- 
tee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in Moscow, was revealed by 
Gouzenko in his evidence. In a statement which he made after he had put him- 
self and his flies into the hands of the Canadian police, and which is reproduced 
without comment in the report, he said : "To many Soviet people abroad it is clear 
that the Communist Party in democratic countries has changed long ago from 
a political party into an agency net of the Soviet Government, into a fifth column 
in these countries to meet a war, into an instrument in the hands of the Soviet 
Government for creating unrest, provocations, and so forth." 

What appears to have happened is, in the Royal Commissioners' words, "a 
transplanting of a conspiratorial technique which was first developed in less for- 
tunate countries to promote an underground struggle against tyranny, to a demo- 
cratic society where it is singularly inappropriate." 



The followinfj article from U. S. News & World Report, November 
24, 1950, is reprinted by permission of the copyright owners, United 
States News Publishing- Corp. : 

Inside Story of a Native American Who Txjkned Spy 

Alfred Dean Slack seemed as nearly normal and average as an American 
could be. Now he is serving a term in prison for giving war secrets to Russia. 
And his friends and neighbors at Clay, N. Y., just outside Syracuse, are trying 
to figure out how it happened. 

Until one day last June, Slack fitted snugly into the co")munity at Clay. He 
merged easily with the crowd. He was 44, of medium lielght, a little too heavy, 
like many others of his age. He wore rimless glasses, looked a little like a 
preoccupied college professor. 

Slack had a good job. He had a new Cape Cod bungalow that he had built 
with his own hands. He was proud of it, and proud of his wife and two .voung 
children. His spare time went into work on the house. In idle moments, he 
liked to play the oi'gan in his living room, or work at wood carving, or thumb 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 215 

through the chemical and scientific books in his little library. He was at home 
and loved it. He had been born within a dozen miles of the place where he 

lived. ^, , . . » 11 I, i. 

Neighbors tabbed him as "a nice guy." One said : "He s a quiet fellow, but 
I like him." The .i"stice of the peace called him "a home man." His grocer 
thought him "one of the nicest fellows I ever met." 

This was the picture the community had of Slack when he climbed into his 
car on the moming of June 15, 1950, and drove ofE to his work as assistant 
production superintendent of a paint factory. A day later, the people at Clay 
knew Slack as a man who had given American war secrets to Russia. Two men 
from the Federal Bureau of Investigation had arrested Slack that morning 
when he reported for work. 

Soon, the details came to the i>eople in the home community. Six years be- 
fore, while Avorking at a war plant in Tennessee, Slack had told a Russian- 
agent how to make a new explosive. He even had given the Russian agent a 
sample. And he had known the information was destined for Russia. 

The neighbors at Clay puzzled over the story as they set about raising funds 
for Mrs. Slack and the children. The thing was hard for them to understand. 
Slack was not a parlor sophisticate or a college-bred Communist. He had not 
turned to communism because of joblessness. He was not even a member of 
the Communist Party. 

All through his working life. Slack had worked at pretty good pay. He had 
no criminal record. He had been a quiet, well-behaved youth. There was noth- 
ing sinister in his background. He was just a quiet man who liked to potter 
about the house and play the organ. 

On the surface of Slack's placid life, there seemed to be no clue as to how 
it could have happened. He had grown up in a self-respecting, middle-class 
family in Syracuse. He had a natural liking for chemistry. His father was a 
chemist. Slack had one brother and two sisters. 

Young Slack had gone through school at the normal rate. He had finished 
North High School in Syracuse when not quite IS. Then had followed various 
jobs and two semesters at Syracuse University. Soon after he turned 21. 
Slack went to Rochester, got a job in the Eastman Kodak Co. laboratories and 
enrolled in night school. For two years he carried the double load of working 
by day and going to school at night. 

Just before entering night school. Slack married. His work at the Eastman 
laboratories settled into permanency. He continued to dig into chemical and 
mechanical subjects in spare time at home after he finished school. 

The great depression did not disturb Slack. All through this period, he had 
a regular job with the Eastman Co.. growing in knowledge and responsibilities. 

When the war came. Slack was one of the young men transferred to the Hoi- 
ston Ordnance Works of an Eastman subsidiary at Kingsport, Tenn. A new, 
superpowerful explosive was to be developed here. Slack became a department 
supervisor, with access to information about the development of the explosive. 
He worked here, and at another Eastman subsidiary at Oak Ridge all through 
the war years. 

With the war over. Slack left Oak Ridge and war work. He tried engineer- 
ing research, worked on various projects. Finally, he went back to Syracuse, 
took the job witli the paint company, and settled back into his native environment 

His work history gave no clue to why Slack had turned spy. There had been 
good jobs — as chemist, engineer, plant manager — at fair pay. He had seemed to 
be happy. His first marriage had ended in a divorce in i9.39, but this seemed 
to have left no scars. He had remarried. This happened to many men. 

It is only in a study of Slack's friends that the pattern of intrigue begins 
to become apparent. 

As an eager yoimg student, working in the Eastman laboratories, Slack had 
met an older man named Richard Briggs. This new friend was a skeptic about 
the American economic system. This was in 1928. Briggs thought they were 
doing things better in Russia, the people's state. 

Slack listened eagerly to Briggs. He felt much the same wav. His own 
friendly feelings toward Russia, which were to grow through the depression 
years, already were beginning to flower. 

In 1936, eight years after their meeting, Briggs left the Eastman plant and 
went to St. Louis. But he kept up his contact with Slack and soon was back 
in the East. And it was not long before he was calling on Slack again. 

Slack was well on the upgrade now. He not only knew the Eastman processes, 
but by his outside studies of mechanics and general engineering he had picked 
up a good knowledge of many industrial techniques. 
81095—51 15 



216 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Briggs began to mine this vein of information. He asked Slack all sorts of 
questions: What is the way to do this;? What is the formula for that? What 
are the processes for making this? He hinted that he needed the information 
for use in his own job. But some of the things Briggs said were vague. They 
set Slack to asking questions. 

Briggs admitted that he was collecting the information for Russia. He was 
eloquent : Russia was the people's republic. It was behind the United States in 
industrial development. It would be.a service to humanity to help Russia bridge 
this gap. Slack listened. 

Soon, Briggs was suggesting that Slack might pick up some extra money for 
spare-time work. Slack could work out explanations and outlines of how things 
were done in the chemical field, with formulas and such things, and sell them to 
Russia. Briggs would put him in touch with the right man. 

Slack was interested. Here was a chance to do something to help the people's 
republic. And he could pick up some spare money for doing it. At first he gave 
information to Briggs. Then Briggs brought a man named "George," who be- 
came a regular contact. "George" explained what he wanted and Slack worked 
out the information. He got approximately $200 for each report. Briggs died, 
but Slack went ahead with the work. 

It all seemed simple. Russia was at peace with the United States. And this 
was industrial information, having nothing to do with weapons. 

In 1940, about a year after the death of Briggs, Harry Gold took the place of 
the first Russian agent as a contact with Slack. The work continued. 

Then America went to war and Slack tried to break off relations with Gold. 

Slack had been picked for an important new job at Kingsport. He was married 
again, and happy. And he realized that there was a vast difference between 
giving industrial information in peace and providing military information in 
war. 

There were constant reminders of this at Kingsport: restrictions on plant 
workers ; security regulations ; posters warning against giving information to an 
enemy. Russia was not an enemy, but Slack decided not to give Gold any more 
information. 

Gold made several trips to Kingsport, demanding to know about the new 
explosive. Slack could tell him about it easily. But he refused, fiatly. 

Finall.v, Gold cracked down and began to threaten. He would tell about the ., 
other things Slack had done. No one would believe this work was as innocent 
as it sounded. Slack would be fired from the war plant, barred from work in 
any other, blacklisted everywhere. 

Then Gold became persuasive again : Russia was an ally of the United States. 
It was up to Americans to help. He spoke of Stalingrad, and the stand before 
Moscow, and a devastated Ukraine. 

Slack bent under the pressure. He brought a sample of the explosive out of 
the plant and gave it, with a sketch of the manufacturing technique, to Gold. 
The latter hurried it off toward the upper levels of the Russian pyramid. 

That was in 1943. The crime lay on Slack's conscience for 6 years, through 
half a dozen different jobs, before it caught up with him in his home environ- 
ment at Syracuse. 

Because of the threats Gold had used, the Justice Department proposed a 10- 
year sentence for Slack. But Federal Judge Robert L. Taylor waived aside the 
recommendation. He said 15 years was not too much for conspiring to commit 
espionage for a foreign government. 

And Alfred Dean Slack, a rumiiled man with a worried face, wiped his rimless 
glasses, put them on again, and went off to prison. 



From Security Manual, Manhattan District, United States Engi- 
neers Office, November 26, 1945 : 

Section II — Selection and Clearance of Personnel 

1. General. 

The purpose of personnel clearance is to assure the assignment to Manhattan 
District work only persons of demonstrated loyalty and the rejection and 
elimination of those who are potentially disloyal, disaffected, subversive, or 
who lack the character or discretion to protect the security of classified infor- 
mation disclosed to them. 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 217 

2. Applicability of Personnel Clearance Procedure 

a. Personnel to whom the District clearance procedure applies may be 
categorized as follows : 

(1) Military personel. 

(3) Civil Service personnel. 

(3) Contractors' employees. 

(4) Consultants. 

b. Definitions: 

(1) The term "classified employee," as used in this section, refers to all 
persons, excluding military personnel, engaged on classified work or having 
access to classified work areas of interest to the Manhattan District. 

(2) The term "unclassified employee," as used in this section, refers to persons, 
other than military personnel, directly connected with work of interest to the 
Manhattan District but who do not have access to classified information or 
classified work areas. This definition is intended to include clerical personnel, 
construction workers, concessionaires, and other individuals at the Clinton Engi- 
neer Works, the Hanford Engineer Works, and other installations who, though 
not having access to classified documents, materiel, or equipment, are in dnily 
contact with large groups of classified workers and consequently acquire, through 
observation and association, information which becomes classified through col- 
lection and association with unclassified information previously obtained. The 
term "unclassified employee" is not intended to include the great mass of workers 
who, by virtue of their employment by a private concern under contract with 
the District or one of its private associates, manually work on unclassified 
materiel or equipment which becomes classified upon final assembly, where 
the worker has no knowledge of the unusual character of the materiel or equip- 
ment, its potential use, or its ultimate consignee. 

(3) The term "employee," as used in this section, refers to all classified 
employees and those unclassified employees to whom the personnel clearance 
procedure is applicable. (See sec. II, par. r)b.) 

(4) The term "classified information," as used in this section, includes all 
information of a classified nature regardless of its form, substance, or mode of 
transmission, i. e., documents, materiel, equipment, etc. 

3. Clearance Forms Required 

a. Proof of Citizenship. — Prior to employment each employee (except aliens) 
will furnish proof of citizenship. Aliens will furnish proof of alien registratioh 
and will be processed in accordance with specific instructions hereinafter out- 
lined. The following are acceptable as evidence of citizenship : 

(1) Birth Cei-tiflcate. 

(2) Raiitisnial (Vrtificate. indicating date and place of birth. 

(3) Honorable Discharge from the United States Army, Navy, or Marine Corps 
providing same does not bear notation of alien status at time of discharge. 

(4) Naturalization Certificate. 

(5) Declaration of Citizenship, providing (1), (2), or (3) cannot be furnished. 

Military personnel who are aliens are not subject to assignment to the Man- 
hattan District. Citizenship of n)ilitary personnel will be presumed unless the 
individual's Personal History Statement or Service Record discloses information 
to the contrary. 

b. Data Card. — A data card will be prepared for each employee. Blank cards 
will be supplied by the District Security Office upon request. 

c. Questionnaire. — Officers will execute Personal History Statement. All other 
personnel subject to Manhattan District clearance procedure will execute WD 
AGO Form lU-105. revised Personnel Security Questionnaire. The Personal 
History Statement may supplement this form within the discretion of the Area 
Engineer. 

d. FiiKjcrprint Chart. — All employees, including Civil Service personnel, will be 
fingerprinted on the National Defense Fingerprint Chart. The former policy of 
separately fingerprinting Civil Service personnel on the Civil Service Fingerprint 
(hart has been discontinued (Wra- Department Personnel Circular No. 34, 26 
March 19-15). Military personnel will not be fingerprinted. 

Jf. Screening of Fwms Prior to Employment 

Although desirable, investigation prior to assignment to classified work is in 
many instances impractical, in view of the volume of work involved and the 
immediate need for the services of certain types of employees. It is the respon- 
sibility of the Area Engineer, however, to provide the highest possible degree of 
personnel security after consideration has been given to all attending circum- 



218 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

stances and operational purposes. Whenever possible, therefore, investigation 
should be n)adeand the minimum standards of clearance set forth in ijaraf/raph 5 
should be applied prior to assignment of any employee to classified work. In 
all cases, however, all pertinent forms of a given individual will be carefully 
screened. No person who has been a consultant or employed on District Work 
will be re-employed in Category I or II (see par. 6c below) without approval from 
the District Security Section based upon a check of District files. No individual 
iu the following categtn-ies will be assigned to clas.sified work until the Area 
Engineer has assured himself, by reason of sufficient investigation, that the 
individual will not be a menace to project security : 

a. Minors under 18 years of Age (Reference District Circular Letter (Pers. 
34-19) dated 21 March 1944, Subject: Employment of Minors under 18 years 
of age). 

b. Aliens. 

c. Individuals not born in the T'nited States or one of its territories. 

• d. Individuals whose backgrouml indicates that they may possesg affinity for a 
foreign government. Indications to be considered are : 

(1) Visits to a foreign country. 
■ (2) Close relatives who reside in or are to owe allegiance to a foreign country. 
(3) Service in the Army of a foreign country, etc. 

e. Individuals having membership in organizations known to have l>een enemy 
sponsored or otherwise subversive or committed to the violent overthrow of the 
Government of the United States, or to adherence to the interest of any foreign 
power to the detriment of the interest of the United States. 

5. Basic Principles of Personnel Clearance 

a. The following are basic principles of j^ersonnel clearance : 

(1) Each classified employee should be subject to careful and conscientious 
original selection. 

(2) The identity of each classified employee should be positively established 
prior to his assigTiment to classified work. 

(3) The loyalty, honesty, character and discretion or each classified employee 
should be established by investigation prior to his assignment to classified work. 

These principles represent the desirable objective in personnel security; they 
should not be interpreted as the minimum standard for clearance. As a security 
objective, they should constantly be borne in mind and should be applied insofar 
as they are applicable to clearance of i)ersonnel at a unit or installation when 
all existing circumstances have been given careful consideration. 

b. Where unclassified employees acquire some classified information through 
observation and association, and where criminal tendencies of employees of 
this group may adversely affect the work of the project, limited investigation 
is believed necessary. The extent to which the provisions of the i>ersonnel 
clearance procedure will be applied, if at all. to unclassified employees, is left 
to the discretion of the Area Engineer. 

ff. Minimum Standards for Clearance 

The minimum standards for clearance are outlined below. The scope of in- 
vestigation indicated under each category constitutes the minimum investiga- 
tion required and should be supplemented by additional information when, in 
the opinion of the Area Engineer, further inquiry is believed advisable. 

a. Military Personnel. — 

(1) Clearance of military personnel will be based on a three-way central file 
check, routine investigation (mall investigation conducted by the Area Engineer 
Office or Service Command routine investigation), and FBI criminal file check. 
A Service Command special investigation will supplement or be conducted in 
lieu of the routine Investigation for military personnel having access to Top 
Secret Information. 

(2) Inasmuch as the majority of the military personnel assigned to the 
District originally report to Oak Ridge for duty, primary responsibility for their 
clearance is assumed by the District Security Officer. Area Engineers must take 
positive action, however, to insure that all military personnel within their areas 
have been cleared, and where clearance has not been granted by the District 
Security Office (where the individual is transferred directly .to an area office) 
immediate action will be taken. For officer personnel. Personal History State- 
ments will be forwarded to the District Security Office, which will take all 
necessary action. When enlisted SED and WAC personnel, transferring into 
the District report directly to area offices without having been cleared by the 



SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 219 

District Office, all action to effect formal clearance will be taken by the appro- 
priate Area Engineer. „ ^. , t. 

b. Clearance of Naval Person /^e^.— Clearance investigations of Naval Personnel 
assigned to work of interest to the Manhattan District will be conducted by the 
District Security Office. Upon the assignment of a Naval Officer to the Manhattan 
District a Personnel Security Questionnaire, Form No. W. D., A. G. O. 19-105 will 
be transmitted immediately to the District Security Office where clearance will 
be initiated. Investigation will consist of a local agency check excluding ONI, 
a check of FBI, MID, and ONI central tiles and personal interviews with at least 
three unprejudiced individuals, be conducted by Manhattan District Personnel. 

c. Civilian. Personnel.— Civil Service personnel and contractors' personnel Avill 
be categorized as follows: 

(1) Group /—Classified employees having access to (a) Top Secret informa- 
tion, or (b) Secret information reflecting the over-all program of the District 
or of any major subdivision, or (c) detailed information concerning the processing 
and development of end products. 

(2) Group // — All classified employees not included in Group /. 
(.3) Group III — Unclassified employees. 

Minimum retiuirements for clearance are as follows : 

Group / — Special Service Command investigation (Service Command or Man- 
liattan District investigation), FBI subversive file check, and FBI fingerprint 

Group 77— Routine investigation (Service Command or mail investigation 
<?onducted by the contractor, or Area Engineer's office), FBI fingerprint check, 
and central FBI subversive file check. 

Group ///—Central FBI subversive file cheek and fingerprint check. 

7. Transmission of Records 

a. Intra-District. — 

(1) Proof of Citizen.ship and Secrecy Agreement (see sec. III-A, par. 14) 
will be retained in the contractors' file subject to inspection. Declaration of 
Secrecy executed by military personnel upon tran.sfer will become a part of the 
individual's 201 file. 

(2) Intelligence files (201) of officer personnel will be maintained at the 
District Security Office and will not be forwarded upon interarea transfer. 
Intelligence files of contractors' personnel. Civil Service personnel, and enlisted 
personnel will be maintained by the Area Engineer's office having jurisdiction 
over the employing contractor or station and will be forwarded upon transfer of 
the individual to another Manhattan District station or contractor. 

(3) A data card will be forwarded to the District Security office immediately 
upon assignment or employment of each individual and will reflect type of 
investigation initiated. When investigation of military and Civil Service 

personnel is completed the District Security Office will be advised so that the 
proper notation can be made on the master data card. It will not be necessary 
to notify the District office when the investigation of individuals other than the 
foregoing is completed unless derogatory information of a serious nature is 
developed, in which case comi)lete information will be forwarded. Notification 
t(' the District Security Office that investigation has been favorably completed 
will not be necessary in the case of contractors' employees unless there is a 
•change in the individual's clearance status, i. e., a restriction is placed or a 
previous restriction is removed. On all contractors' employees, this office will 
assume that initial clearance is in effect unless si)ecifically advised to the 
•contrary. 

b. To Outside Agencies. — 

(1) Upon transfer of District Civil Service personnel to other Government 
agencies. Intelligence files will be carefully screened and forwarded to the unit 
to which the employee is transferred. Upon the release or termination of con- 
tractors' employees or upon the separation, as distinguished from transfer, of 
Civil Service personnel. Intelligence files will be retained in the office of the 
Area Engineer and will not be forwarded to the Discontinued Projects Branch. 
(District Circular Letter, Civilian Personnel 45-11, dated 6 December 1944). 

(2) Part I of ASF Circular No. 403, dated 11 December 1944, requires that an 
entry be made on the Service Record of an enlisted man or woman or on the 
<3ualification Card, WD AGO Form 66-1, of an officer or warrant officer, indi- 
cating the extent, results and date of loyalty investigation or check conducted. 
"The notation required by this circular will be made on the Service Record or 



220 SOVIET ATOMIC ESPIONAGE 

Form 66-1 of Manhattan District military personnel when the indiviclnal i» 
transferi'ed from the District. All transfers from the Manhattan District are 
processed through the District Military Personnel Section and in each case the 
flies of this office are checked and the proper entry is made. In view of this 
procedure, Circular No. 403 requires no action on the part of the Area Engineer. 
Intelligence files of militai\y personnel will not he forwarded. 

S. Transfer or Reemployment of Personnel 

a. Coiitractor's Personnel. — Employees within group I (see this section par„ 
6c) will not be transferred from one phase of the pro.iect to another phase unless- 
transfer of such individual is specifically approved by the Area Engineer having 
jurisdiction over the unit to which the transfer is being made and by the Area 
Engineer having jurisdiction of the unit from wliich the transfer is proposed. 
In the event of the individual's file contains derogatory information the approval' 
of the District Engineer will be obtained before the transfer is effected. Request 
for such approval will be directed to the District Engineer. Attention : District 
Security Officer, and will include a recommendation by the foregoing Area 
Engineers as to wliether approval should be granted, and if the individual is 
transferring from an installation other than CEW, this request will include a state- 
ment of the date and type of the individual's clearance. Decision as to transfer 
of other employees will be the responsibility of the Area Engineer having juris- 
diction over the unit to which the transfer is to be made. Factors to be con- 
sidered in approving such transfers are (1) the advantage to the District in 
accomplishing the transfer, (2) the hazards to security resulting from tlie- 
individual obtaining information about another pliase of the pi'oject, and (3) 
the information contained in the transferees intelligence file and employment 
record. 

b. Civil Service Personnel. — Provisions of a. above do not apply to the transfer- 
of Civil Service employees. Prior to the transfer of « Civil Service employee, 
the approval of the Area Engineer and the District Executive Officer mvM be 
obtained. 

c. Military Personnel. — All transfers of military personnel emanate from 
the District Military Personnel Section which assumes full responsibility for 
compliance with general security policy. 

9. Aliens 

a. Paragraph 61, AR 380-5, 15 March 1944, provides that no alien shall be- 
employed on a classified war contract unless consent has first been obtained from 
the Secretary of War. To expedite the granting of consent in cases of alien^ 
employment, this authority has been delegated to the Commanding Generals of 
the Service Commands. Consent for employment of an alien is actually granted' 
by the Commanding Officer of the Service Command upon the recommendation 
of the Director, Security and Intelligence Division. 

b. Aliens to be employed on classified Manhattan District work will furnish: 
proof of alien registration and execute WD PMGO Form No. 301, in sextuplicate, 
which will be forwarded to the Director, Security and Intelligence, of the 
Service Command having jurisdiction over the employing facility, with a request 
that consent be granted for the alien's employment. Assignment to classified 
work prior to the receipt of this consent is prohibited. 

c. Security of Manhattan District work requires clearance standards for 
aliens which are higher than those normally applied by the Service Command ; 
consequently, letters transmitting Alien Questionnaires should specifically re- 
quest that a special investigation be conducted and that a copy of the report 
of investigation be transmitted with the letter of consent to the requesting Area 
Engineers's office. Immediate arrangements to procure this additional service 
should be made with the Service Command inasmuch as the procedure is not in' 
accordance with the Service Command's present operating policy. 

d. It should be noted that consent for the employment of an alien by "X" 
company does not authorize the employment of the same alien by "Y" company 
within the same or another Service Command. When consent is desired for 
the alien's employment by a new employer, a new Alien Questionnaire must 
be sul>mitted to the Service Command in which the new employer is located' 
and new consent must be obtained. If however, consent has been granted for 
the alien's employment by "X" company in "X" Service Command, temporary 
consent can normally be obtained by TWX for his employment by "Y" Company 
in "Y" Service Command, if the name of the original employer, the date of the- 
original consent and alien registration number are furnished. 

