Active Information, Meaning and Form

F. David Peat

ABSTRACT

It is proposed, in the spirit of open speculation, that science is 
now ready to accommodate a new principle, that of active 
information, that will take its place alongside energy and 
matter. Information connects to concepts such as form and 
meaning which are currently being debated in a variety of 
fields from biology and the neurosciences, to consciousness 
studies and the nature of dialogue. It may well provide the 
integrating factor between mind and matter.

While the principle of Information has considerable potential it 
also raises a variety of questions whose clarification and 
resolution may help to increase understanding in other fields.

INTRODUCTION

Towards the end of the 1980s David Bohm introduced the 
notion of Active Information into his Ontological Interpretation 
of Quantum Theory. His idea was to use the activity of 
information as a way of explaining the actual nature of 
quantum processes and, in particular, the way in which a 
single physical outcome emerges out of a multiplicity of 
possibilities. Initially this idea, of Information as a physical 
activity, was tied to Bohm's particular theory but, as this essay 
paper proposes, it is possible to go further and elevate 
"Information" to the level of a new physical concept, one that 
can be placed alongside Matter and Energy.

Information connects to clusters of fertile ideas being debated 
in physics, biology, consciousness research and the 
neurosciences. These are grouped around the notions of 
Information, Form and Meaning, each of which is discussed 
below.

At present it is by no means clear how these ideas will finally 
integrate together but the resonance between them is striking 
and should provide a profitable nucleus for further research 
and speculation. On the one hand the notion of information is 
firmly based within the physical sciences, yet has immediate 
application to, for example, consciousness studies. Such 
ideas are also particularly rich in the way they connect to new 
approaches in health, healing, dialogue and the cohesion of 
society.

When ideas begin to come together in this way it suggests that 
a fundamental break-through may not be far behind. One 
thinks of the web of approaches and notions being debated in 
the first years of this century and the how they finally 
coalesced into quantum theory and relativity. Similar 
unresolved discussions abound today, about the nature of 
mind, brain function and consciousness, pre-space and 
algebras that lie below quantum theory, and the nature of 
health and healing. Information is something that could play a 
significant role in understanding the nature of the physical 
universe and, at the same time, have a key role in the 
operation of consciousness. Concepts of meaning, form and 
information could well play an integrating role in bringing unity 
to whole areas of speculation.

The individual topics of Information, Form and Meaning, 
together with their interconnections, are discussed below. 
Following this questions are posed and directions for future 
work suggested.


INFORMATION

At first sight "information" plays no role in the world of physics. 
Facts, data and information are contained in books, or collated 
by scientists, but have no independent, objective existence in 
the physical world apart from their interpretation by human 
subjects. Shannon and Weaver's "Information Theory", for 
example, is concerned with the way data - bites of information 
- travels along a telephone line or within other transmission 
system. The "meaning" of a particular message is irrelevant, 
what is significant is only the mechanism of its encoding and 
decoding, plus the relative roles played by noise and 
redundancy.

Yet a deeper investigation suggests that things are more 
subtle and less obvious. The notion of entropy, for example, is 
present in both Information theory and thermodynamics. It is 
another concept that began with an uncertain ontology. On the 
one hand in thermodynamics entropy is related to well defined 
variables, like temperature and heat capacity, on the other, it is 
spoken of, somewhat subjectively, as the degree of "disorder" 
within a system, or as the break down of order and 
information, or the degradation of the information content of a 
message.

There is the question of the amount information required to 
define a system. An apparently "ordered" system, exhibiting 
strictly periodic behavior requires little information for its 
definition. Highly complex or random systems, on the other 
hand, are defined by a potentially infinite amount of 
information. But are these purely objective measures or do 
they always depend upon some human subject to assign 
significance? Prigogine is attempting to place the concept of 
entropy within a clearer objective basis but the debate 
continues.

The mystery of information deepens with Beckenstein's 
discovery of the relationship between amount of information 
passing through an event horizon, entropy content, and the 
radius of a Black Hole. Here is a totally objective, quantitative 
definition of information within physics. (In this case, however, 
it is the amount of information rather than its actual content or 
meaning that is significant.) The section below, on Form, also 
discusses ways in which form (related to in-form-ation) plays a 
significant role in quantum physics.

The breakthrough in giving information a more "physical" role 
comes with Bohm's proposal that information plays an active 
role in quantum systems. Bohm's 1952 Hidden Variable 
papers proposed an alternative approach to quantum theory in 
which the electron is a real particle guided by a new kind of 
force, the quantum potential. While at first sight Bohm's theory 
appears somewhat "classical" - electrons have real paths - the 
quantum potential is entirely novel. Unlike all other potentials 
in physics its effects do not depend upon the strength or "size" 
of the potential but only on its form. It is for this reason that 
distant objects can exert a strong influence on the motion of an 
electron.

In the double slit experiment, a paradigm-shifting experiment 
of quantum theory, the effects of the slits are be experienced 
by electrons located many centimeters away. This is very 
difficult to explain in conventional terms but follows quite 
naturally once a quantum potential has been introduced. 
Indeed, it is this quantum potential that is responsible for all 
the novel effects exhibited by quantum theory. The form of the 
quantum potential is extremely complex and reflects the entire 
physical set-up of a quantum measurement. The complexity of 
its form is also what gives rise to the apparently random 
processes of the quantum world, such as the disintegration of 
a radio-active nucleus, or the dual wave-particle nature of the 
electron.

Bohm's approach to his own theory became more subtle over 
the years and he soon began to speak of not only of the form 
of the quantum potential and also of the "information" it 
contains. The action of the quantum potential is not to push or 
pull the electron along its path. Rather, Bohm likened it to a 
radar signal that guides a ship approaching a harbor. The 
information within the radar signal acts, via a computer or 
automated steering device, to change the direction of the ship. 
Information itself does not push the ship, rather it "in-forms" the 
gross energy of the engines.

Information therefore allows a distinction to be made between 
what could be called raw or "un-formed" energy an a more 
subtle energy, an activity that can be identified with 
information. This information acts on raw energy to give it 
form.

Later versions of Bohm's theory pictured the electron not so 
much as a real physical particle but as a process, a wave 
continually collapsing inward to a localized region and then 
expanding outward. This process is guided by a super-
quantum potential. An activity of information is responsible for 
the existence quantum particles and quantum events.

In discussing the quantum measurement problem Bohm, and 
his coworkers, further developed the notion of "Active 
Information". Take the double slit experiment, as an example. 
In Bohm's theory an electron has the potentiality to take a 
multiplicity of paths that pass through either one of the two 
slits. In actuality, an electron takes only a single path. Bohm 
suggested that the quantum potential contains information 
about the experimental set-up. This information is potentially 
active, but once the electron has "chosen", and begun to move 
along a particular path the information about alternative paths 
becomes inactive.

For reasons of space this is an oversimplification of Bohm's 
approach, but the essential idea should be clear. Information, 
in this case about the context of an experimental set-up, is 
carried, in some sort of active form, at the quantum level. This 
information acts directly on matter, (eg via the form it imposes 
on the "unformed"). Information is being used in an objective 
way. It is not something that depends on the point of view of a 
human observer.

The actual nature of the information and the way it is carried is 
not yet entirely clear. Is it really correct, for example, to speak 
of a "field" of information, since information does not fall off 
with distance, neither is it associated with energy in the usual 
sense. Possibly the notion of field should be widened or, at 
the quantum level. we should be talking about pre-space 
structures, or about algebraic relationships that precede the 
structure of space and time.

Bohm's notion of "active information" is tied to his  "Ontological 
Interpretation" (formerly the Causal or Hidden Variable 
Interpretation). I propose it be freed from any particular theory 
and raised to the level of a General Principle. Bohm never 
considered his Ontological Interpretation to be the last word 
on quantum theory, rather that it would suggest insights and 
avenues for further research. I believe that one of the most 
valuable is this notion of information.

Newtonian physics was concerned with the movements of 
matter under forces and mechanical contact. Nineteenth 
century physics generalized the whole notion of energy, as 
that which causes the transformations, rearragements and 
motions of matter. I suggest that Information is the final 
element in a triad - information is that which gives form to 
energy. (It is the "subtle" energy spoken of in Eastern 
science.)
Information would have an objective nature. It would play an 
active role in giving "form" to energy and be responsible for 
quantum processes. As a "field" of active information it 
provided a collective, global form for a superconductor or 
superfluid. Information would be copresent as an aspect of 
physical law, but also through what appear to be more 
subjective elements such as meaning and significance. It 
particular, Information may be responsible for global 
processes in the brain and have a role to play in the nature of 
consciousness.

It could be argued that, in giving information an active role in 
science, the face of physics will change. But this has already 
happened several times before. On each occasion more 
subtle notions were introduced. Thermodynamics, for 
example was born in the transformation of caloric from a fluid 
to a non-material concept - energy. Electromagnetism was 
found not to be the result of mechanical vibrations in an ether 
but the manifestation of the more subtle notion of field. In our 
own century matter the notion of "independent elements of 
reality" was abandoned at the quantum level, physical 
properties were discovered not to be intrinsic to objects but to 
be context dependent. The force of gravity melted in 
geometry. In each case the movement has been from the 
material and mechanical into the subtle. Information could well 
be the next stage in this evolution of ideas. Its integrating role 
would extend over physics, biology and the study of 
consciousness.

In the two sections below the relationship of information to 
form and meaning is discussed.

FORM

Form is a key concept in biology. The function of everything 
from the activity of an enzyme to a cell or organ is related to its 
physical form. Growth from the fertilized cell to the adult is a 
process of differentiation and transformation of form; hence 
biologists from Aristotle to Waddington, Sheldrake and 
Goodwin have postulated notions of "morphic fields".

The universal nature of form and its transformation was, in the 
1960s, the subject of a new branch of mathematics, Rene 
Thom's Catastrophe Theory. Form has associated with it the 
idea of a Gestalt, of global patterns, perception and non-
locality; such notions connect with the functioning of 
consciousness and with the Immune system.

Form has its role to play in physics. In classical physics it is the 
form of the Hamiltonian that remains invariant under canonical 
transformations. In this way, Newtonian mechanics can be 
transformed from the mechanical interaction of individual 
particles into global form-preserving processes. Likewise, 
General relativity is about the invariance of form under all 
possible coordinate transformations. In this sense, motion 
under gravity has to do with the preservation of form. One 
could perhaps generalize the concept of inertia to that of the 
"law of persistence of form".

Most dramatically form appears in the guise of the wave 
function. It is the global form of the wave function (symmetric 
or antisymmetric) that is responsible for the existence of 
Fermi-Dirac or Bose-Einstein statistics. The fact that such 
forms are non-factorizable (into spatially independent 
components) is the deep reason for quantum non-locality 
(Bell's mysterious correlation between distant particles). The 
form of the wave function is ultimately responsible for 
collective modes in physics - plasma, superfluid, 
superconductor and hypothetical Frochlich systems. The form 
of the wave function orchestrates each of an astronomical 
number of particles into a highly coordinated dance.

Bohm's quantum potential is unique in that the magnitude of its 
effects, on the motion of electrons, does not arise from its 
strength or intensity but from the "form" of the potential - that is, 
its particular complex shape. It is for this reason that the effects 
of the quantum potential do no fall off with distance and that 
well separated quantum objects can remain strongly 
correlated.

It is highly suggestive that form may also be responsible for 
global quantum proper within the brain that give rise to 
consciousness. Form, a global property as opposed to a local 
one, may have something to do with the evolution of space-
time structure out of some more primitive quantum pre-space. 
Penrose, for example, proposes that the quantum mechanical 
"collapse of the wave function" is a global phenomenon 
connected with the geometrical properties of space-time. He 
also speculates that global quantum process have a role to 
play in the liaison between consciousness and brain structure.

These are speculative, but compelling, speculations that 
revolve around the same cluster of ideas and connect different 
areas of interest, such as consciousness, life and fundamental 
physics. They raise the question: How does the global nature 
of form relate to Active Information? Is Information a new 
principle of the physical world that applies in a wide variety of 
fields of interest? The answer to this question must begin with 
a period of "sorting out" and clarification of basic ideas and 
their multiple interconnections.


MEANING

If Form begins with biology (and leads into quantum theory) 
Meaning surely starts in psychology. It was Carl Jung who 
stressed the role of meaning in the Synchronicity - that region 
where form and pattern spill over the boundaries between 
mind and matter. For Jung the key was the deep internal 
significance associated with an experience of synchronistic 
patterns, a significance that did not end at the boundaries of 
personal consciousness. Meaning was both subjective and 
objective. As Wolfgang Pauli emphasized, just as psychology 
had uncovered the objective in psyche (the collective or 
objective unconscious) so physics must find the subjective in 
matter. Jung termed this speculum between matter and mind 
as the "psychoid", its integrating factor is meaning.

In the context of Dialogue groups Bohm spoke of a "field of 
meaning" shared by all participants. He also stressed that the 
way to bring about effective social change is through an 
overall change of meaning. Meaning, which could be thought 
of as a field of form, Bohm associated this with the Immune 
system. The Immune system is what keeps the body whole, it 
processes coordinated and is another manifestation of 
meaning. if meaning is degraded the body becomes sick. 
Bohm stressed that his maxim "a change of meaning is a 
change of being" was to be taken literally. That assailant seen 
on a dark night turns out to be the shadow of a tree trunk. 
Immediately a flurry of electrochemical changes takes place in 
mind and body. Laboratory research suggests that shifts in 
"meaning" bring about subtle restructuring of nerve pathways 
and the sensitivities of connections. Meaning, which is 
normally taken to be subjective turns out to have an objective, 
physical consequence.

Meaning can act on matter and, presumably, matter on 
meaning. (The significance of what we see or think is affected 
by the electrochemical environment of our bodies.) Does the 
idea extend from consciousness into the physical world? I 
believe it does. Information is, in some way, encoded in the 
wave function, or some sort of a field of form, or some set of 
prequantum algebraic relationships. Yet what information is 
encoded? One solution is that all information, about the entire 
universe is encoded, or enfolded, within the global form. (Or 
as Bohm may have said, within the Implicate Order.) Yet only 
that which has meaning, or significance, for the electron is 
"active". Consciousness becomes a certain dynamical aspects 
of this underlying field or order. Mind is fundamentally 
distributed throughout the material world.

Information by itself is nothing more than an abstract set of 
binary digits (Shannon and Weaver's Information Theory) but if 
it is to act, if it is to affect the motion of the electron, coordinate 
the dance of a plasma, and the global movement of electrical 
activity within the brain, then it must have a particular 
significance within a given context. Meaning comes down to 
the way the information acts within different contexts.

Again deep speculative connections exist between 
Information, Form and Meaning, between quantum theory, 
brain function and consciousness.


CONCLUSION AND DIFFICULTIES

It is proposed that science can accommodate a new general 
principle, Active Information, alongside matter and energy. 
Information is connected to ideas of form and meaning and 
leads to questions that are being debated in consciousness 
studies, healing and dialogue.

Supposing one is willing to accept the existence of a new 
explanatory principle in science; what is the next step? Clearly 
there is much to sort out and clarify. How exactly is information 
encoded, decoded and transmitted? Is the metaphor of the 
field valid or do we need some new concept, something that 
exists at the level of prespace? And just what sort of 
information is encoded?

That final question goes right back to Neils Bohr and his 
emphasis that a quantum system must always be defined 
within the context of the experiment. But just what does this 
context consist of? What information is relevant - the location 
of the laboratory? the material out of which the double slits are 
made? What aspects of the universe comprise objective, 
active information and which are purely subjective? No one 
seems to know at preset. What may be considered relevant 
information for one context may be irrelevant in the next. Could 
it be that while much information is encoded within some sort 
of "information field", only certain aspects are decoded by the 
electron?  How does one quantum system - an enzyme, for 
example, become the "environment" or "information" for some 
other biologically active information.

Many more questions can be raised and debated.

PROPOSALS

The ideas and speculations discussed in this essay have 
considerable potential for further development. They are 
nuclei for new discussions in quantum theory, biology and the 
neurosciences. At present, however, these ideas lack critical 
mass and there is a great danger than, following Bohm's death 
for example, interest could dissipate or discussion fall back to 
more mechanistic approaches.

It is proposed that a concerted effort be made in this general 
area. A useful first step is to combine speculation with 
clarification, to discover just what is being said by various 
thinkers about information, meaning and form in quantum 
theory, consciousness research, biology and so on? How are 
various terms being used, where does common ground lie 
and what questions are being formulated? Where is 
clarification needed? Are any new experiments suggested? In 
what direction should these concepts be developed? Who are 
the main players in this area and is advantage to be gained by 
bringing them together at this point? Would it be useful to 
publish a review or overview in this field?

