

"The style is the man himself," people repeat without seeing any harm in 
it, and without worrying about the fact that man is no longer so sure a ref- 
erence point. Besides, the image of the cloth that adorned Buffon while 
he wrote is there to keep us inattentive. 

A re-edition of Voyage a Montbard (published posthumously in the 
year IX by the Sol vet press), penned by Herault de Sechelles — the title 
alters that of the edition published in 1 785, Visite a Buffon — gives us pause 
for thought. Not simply because one finds in it another style, which pre- 
figures the best of our buffoonish reporting, but because it resituates the 
saying itself in a context of impertinence in which the host is in no wise 
outdone by his guest. 

For the man discussed in the adage — which was already classic by that 
time [1785], having been extracted from Buffon's discourse to the Acad- 
emy — proves, in Sechelles' portrait, to be a fantasy of the great man, Buf- 
fon turning it into a scenario that involves his whole household. There is 
nothing natural here; Voltaire generalizes maliciously on this point, as we 
recall. 

Shall we adopt the formulation — the style is the man — if we simply 
add to it: the man one addresses? 

This would be simply to comply with the principle I have proposed: 
that in language our message comes to us from the Other, and — to state 



4 Ecrits 

the rest of the principle — in an inverted form. (Let me remind you that 
this principle applied to its own enunciation since, although I proposed it, 
it received its finest formulation from another, an eminent interlocutor.) 

But if man were reduced to being nothing but the echoing locus of our 
discourse, wouldn't the question then come back to us, "What is the point 
of addressing our discourse to him?" 

That is the question posed to me by the new reader, this reader being 
the reason that has been put forward to convince me to publish a collec- 
tion of my writings. 

I am offering this reader an easy entryway into my style by opening 
this collection with "The Purloined Letter," even though that means tak- 
ing it out of chronological order. 
10 It will be up to this reader to give the letter in question, beyond those 

to whom it was one day addressed, the very thing he will find as its con- 
cluding word: its destination. Namely, Poe's message deciphered and 
returning from him, the reader, so that in reading this message he realizes 
that he is no more feigned than the truth is when it inhabits fiction. 

This "purloining of the letter" [vol de la lettre] will be said to be the 
parody of my discourse, whether one confines one 's attention to the ety- 
mology of "parody," which indicates an accompaniment and implies the 
precedence of the trajectory that is parodied, or, in returning to the usual 
meaning of the term, one sees the shadow of the intellectual master dis- 
pelled in it in order to obtain the effect that I prefer to it. 

The title of the poem "The Rape of the Lock" * [le vol de la boucle] is 
evoked here in which Pope, thanks to parody, ravishes — from the epic, in 
his case — the secret feature of its derisory stakes. 

Our task brings back this charming lock, in the topological sense of 
the term [boucle also means loop]: a knot whose trajectory closes on the 
basis of its inverted redoubling — namely, such as I have recently formu- 
lated it as sustaining the subject's structure. 

It is here that my students would be right to recognize the "already" 
for which they sometimes content themselves with less well-founded 
homologies. 

For I decipher here in Poe 's fiction, which is so powerful in the math- 
ematical sense of the term, the division in which the subject is verified in 
the fact that an object traverses him without them interpenetrating in any 
respect, this division being at the crux of what emerges at the end of this 
collection that goes by the name of object a (to be read: little a). 

It is the object that (cor) responds to the question about style that I am 



Overture to this Collection 

raising right at the outset. In the place man marked for Buffon, I call for 
the falling away [chute] of this object, which is revealing due to the fact 
that the fall isolates this object, both as the cause of desire in which the 
subject disappears and as sustaining the subject between truth and knowl- 
edge. With this itinerary, of which these writings are the milestones, and 
this style, which the audience to whom they were addressed required, I 
want to lead the reader to a consequence in which he must pay the price 
with elbow grease. 

October 1966 



II 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 



Und wenn es uns gliickt, 
Und wenn es sick schickt, 
So sind es Gedanken. 



My research has led me to the realization that repetition automatism (Wieder- 
holungs^wang) has its basis in what I have called the insistence of the signify- 
ing chain. I have isolated this notion as a correlate of the ex-sistence (that is, 
of the eccentric place) in which we must necessarily locate the subject of the 
unconscious, if we are to take Freud's discovery seriously. As we know, it is 
in the experience inaugurated by psychoanalysis that we can grasp by what 
oblique imaginary means the symbolic takes hold in even the deepest recesses 
of the human organism. 

The teaching of this seminar is designed to maintain that imaginary effects, 
far from representing the core of analytic experience, give us nothing of any 
consistency unless they are related to the symbolic chain that binds and orients 
them. 

I am, of course, aware of the importance of imaginary impregnations (Pra- 
gung) in the partializations of the symbolic alternative that give the signify- 
ing chain its appearance. Nevertheless, I posit that it is the law specific to this 
chain which governs the psychoanalytic effects that are determinant for the 
subject — effects such as foreclosure {Verwerfung), repression {Verdrangung), 
and negation {Verneinung) itself — and I add with the appropriate emphasis 
that these effects follow the displacement (Entstellung) of the signifier so faith- 
fully that imaginary factors, despite their inertia, figure only as shadows and 
reflections therein. 

But this emphasis would be lavished in vain if it merely served, in your 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" y 

view, to abstract a general form from phenomena whose particularity in ana- 
lytic experience would remain the core thing to you and whose original com- 
posite nature could be broken down only through artifice. 

This is why I have decided to illustrate for you today a truth which may be 12 

drawn from the moment in Freud's thought we have been studying — namely, 
that it is the symbolic order which is constitutive for the subject — by demon- 
strating in a story the major determination the subject receives from the itin- 
erary of a signifier. 

It is this truth, let us note, that makes the very existence of fiction possible. 
Thus a fable is as appropriate as any other story for shedding light on it — pro- 
vided we are willing to put the fable 's coherence to the test. With this proviso, 
a fable even has the advantage of manifesting symbolic necessity all more purely 
in that we might be inclined to believe it is governed by the arbitrary. 

This is why, without looking any further, I have taken my example from 
the very story in which we find the dialectic of the game of "even or odd," 
from which we very recently gleaned something of importance. It is proba- 
bly no accident that this story proved propitious for the continuation of a line 
of research which had already relied upon it. 

As you know, I am referring to the tale Baudelaire translated into French 
as "La lettre volee." In it we must immediately distinguish between a drama 
and its narration as well as the conditions of that narration. 

We quickly perceive, moreover, what makes these components necessary 
and realize that their composer could not have created them unintentionally. 

For the narration effectively doubles the drama with a commentary with- 
out which no mise-en-scene would be possible. Let us say that the action would 
remain, strictly speaking, invisible to the audience — aside from the fact that 
the dialogue would be expressly and by dramatic necessity devoid of what- 
ever meaning it might have for a listener. In other words, nothing of the drama 
could appear, either in the framing of the images or the sampling of the sounds, 
without the oblique light shed, so to speak, on each scene by the narration 
from the point of view that one of the actors had while playing his role in it. 

There are two such scenes, the first of which I shall immediately designate 
as the primal scene, and by no means inattentively, since the second may be 
considered its repetition in the sense of the latter term that I have been artic- 
ulating in this very seminar. 

The primal scene is thus performed, we are told, in the royal boudoir, such 13 

that we suspect that the "personage of most exalted station," also referred to 
as the "illustrious personage," who is alone there when she receives a letter, 
is the Queen. This sense is confirmed by the awkward situation she is put in 
"by the entrance of the other exalted personage," of whom we have already 



8 Ecrits 

been told prior to this account that, were he to come to know of the letter in 
question, it would jeopardize for the lady nothing less than her "honor and 
peace." Any doubt that he is in fact the King is promptly dissipated in the 
course of the scene which begins with the entrance of Minister D — . For at 
that moment the Queen can do no better than to take advantage of the King's 
inattentiveness by leaving the letter on the table turned face down, "address 
uppermost." This does not, however, escape the Minister's lynx eye, nor does 
he fail to notice the Queen's distress and thus to fathom her secret. From then 
on everything proceeds like clockwork. After dealing with the business of 
the day with his customary speed and intelligence, the Minister draws from 
his pocket a letter similar in appearance to the one before his eyes and, after 
pretending to read it, places it next to the other. A bit more conversation to 
pull the wool over the royal eyes, whereupon he picks up the embarrassing 
letter without flinching and decamps, while the Queen, on whom none of his 
maneuver has been lost, remains unable to intervene for fear of attracting the 
attention of her royal spouse, who is standing at her elbow at that very 
moment. 

An ideal spectator might have noticed nothing of this operation in which 
no one batted an eye, and whose quotient is that the Minister has filched from 
the Queen her letter and, even more important, that the Queen knows that he 
now has it, and by no means innocently. 

A remainder that no analyst will neglect, trained as he is to remember every- 
thing having to do with the signif ier even if he does not always know what to 
do with it: the letter, left on hand by the Minister, which the Queen is now free 
to crumple up. 

Second scene: in the Minister's office at the Ministerial hotel. We know from 
the account the Prefect of Police has given Dupin, whose genius for solving 
enigmas Poe mentions here for the second time, that the police have searched 
the hotel and its surroundings from top to bottom for the last three months, 
returning there as often as the Minister's regular absences at night allow them 
14 to. In vain, however, although anyone can deduce from the situation that the 

Minister keeps the letter within easy reach. 

Dupin calls on the Minister. The latter greets him with a show of noncha- 
lance, affecting in his conversation romantic ennui. Meanwhile Dupin, who is 
not taken in by this feigning, inspects the premises, his eyes protected by green 
spectacles. When his gaze alights upon a very chafed letter — which seems to 
have been abandoned in a compartment of a wretched, eye-catching, 
trumpery card-rack of pasteboard, hanging right smack in the middle of the 
mantelpiece — he already knows that he has found what he was looking for. 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" ,9 

His conviction is reinforced by the very details which seem designed to con- 
tradict the description he has been given of the stolen letter, with the excep- 
tion of the size, which fits. 

Whereupon he has but to take his leave, after having "forgotten" his snuff- 
box on the table, in order to return the following day to reclaim it — armed 
with a facsimile of the letter in its present state. When an incident out in the 
street, prepared for the right moment, draws the Minister to the window, Dupin 
seizes the opportunity to snatch, in his turn, the letter while replacing it with 
an imitation [semblant\ and need but maintain the appearances of a normal 
exit thereafter. 

Here too all has transpired, if not without any sound, at least without any 
din. The quotient of the operation is that the Minister no longer has the let- 
ter, but he knows nothing of it and is far from suspecting that it is Dupin who 
ravished it from him. Moreover, what he is left with here is far from insignif- 
icant for what follows. I shall return later to what led Dupin to jot something 
down on his factitious letter. In any case, when the Minister tries to make use 
of it, he will be able to read the following words, whose source, Dupin tells 
us, is Crebillon's^rre'^ written so that he may recognize Dupin's hand: 

Un dessein sifuneste 

S'ilnest digne d'Atree, est digne de Thyeste. 

Need I emphasize the resemblance between these two actions? Yes, for the 
similarity I have in mind is not made up of the simple union of traits chosen 
only in order to prepare [appareiller] their difference. And it would not suf- 
fice to retain the traits of resemblance at the expense of the others for any truth 
whatsoever to result therefrom. It is, rather, the inter subjectivity by which the 
two actions are motivated that I wish to highlight, as well as the three terms 1 5 

with which that inter subjectivity structures them. 

These terms derive their privileged status from the fact that they corre- 
spond both to the three logical moments through which decision is precipi- 
tated and to the three places which this decision assigns to the subjects that it 
separates out. 

This decision is reached in the moment of a glance [regard]. 1 For the maneu- 
vers that follow, however stealthily that moment is prolonged in them, add 
nothing to it, no more than their deferral of the opportunity in the second scene 
disrupts the unity of that moment. 

This glance presupposes two others, which it assembles to provide a view 
of the opening left in their fallacious complementarity, anticipating there the 



io Ecrits 

plunder afforded by that uncovering. Thus three moments, ordering three 
glances, sustained by three subjects, incarnated in each case by different people. 

The first is based on a glance that sees nothing: the King and then the police. 

The second is based on a glance which sees that the first sees nothing and 
deceives itself into thereby believing to be covered what it hides: the Queen 
and then the Minister. 

The third is based on a glance which sees that the first two glances leave 
what must be hidden uncovered to whomever would seize it: the Minister and 
finally Dupin. 

In order to get you to grasp in its unity the inter subjective complex thus 
described, I would willingly seek patronage for it in the technique legendar- 
ily attributed to the ostrich [autruche] when it seeks shelter from danger. For 
this technique might finally be qualified as political, distributed as it is here 
among three partners, the second believing himself invisible because the first 
has his head stuck in the sand, all the while letting the third calmly pluck his 
rear. We need but enrich its proverbial denomination by a letter, producing la 
politique de Uautruiche, for this technique in itself to finally take on a new ever- 
lasting meaning. 

Having thus established the intersubjective module of the action that 
repeats, we must now indicate in it a repetition automatism in the sense that 
interests us in Freud's work. 
1 6 The fact that we have here a plurality of subjects can, of course, in no way 

constitute an objection to those who are long accustomed to the perspectives 
summarized by my formulation: the unconscious is the Other's discourse, I will 
not remind you now what the notion of the inmixing of subjects, recently intro- 
duced in my reanalysis of the dream of Irma's injection, adds here. 

What interests me today is the way in which the subjects, owing to their 
displacement, relay each other in the course of the intersubjective repetition. 

We shall see that their displacement is determined by the place that a pure 
signifier — the purloined letter — comes to occupy in their trio. This is what 
will confirm for us that it is repetition automatism. 

It does not, however, seem superfluous, before pursuing this line of inquiry, 
to ask whether the aim of the tale and the interest we take in it — inasmuch as 
they coincide — do not lie elsewhere. 

Can we consider the fact that the tale is told to us as a mystery story to be 
a simple "rationalization," as we say in our crude jargon? 

In truth, we would be justified in considering this to be highly dubious, 
noting as we do that everything about a crime or offense that creates such a 
mystery — its nature and motives, instruments and execution, the procedure 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" n 

used to discover its author, and the means employed to convict him for it — is 
carefully eliminated here at the beginning of each episode. 

Indeed, the act of deceit is as clearly known from the outset as the plotting 
of the culprit and its effects on his victim. The problem, as it is exposed to us, 
is limited to the search for the deceitfully acquired object, for the purposes of 
restitution; and it seems quite intentional that the solution is already known 
when it is explained to us. Is that how we are kept in suspense? However much 
credit we may give the conventions of a genre for arousing a specific interest 
in the reader, we should not forget that the "Dupin tale" — this being the sec- 
ond to come out — is a prototype, and that since it receives its genre only from 
the first, it is a little too early for the author to play on a convention. 

It would, however, be equally excessive to reduce the whole thing to a fable 1 7 

whose moral would be that, in order to shelter from inquisitive eyes corre- 
spondence whose secrecy is sometimes necessary to conjugal peace, it suffices 
to leave the letters lying around on one's table, even if one turns them signi- 
fying face down. For that would be a lure which, personally, I would never 
recommend anyone try, lest he be disappointed at having trusted in it. 

Is there then no other mystery here than incompetence resulting in failure 
on the part of the Prefect of Police? Is there not a certain discordance on 
Dupin's part, which we are loath to admit, between the assuredly penetrat- 
ing remarks (which are not, however, always absolutely relevant when gen- 
eralized) with which he introduces us to his method and the way in which he 
in fact intervenes? 

Were we to pursue a bit further our sense that we are being hoodwinked, 
we might soon begin to wonder whether — from the inaugural scene, which 
only the rank of the protagonists saves from degenerating into vaudeville, to 
the descent into ridicule that seems to await the Minister at the story's con- 
clusion — it is not, indeed, the fact that everyone is duped which gives us such 
pleasure here. 

I would be all the more inclined to think so in that, along with my readers, 
I would find anew here the definition I once gave, somewhere in passing, of 
the modern hero, "represented by ridiculous feats in situations of confusion." 2 

But are we ourselves not taken with the imposing bearing of the amateur 
detective, prototype of a new kind of braggart, as yet safe from the insipidity 
of our contemporary superman*? 

That was a joke, yet it makes us note, by way of contrast, so perfect a 
verisimilitude in this tale that it may be said that truth here reveals its fictional 
ordering. 

For this is certainly the pathway along which the reasons for this verisimil- 
itude lead us. Entering first into its procedure, we perceive, in effect, a new 



iz Ecrits 

drama that I would call complementary to the first, since the first was what is 

1 8 termed a silent drama whereas the interest of the second plays on the proper- 
ties of discourse. 3 

Indeed, while it is obvious that each of the two scenes of the real drama is 
narrated in the course of a different dialogue, one must be provided with cer- 
tain notions brought out in my teaching to realize that this is not done simply 
to make the exposition more pleasing, but that the dialogues themselves, in 
the opposite use they make of the virtues of speech, take on a tension that makes 
them into a different drama, one which my terminology will distinguish from 
the first as sustaining itself in the symbolic order. 

The first dialogue — between the Prefect of Police and Dupin — is played 
out as if it were between a deaf man and one who hears. That is, it represents 
the veritable complexity of what is ordinarily simplified, with the most con- 
fused of results, in the notion of communication. 

This example demonstrates how communication can give the impression, 
at which theorists too often stop, of conveying in its transmission but one mean- 
ing, as though the highly significant commentary into which he who hears 
integrates it could be considered neutralized because it is unperceived by he 
who does not hear. 

The fact remains that if we only retain the dialogue's meaning as a report, 
its verisimilitude appears to depend on a guarantee of accuracy. But the report 
then turns out to be more fruitful than it seems, provided we demonstrate its 
procedure, as we shall see by confining our attention to the recounting of the 
first scene. 

For the double and even triple subjective filter through which that scene 
comes to us — a narration by Dupin's close friend (whom I will refer to hence- 
forth as the story's general narrator) of the account by which the Prefect reveals 
to Dupin the version the Queen gave him of it — is not merely the consequence 
of a fortuitous arrangement. 

If, indeed, the extremity to which the original narrator is reduced precludes 

19 her altering any of the events, we would be wrong to believe that the Prefect 
is authorized to lend her his voice here only owing to the lack of imagination 
for which he holds, as it were, the patent. 

The fact that the message is retransmitted in this way assures us of some- 
thing that is absolutely not self-evident: that the message truly belongs to the 
dimension of language. 

Those who are here are familiar with my remarks on the subject, specifi- 
cally those illustrated by the counterexample of the supposed language of bees, 
in which a linguist 4 can see nothing more than a signaling of the location of 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" ij 

objects — in other words, an imaginary function that is simply more differen- 
tiated than the others. 

Let me emphasize here that such a form of communication is not absent 
in man, however evanescent the natural pregivenness [donne naturel\ of objects 
may be for him due to the disintegration they undergo through his use of 
symbols. 

Something equivalent may, in effect, be grasped in the communion estab- 
lished between two people in their hatred directed at a common object, with 
the proviso that this can never occur except in the case of one single object, 
an object defined by the characteristics of (the) being that each of the two 
refuses to accept. 

But such communication is not transmittable in symbolic form. It can only 
be sustained in relation to this object. This is why it can bring together an indef- 
inite number of subjects in a common "ideal"; the communication of one sub- 
ject with another within the group thus constituted will nonetheless remain 
irreducibly mediated by an ineffable relation. 

This excursion is not merely a reminder here of principles distantly 
addressed to those who tax me with neglecting nonverbal communication; in 
determining the scope of what discourse repeats, it prepares the question of 
what symptoms repeat. 

Thus the indirect relating [of the first scene] clarifies the dimension of lan- 
guage, and the general narrator, by redoubling it, "hypothetically" adds noth- 
ing to it. But this is not at all true of his role in the second dialogue. 

For the latter is opposed to the first like the poles in language that I have 20 

distinguished elsewhere and that are opposed to each other like word to speech. 

Which is to say that we shift here from the field of accuracy to the register 
of truth. Now this register — I dare think I need not go back over this — is situ- 
ated somewhere else altogether: at the very foundation of intersubjectivity. It is 
situated where the subject can grasp nothing but the very subjectivity that con- 
stitutes an Other as an absolute. I shall confine my attention, in order to indi- 
cate its place here, to evoking the dialogue which seems to me to warrant its 
attribution as a Jewish joke due to the nakedness with which the relation 
between the signifier and speech appears in the entreaty which brings it to a 
head: "Why are you lying to me?" one character exclaims exasperatedly, "Yes, 
why are you lying to me by saying you're going to Cracow in order to make me 
believe you're going to Lemberg, when in reality you are going to Cracow?" 

A similar question might be raised in our minds by the torrent of aporias, 
eristic enigmas, paradoxes, and even quips presented to us as an introduction 
to Dupin's method if the fact that they were confided to us by a would-be dis- 



14 Ecrits 

ciple did not add some virtue to them, owing to the act of delegation. Such is 
the unmistakable prestige of legacies: the witness' faithfulness is the wool pulled 
over the eyes of those who might criticize his testimony. 

What could be more convincing, moreover, than the gesture of turning 
one 's cards face up on the table? It is so convincing that we are momentarily 
persuaded that the prestidigitator has in fact demonstrated, as he promised he 
would, how his trick was performed, whereas he has only performed it anew 
in a purer form; this moment makes us appreciate the supremacy of the signi- 
fier in the subject. 

This is how Dupin operates when he starts with the story of the child prodigy 
who takes in all his classmates at the game of even or odd with his trick of 
identifying with his opponent, concerning which I have shown that he cannot 
reach the first level of its mental elaboration — namely, the notion of inter- 
subjective alternation — without immediately being tripped up by the stop of 
its recurrence. 5 

This does not stop us from being treated — in order to dazzle us — to the 
21 names of La Rochefoucauld, La Bruyere, Machiavelli, and Campanella, 

whose reputations now seem trivial compared to the child's prowess. 

And then to Chamfort, whose maxim that "the odds are that every idea 
embraced by the public, every accepted convention, is foolish, since it suits 
the greatest number" will indubitably satisfy all those who think they escape 
its law, that is, precisely, the greatest number. The fact that Dupin taxes the 
French with dishonesty when they apply the word "analysis" to algebra has 
little chance of threatening our pride when, moreover, the freeing of that term 
for other ends implies nothing that should stop a psychoanalyst from consid- 
ering himself in a position to assert his rights to it. And off he goes making 
philological remarks which should positively delight lovers of Latin; when he 
recalls without deigning to say any more about it that " 'ambitus [doesn't imply] 
'ambition,' 'religio 'religion,' 'homines honesti a set of honorable men," who 
among you would not take pleasure in remembering . . . what these words 
mean to assiduous readers of Cicero and Lucretius? No doubt Poe is having 
a good time . . . 

But a suspicion dawns on us: isn't this display of erudition designed to make 
us hear the magic words of our drama? 6 Isn't the prestidigitator repeating his 
trick before our eyes, without deluding us into thinking that he is divulging 
his secret to us this time, but taking his gamble even further by really shed- 
ding light on it for us without us seeing a thing? That would be the height of 
the illusionist's art: to have one of his fictional beings truly fool us. 

And isn't it such effects which justify our harmless way of referring to many 
imaginary heroes as real personages? 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" i5 

Thus, when we are open to hearing the way in which Martin Heidegger 
uncovers for us in the word alethes the play of truth, we merely rediscover a 
secret to which truth has always initiated her lovers, and through which they 
have learned that it is in hiding that she offers herself to them most truly. 

Thus, even if Dupin's comments did not defy us so blatantly to lend ere- 22 

dence to them [yfier], we would still have to make this attempt against the 
opposite temptation. 

Let us thus detect his track [depistons safoulee] where it throws us off track 
[depute]. 7 And first of all in the criticism by which he explains the Prefect's 
lack of success. We already saw it surface in those furtive gibes the Prefect, in 
the first conversation with Dupin, paid no mind, finding in them only a pre- 
text for hilarity. The fact that it is, as Dupin insinuates, because a problem is 
too simple, indeed too self-evident, that it may appear obscure, will never have 
any more impact on him than a somewhat vigorous rub of the ribcage. 

Everything is done to make us believe he is an imbecile. This is powerfully 
articulated in the claim that he and his henchmen will never conceive of any- 
thing beyond what an ordinary rascal might imagine for hiding an object — 
that is, precisely the all-too-well-known series of extraordinary hiding places, 
running the gamut from hidden desk drawers to removable tabletops, from the 
unstitched upholstery of chairs to their hollowed-out legs, and from the back 
side of the quicksilvering of mirrors to the thickness of book bindings. 

This gives way to making fun of the Prefect's error when he deduces that 
because the Minister is a poet, he is only one remove from a fool, an error, it 
is argued, that simply consists, although this is hardly negligible, in a non dis- 
tributio medii, since it is far from following from the fact that all fools are poets. 

Yes indeed. But we ourselves are left to err regarding what constitutes the 
poet's superiority in the art of concealment — even if he turns out to be a math- 
ematician to boot — since we suddenly lose whatever momentum we had when 
we are dragged into a thicket of unprovoked arguments directed against the 
reasoning of mathematicians, who have never, to my knowledge, showed such 
devotion to their formulas as to identify them with reasoning reason. At least, 
let me bear witness to the fact that, unlike what seems to be Poe 's experience, 23 

I occasionally hazard such serious mischief (virtual blasphemy, according to 
Poe) before my friend Riguet — whose presence here guarantees you that my 
incursions into combinatorial analysis do not lead us astray — as to question 
whether perhaps "x 2 +px is not altogether equal to ^," without ever (here I 
refute Poe) having to fend off any unexpected attack. 

Isn't so much intelligence being expended then simply to divert our atten- 
tion from what had been indicated earlier as given, namely, that the police have 
looked everywhere? We were to understand this — regarding the field in which 



i6 Ecrits 

the police, not without reason, assumed the letter must be found — in the sense 
of an exhaustion of space, which is no doubt theoretical but which we are 
expected to take literally if the story is to have its piquancy. The division of 
the entire surface into numbered "compartments," which was the principle 
governing the operation, is presented to us as so accurate that "the fiftieth part 
of a line," it is said, could not escape the probing of the investigators. Are we 
not then within our rights to ask how it happened that the letter was not found 
anywhere, or rather to observe that nothing we are told about a higher-caliber 
conception of concealment ultimately explains how the letter managed to 
escape detection, since the field exhaustively combed did in fact contain it, as 
Dupin's discovery eventually proved? 

Must the letter then, of all objects, have been endowed with the property 
of "nullibiety," to use a term which the well-known Roget's Thesaurus picks 
up from the semiological Utopia of Bishop Wilkins? 8 

It is evident ("a little too self-evident") 9 that the letter has, in effect, rela- 
tions with location [le lieu] for which no French word has the entire import of 
the English adjective "odd." Bizarre, by which Baudelaire regularly translates 
it into French, is only approximate. Let us say that these relations are singuliers 
(singular), for they are the very same ones that the signifier maintains with 
location. 
24 You realize that my intention is not to turn them into "subtle" relations, 

that my aim is not to confuse letter with spirit [esprit], even when we receive 
the former by pneumatic dispatch, and that I readily admit that one kills if the 
other gives life, insofar as the signifier — you are perhaps beginning to catch 
my drift — materializes the instance of death. But whereas it is first of all the 
materiality of the signifier that I have emphasized, that materiality is singular 
in many ways, the first of which is not to allow of partition. Cut a letter into 
small pieces, and it remains the letter that it is — and this in a completely dif- 
ferent sense than Gestalttheorie can account for with the latent vitalism in its 
notion of the whole. 10 

Language hands down its sentence to those who know how to hear it: 
through the use of the article employed as a partitive particle. Indeed, it is here 
that spirit — if spirit be living signification — seems, no less singularly, to allow 
for quantification more than the letter does. To begin with, through the very 
signification that allows us to say, "this discourse full 0/meaning" [plein de 
signification], just as it allows us to recognize some intentionality [de Vinten- 
tion] in an act, to deplore that there is no longer any love [plus A' amour], to 
store up hatred [de la haine] and expend devotion [du devouement], and to note 
that so much infatuation [tant d' 'infatuation] can be reconciled with the fact 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" ij 

that there will always be plenty of 'ass [de la cuisse] to go around and brawling 
among men [du rififi che\ les hommes]. 

But as for the letter itself, whether we take it in the sense of a typographi- 
cal element, of an epistle, or of what constitutes a man of letters, we commonly 
say that what people say must be understood a la lettre (to the letter or liter- 
ally), that a letter is being held for you at the post office, or even that you are 
well versed in letters — never that there is (some amount of) letter [de la let- 
tre] anywhere, whatever the context, even to designate late mail. 

For the signifier is a unique unit of being which, by its very nature, is the 
symbol of but an absence. This is why we cannot say of the purloined letter 
that, like other objects, it must be or not be somewhere but rather that, unlike 
them, it will be and will not be where it is wherever it goes. 

Let us, in fact, look more closely at what happens to the police. We are 
spared none of the details concerning the procedures used in searching the 
space subjected to their investigation: from the division of that space into vol- 25 

umes from which the slightest bulk cannot escape detection, to needles prob- 
ing soft cushions, and, given that they cannot simply sound the hard wood [for 
cavities], to an examination with a microscope to detect gimlet-dust from any 
holes drilled in it, and even the slightest gaping in the joints [of the furniture]. 
As their network tightens to the point that, not satisfied with shaking the pages 
of books, the police take to counting them, don't we see space itself shed its 
leaves like the letter? 

But the seekers have such an immutable notion of reality [reel] that they 
fail to notice that their search tends to transform it into its object — a trait by 
which they might be able to distinguish that object from all others. 

This would no doubt be too much to ask them, not because of their lack of 
insight but rather because of ours. For their imbecility is of neither the indi- 
vidual nor the corporate variety; its source is subjective. It is the imbecility of 
the realist who does not pause to observe that nothing, however deep into the 
bowels of the world a hand may shove it, will ever be hidden there, since another 
hand can retrieve it, and that what is hidden is never but what is not in its place 
[manque a sa place], as a call slip says of a volume mislaid in a library. And 
even if the book were on an adjacent shelf or in the next slot, it would be hid- 
den there, however visible it may seem there. For it can literally [a la lettre] be 
said that something is not in its place only of what can change places — that is, 
of the symbolic. For the real, whatever upheaval we subject it to, is always and 
in every case in its place; it carries its place stuck to the sole of its shoe, there 
being nothing that can exile it from it. 

Now, to return to our policemen, how could they have grasped the letter 



1 8 Ecrits 

when they took it from the place where it was hidden? What were they turn- 
ing over with their fingers but something that did not jit the description they 
had been given of it? "A letter, a litter": in Joyce's circle, they played on the 
homophony of the two words in English. 1 ] The seeming scrap of waste paper 
[de'chet] the police were handling at that moment did not reveal its other nature 

26 by being only half torn in two. A different cipher on a seal [cachet] of another 
color and the distinctive mark [cachet] of a different handwriting in the super- 
scription served as the most inviolable of hiding places [cachettes] here. And 
if they stopped at the reverse side of the letter, on which, as we know, the recip- 
ient's address was written at that time, it was because the letter had for them 
no other side but this reverse side. 

What might they have detected on the basis of its obverse? Its message, as 
it is often said, an answer pleasing to our amateur cybernetic streak? . . . But 
does it not occur to us that this message has already reached its addressee and 
has even been left behind along with the insignificant scrap of paper, which 
now represents it no less well than the original note? 

If we could say that a letter has fulfilled its destiny after having served its 
function, the ceremony of returning letters would be a less commonly 
accepted way to bring to a close the extinguishing of the fires of Cupid's fes- 
tivities. The signifier is not functional. And the mobilization of the elegant 
society, whose frolics we are following, would have no meaning if the letter 
limited itself to having but one. Announcing that meaning to a squad of cops 
would hardly be an adequate means of keeping it secret. 

We could even admit that the letter has an entirely different (if not a more 
consuming) meaning to the Queen than the one it offers up to the Minister's 
ken. The sequence of events would not be appreciably affected, not even if the 
letter were strictly incomprehensible to a reader not in the know. 

For the letter is certainly not incomprehensible to everybody, since, as the 
Prefect emphatically assures us, eliciting everyone 's mockery, "the disclosure 
of the document to a third person, who shall be nameless" (his name leaping 
to mind like a pig's tail twixt the teeth of Father Ubu) "would bring in ques- 
tion the honor of a personage of most exalted station" — indeed, the illustri- 
ous personage's very "honor and peace [would be] so jeopardized." 

Hence it would be dangerous to let circulate not only the meaning but also 
the text of the message, and it would be all the more dangerous the more harm- 
less it might appear to be, since the risks of an unwitting indiscretion by one 
of the letter's trustees would thus be increased. 

Nothing then can save the police 's position, and nothing would be changed 

27 by making them more "cultured." Scripta manent: in vain would they learn 
from a deluxe-edition humanism the proverbial lesson which the words verba 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 19 

volant conclude. Would that it were the case that writings remain, as is true, 
rather, of spoken words [paroles]: for the indelible debt of those words at least 
enriches our acts with its transfers. 

Writings scatter to the four winds the blank checks of a mad charge of the 
cavalry. And were there no loose sheets, there would be no purloined letters. 

But what of it? For there to be purloined letters, we wonder, to whom does a 
letter belong? I stressed a moment ago the oddity implicit in returning a let- 
ter to the person who had formerly let ardently fly its pledge. And we gener- 
ally deem unworthy the method of such premature publications, as the one by 
which the Knight of Eon put several of his correspondents in a rather pitiful 
position. 

Might a letter to which the sender retains certain rights then not belong 
altogether to the person to whom it is addressed? Or might it be that the lat- 
ter was never the true addressee? 

What will enlighten us is what may at first obscure the matter — namely, 
the fact that the story tells us virtually nothing about the sender or about the 
contents of the letter. We are merely informed that the Minister immediately 
recognized the hand that wrote the Queen's address on it and it is only inci- 
dentally mentioned, in a discussion of the camouflaging of the letter by the 
Minister, that the original cipher is that of the Duke of S — . As for the letter's 
import, we know only the dangers it would bring with it were it to fall into 
the hands of a certain third party, and that its possession has allowed the Min- 
ister to wield, "for political purposes, to a very dangerous extent," the power 
it assures him over the person concerned. But this tells us nothing about the 
message it carries. 

Love letter or conspiratorial letter, informant's letter or directive, demand- 
ing letter or letter of distress, we can rest assured of but one thing: the Queen 
cannot let her lord and master know of it. 

Now these terms, far from allowing for the disparaging tone they have in 
bourgeois comedy, take on an eminent meaning since they designate her sov- 28 

ereign, to whom she is bound by pledge of loyalty, and doubly so, since her 
role as spouse does not relieve her of her duties as a subject, but rather ele- 
vates her to the role of guardian of the power that royalty by law incarnates, 
which is called legitimacy. 

Thus, whatever action the Queen has decided to take regarding the letter, 
the fact remains that this letter is the symbol of a pact and that, even if its 
addressee does not assume responsibility for this pact, the existence of the let- 
ter situates her in a symbolic chain foreign to the one which constitutes her 
loyalty. Its incompatibility with her loyalty is proven by the fact that posses- 



20 Ecrits 

sion of the letter is impossible to bring forward publicly as legitimate, and that 
in order to have this possession respected, the Queen can only invoke her right 
to privacy, whose privilege is based on the very honor that this possession 
violates. 

For she who incarnates the graceful figure of sovereignty cannot welcome 
even a private communication without power being concerned, and she can- 
not lay claim to secrecy in relation to the sovereign without her actions becom- 
ing clandestine. 

Hence, the responsibility of the letter's author takes a back seat to that of 
its holder: for the offense to majesty is compounded by high treason. 

I say the "holder" and not the "owner." For it becomes clear thus that the 
addressee 's ownership of the letter is no less questionable than that of anyone 
else into whose hands it may fall, since nothing concerning the existence of 
the letter can fall back into place without the person whose prerogatives it 
infringes on having pronounced judgment on it. 

However, none of this implies that, even though the letter's secrecy is inde- 
fensible, it would in any way be honorable to denounce that secret. Honesti 
homines, decent people, cannot get off the hook so easily. There is more than 
one religio, and sacred ties shall not cease to pull us in opposite directions any 
time soon. As for ambitus, a detour, as we see, is not always inspired by ambi- 
tion. For although I am taking a detour here, I have not stolen [vole] it — that's 
the word for it — since, to be quite frank, I have adopted the title Baudelaire 
gave the story only in order to stress, not the signifier's "conventional" nature, 
29 as it is incorrectly put, but rather its priority over the signified. Despite his 

devotion, Baudelaire nevertheless betrayed Poe by translating his title "The 
Purloined Letter" as "La lettre volee" (the stolen letter), the English title con- 
taining a word rare enough for us to find it easier to define its etymology than 
its usage. 

To purloin, says the Oxford English Dictionary, is an Anglo-French 
word — that is, it is composed of the prefix pur-, found in purpose, purchase, 
and purport, and of the Old French word loing, loinger, longe. We recognize in 
the first element the Latin^ro-, as opposed to ante, insofar as it presupposes a 
back in front of which it stands, possibly to guarantee it or even to stand in as 
its guarantor (whereas ante goes forth to meet what comes to meet it). As for 
the second, the Old French word loigner is a verb that attributes place au loing 
(or longe), which does not mean au loin (far off), but au long de (alongside). 
To purloin is thus mettre de cote (to set aside) or, to resort to a colloquialism 
which plays off the two meanings, mettre a gauche (to put to the left side [lit- 
erally] and to tuck away). 

Our detour is thus validated by the very object which leads us into it: for 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 21 

we are quite simply dealing with a letter which has been detoured, one whose 
trajectory has been prolonged (this is literally the English word in the title), or, 
to resort to the language of the post office, a letter en souffrance (awaiting deliv- 
ery or unclaimed). 

Here then, the letter's singularity, reduced to its simplest expression, is "sim- 
ple and odd," as we are told on the very first page of the story; and the letter 
is, as the title indicates, the true subject of the tale. Since it can be made to take 
a detour, it must have a trajectory which is proper to it — a feature in which its 
impact as a signifier is apparent here. For we have learned to conceive of the 
signifier as sustaining itself only in a displacement comparable to that found in 
electronic news strips or in the rotating memories of our machines-that-think- 
like-men, 12 this because of the alternating operation at its core that requires it 
to leave its place, if only to return to it by a circular path. 

This is what happens in repetition automatism. What Freud teaches us in the 30 

text I have been commenting on is that the subject follows the channels of 
the symbolic. But what is illustrated here is more gripping still: It is not only the 
subject, but the subjects, caught in their inter subjectivity, who line up — in other 
words, they are our ostriches, to whom we thus return here, and who, more 
docile than sheep, model their very being on the moment of the signifying 
chain that runs through them. 

If what Freud discovered, and rediscovers ever more abruptly, has a mean- 
ing, it is that the signifier's displacement determines subjects' acts, destiny, 
refusals, blindnesses, success, and fate, regardless of their innate gifts and 
instruction, and irregardless of their character or sex; and that everything per- 
taining to the psychological pregiven follows willy-nilly the signifier's train, 
like weapons and baggage. 

Here we are, in fact, once again at the crossroads at which we had left our 
drama and its round with the question of the way in which the subjects relay 
each other in it. My apologue is designed to show that it is the letter and its 
detour which governs their entrances and roles. While the letter may be en 
souffrance, they are the ones who shall suffer from it. By passing beneath its 
shadow, they become its reflection. By coming into the letter's possession — 
an admirably ambiguous bit of language — its meaning possesses them. 

This is what is demonstrated to us by the hero of the drama that is recounted 
to us here, when the very situation his daring triumphantly crafted the first time 
around repeats itself. If he now succumbs to it, it is because he has shifted to 
die second position in the triad where he was initially in the third position and 
was simultaneously the thief — this by virtue of the object of his theft. 



22 Ecrits 

For if, now as before, the point is to protect the letter from inquisitive eyes, 
he cannot help but employ the same technique he himself already foiled: that 
of leaving it out in the open. And we may legitimately doubt that he thus knows 
what he is doing when we see him suddenly captivated by a dyadic relation- 
ship, in which we find all the features of a mimetic lure or of an animal play- 
3 1 ing dead, and caught in the trap of the typically imaginary situation of seeing 

that he is not seen, leading him to misconstrue the real situation in which he 
is seen not seeing. And what does he fail to see? The very symbolic situation 
which he himself was so able to see, and in which he is now seen seeing him- 
self not being seen. 

The Minister acts like a man who realizes that the police 's search is his own 
defense, since we are told he deliberately gives the police total access to his 
hotel by his absences; he nevertheless overlooks the fact that he has no defense 
against anything beyond that form of search. 

This is the very autruicherie — if I may be allowed to multiply my monster 
by layering — he himself crafted, but it cannot be by some imbecility that he 
now comes to be its dupe. 

For in playing the game of the one who hides, he is obliged to don the role 
of the Queen, including even the attributes of woman and shadow, so propi- 
tious for the act of concealment. 

I do not mean to reduce the veteran couple of Yin and Yang to the primal 
opposition of dark and light. For its precise handling involves what is blind- 
ing in a flash of light, no less than the shimmering that shadows exploit in order 
not to release their prey. 

Here the sign and being, marvelously disjoint, reveal which wins out when 
they are opposed. A man who is man enough to brave, and even scorn, a 
woman's dreaded ire suffers the curse of the sign of which he has dispossessed 
her so greatly as to undergo metamorphosis. 

For this sign is clearly that of woman, because she brings out her very being 
therein by founding it outside the law, which ever contains her — due to the 
effect of origins — in a position as signifier, nay, as fetish. In order to be wor- 
thy of the power of this sign she need but remain immobile in its shadow, man- 
aging thereby, moreover, like the Queen, to simulate mastery of nonaction 
that the Minister's "lynx eye" alone was able to see through. 

The man is now thus in this ravished sign's possession, and this possession 
is harmful in that it can be maintained only thanks to the very honor it defies, 
and it is accursed for inciting him who maintains it to punishment or crime, 
both of which breach his vassalage to the Law. 

There must be a very odd noli me tangere in this sign for its possession to, 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 23 

like the Socratic stingray, make its man so numb that he falls into what 32 

unequivocally appears in his case to be a state of inaction. 

For in remarking, as the narrator does already in the first meeting, that the 
letter's power departs when used, we perceive that this remark concerns only 
its use for ends of power — and simultaneously that the Minister will be forced 
to use it in this way. 

For him to be unable to rid himself of it, the Minister must not know what 
else to do with the letter. For this use places him in so total a dependence on the 
letter as such, that in the long run this use no longer concerns the letter at all. 

I mean that, for this use to truly concern the letter, the Minister — who, after 
all, would be authorized to do so by his service to the King, his master — could 
present respectful reproaches to the Queen, even if he had to ensure their 
desired effects by appropriate guarantees; or he could initiate a suit against the 
author of the letter (the fact that its author remains on the sidelines reveals the 
extent to which guilt and blame are not at stake here, but rather the sign of 
contradiction and scandal constituted by the letter, in the sense in which the 
Gospel says that the sign must come regardless of the misfortune of he who 
serves as its bearer); or he could even submit the letter as an exhibit in a case 
to the "third personage" who is qualified to decide whether he will institute a 
Chambre Ardente for the Queen or bring disgrace upon the Minister. 

We will not know why the Minister does not use the letter in any of these 
ways, and it is fitting that we do not, since the effect of this non-use alone con- 
cerns us; all we need to know is that the manner in which the letter was acquired 
would pose no obstacle to any of them. 

For it is clear that while the Minister will be forced to make use of the let- 
ter in a non-significant way, its use for ends of power can only be potential, 
since it cannot become actual [passer a I'acte] without immediately vanishing. 
Hence the letter exists as a means of power only through the final summons 
of the pure signifier — either by prolonging its detour, making it reach he whom 
it may concern through an extra transit (that is, through another betrayal whose 
repercussions the letter's gravity makes it difficult to prevent), or by destroy- 
ing the letter, which would be the only sure way, as Dupin proffers at the out- 3 3 
set, to be done with what is destined by nature to signify the canceling out 
[annulation] of what it signifies. 

The ascendancy which the Minister derives from the situation is thus not 
drawn from the letter but, whether he knows it or not, from the personage it 
constitutes for him. The Prefect's remarks thus present him as someone "who 
dares all things," which is commented upon significantly: "those unbecom- 
ing as well as those becoming a man," words whose thrust escapes Baudelaire 



24 Ecrits 

when he translates: "ce qui est indigne d'un homme aussi bien que ce qui est 
digne de lui" (those unbecoming a man as well as those becoming him). For 
in its original form, the appraisal is far more appropriate to what concerns a 
woman. 

This allows us to see the imaginary import of the personage, that is, the 
narcissistic relationship in which the Minister is engaged, this time certainly 
without knowing it. It is also indicated right on the second page of the Eng- 
lish text by one of the narrator's remarks, whose form is worth savoring: the 
Minister's ascendancy, we are told, "would depend upon the robber's knowl- 
edge of the loser's knowledge of the robber." Words whose importance the 
author underscores by having Dupin repeat them word for word right after 
the Prefect's account of the scene of the theft of the letter, when the conver- 
sation resumes. Here again we might say that Baudelaire is imprecise in his 
language in having one ask and the other confirm in the following terms: "Le 
voleur sait-il? ..." (Does the robber know?), then: "Le voleur sait ..." (The 
robber knows). What? "que la personne volee connait son voleur" (that the 
loser knows her robber). 

For what matters to the robber is not only that the said person know who 
robbed her, but that she know what kind of robber she is dealing with; the fact 
is that she believes him capable of anything, which should be understood as 
follows: she confers upon him a position that no one can really assume, 
because it is imaginary, that of absolute master. 

In truth, it is a position of absolute weakness, but not for the person we lead 
to believe in it. The proof is not merely that the Queen takes the audacious 
step of calling upon the police. For the police merely conform to their dis- 
placement to the next slot in the array constituted by the initial triad, accept- 
ing the very blindness that is required to occupy that place: "No more 
34 sagacious agent could, I suppose," Dupin notes ironically, "be desired, or even 

imagined." No, if the Queen has taken this step, it is less because she has been 
"driven to despair," as we are told, than because she takes on the burden [charge] 
of an impatience that should rather be attributed to a specular mirage. 

For the Minister has a hard time confining himself to the inaction which is 
presently his lot. The Minister, in point of fact, is "not altogether a fool." This 
remark is made by the Prefect, whose every word is golden: it is true that the 
gold of his words flows only for Dupin and does not stop flowing until it reaches 
the fifty thousand francs' worth it will cost him by the metal standard of the 
day, though not without leaving him a tidy profit. The Minister then is not 
altogether a fool in his foolish stagnation, and this is why he must behave accord- 
ing to the mode of neurosis. Like the man who withdrew to an island to for- 
get — to forget what? he forgot — so the Minister, by not making use of the 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" z5 

letter, comes to forget it. This is expressed by the persistence of his conduct. 
But the letter, no more than the neurotic's unconscious, does not forget him. 
It forgets him so little that it transforms him more and more in the image of 
her who offered it up to his discovery, and that he now will surrender it, fol- 
lowing her example, to a similar discovery. 

The features of this transformation are noted, and in a form characteristic 
enough in their apparent gratuitousness that they might legitimately be com- 
pared to the return of the repressed. 

Thus we first learn that the Minister in turn has turned the letter over, not, 
of course, as in the Queen's hasty gesture, but more assiduously, as one turns 
a garment inside out. This is, in effect, how he must proceed, according to the 
methods of the day for folding and sealing a letter, in order to free the virgin 
space in which to write a new address. 13 

This address becomes his own. Whether it be in his handwriting or 35 

another's, it appears in a diminutive female script, and, the seal changing from 
the red of passion to the black of its mirrors, he stamps his own cipher upon 
it. The oddity of a letter marked with the cipher of its addressee is all the more 
worth noting as an invention because, although it is powerfully articulated in 
the text, it is not even mentioned thereafter by Dupin in the discussion he 
devotes to his identification of the letter. 

Whether this omission is intentional or involuntary, it is surprising in the 
organization of a creation whose meticulous rigor is evident. But in either case 
it is significant that the letter which the Minister addresses to himself, ulti- 
mately, is a letter from a woman: as though this were a phase he had to go 
through owing to one of the signifier's natural affinities. 

And everything — from the aura of nonchalance, that goes as far as an affec- 
tation of listlessness, to the display of an ennui verging on disgust in his con- 
versation, to the ambiance that the author of the "Philosophy of Furniture" 14 
knows how to elicit from virtually impalpable details (like that of the musical 
instrument on the table) — seems to conspire to make a personage, whose every 
remark has surrounded him with the most virile of traits, exude the oddest 
odor difemina when he appears. 

Dupin does not fail to emphasize that this is indeed an artifice, describing 
behind the spurious appearance the vigilance of a beast of prey ready to spring. 
But how could we find a more beautiful image of the fact that this is the very 
effect of the unconscious, in the precise sense in which I teach that the uncon- 
scious is the fact that man is inhabited by the signifier, than the one Poe him- 
self forges to help us understand Dupin 's feat? For, to do so, Poe refers to those 
toponymic inscriptions which a map, in order not to be silent, superimposes 
on its outline, and which may become the object of "a game of puzzles" in 



26 Ecrits 

which one has to find the name chosen by another player. He then notes that 
the name most likely to foil a novice will be one which the eye often overlooks, 
but which provides, in large letters spaced out widely across the field of the 
map, the name of an entire country . . . 
3 6 Just so does the purloined letter, like an immense female body, sprawl across 

the space of the Minister's office when Dupin enters it. But just so does he 
already expect to find it there, having only to undress that huge body, with his 
eyes veiled by green spectacles. 

This is why, without any need (nor any opportunity either, for obvious 
reasons) to listen in at Professor Freud's door, he goes straight to the spot 
where lies and lodges what that body is designed to hide, in some lovely mid- 
dle toward which one 's gaze slips, nay, to the very place seducers call San- 
t'Angelo's Castle in their innocent illusion of being able to control the City 
from the castle. Lo! Between the jambs of the fireplace, there is the object 
already in reach of the hand the ravisher has but to extend . . . Whether he 
seizes it above the mantelpiece, as Baudelaire translates it, or beneath it, as in 
the original text, is a question that may be abandoned without harm to infer- 
ences emanating from the kitchen. 15 

Now if the effectiveness of symbols stopped there, would it mean that the sym- 
bolic debt is extinguished there too? If we could believe so, we would be advised 
of the contrary by two episodes which we must be all the more careful not to 
dismiss as accessory in that they seem, at first blush, to be at odds with the rest 
of the work. 

First of all, there is the business of Dupin's remuneration, which, far from 
being one last game, has been present from the outset in the rather offhanded 
question Dupin asks the Prefect about the amount of the reward promised him, 
and whose enormousness the Prefect, however reticent he may be about cit- 
ing the exact figure, does not dream of hiding from him, even returning to the 
subject later in mentioning its having been doubled. 

The fact that Dupin was previously presented to us as a virtual pauper tak- 
ing refuge in ethereal pursuits ought rather to lead us to reflect on the deal 
he cuts for delivery of the letter, promptly assured as it is by the checkbook 
he produces. I do not regard it as negligible that the direct hint* by which he 
broaches the matter is a "story attributed to the personage, as famous as he 
was eccentric," Baudelaire tells us, of an English doctor named Abernethy; 
37 this doctor replied to a rich miser, who was hoping to sponge a free medical 

opinion off him, not to take medicine, but rather to take advice. 

Are we not, in fact, justified in feeling implicated when Dupin is perhaps 
about to withdraw from the letter's symbolic circuit — we who make ourselves 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 27 

the emissaries of all the purloined letters which, at least for a while, remain en 
souffrance with us in the transference? And is it not the responsibility their 
transference entails that we neutralize by equating it with the signifier that 
most thoroughly annihilates every signification — namely, money? 

But that's not all here. The profit Dupin so blithely extracts from this feat, 
assuming its purpose is to allow him to withdraw his ante from the game before 
it is too late, merely renders all the more paradoxical, even shocking, the rebuke 
and underhanded blow he suddenly permits himself to deal the Minister, whose 
insolent prestige would, after all, seem to have been sufficiently deflated by 
the trick Dupin has just played on him. 

I have already quoted the atrocious lines Dupin claims he could not stop 
himself from dedicating, in his counterfeit letter, to the moment at which the 
Minister, flying off the handle at the Queen's inevitable acts of defiance, will 
think of bringing her down and will fling himself into the abyss — facilis descen- 
sus Averni J 6 he says, waxing sententious — adding that the Minister will not 
fail to recognize his handwriting. Leaving behind a merciless opprobrium, at 
the cost of no peril to himself, would seem to be a triumph without glory over 
a figure who is not without merit, and the resentment Dupin invokes, stem- 
ming from "an evil turn" done him in Vienna (at the Congress?), merely adds 
an extra touch of darkness to it. 

Let us consider this explosion of feeling more closely, however, and more 
specifically the moment at which it occurs in an act whose success depends on 
so cool a head. 

It comes just after the moment at which it may be said that Dupin already 
holds the letter as securely as if he had seized it, the decisive act of identify- 
ing the letter having been accomplished, even though he is not yet in a posi- 
tion to rid himself of it. 

He is thus clearly a participant in the inter subjective triad and, as such, finds 
himself in the median position previously occupied by the Queen and the Min- 
ister. In showing himself to be superior here, will he simultaneously reveal to 38 
us the author's intentions? 

While he has succeeded in putting the letter back on its proper course, it 
has yet to be made to reach its address. And that address is the place previ- 
ously occupied by the King, since it is there that it must fall back into the order 
based on the Law. 

As we have seen, neither the King nor the police who replaced Him in that 
position were capable of reading the letter because that/?/ace entailed blindness. 

Rex et augur — the legendary archaism of the words seems to resound only 
to make us realize how derisive it is to call upon a man to live up to them. And 
history's figures have hardly encouraged us to do so for some time now. It is 



28 Ecrits 

not natural for man to bear the weight of the highest of signifiers all alone. 
And the place he comes to occupy when he dons it may be equally apt to become 
the symbol of the most enormous imbecility. 17 

Let us say that the King here is invested — thanks to the amphibology nat- 
ural to the sacred — with the imbecility that is based precisely on the Subject. 

This is what will give meaning to the personages who succeed him in his 
place. Not that the police can be regarded as constitutionally illiterate, and we 
are aware of the role played by pikes planted around the university in the birth 
of the State. But the police who exercise their functions here are plainly marked 
by liberal forms, that is, by forms imposed on them by masters who are not 
very interested in enduring their indiscreet tendencies. This is why words are 
not minced, at times, regarding what is expected of them: "Sutorne ultra crep- 
idam, just take care of your crooks. We'll even give you the scientific means 
with which to do so. That will help you not to think of truths you'd be better 
off leaving in the dark." 18 

We know that the relief that results from such sensible principles shall have 
lasted but a morning's time in history, and that everywhere the march of des- 
39 tiny is already bringing back, after a just aspiration to the reign of freedom, an 

interest in those who trouble it with their crimes, an interest that occasionally 
goes so far as to forge its own evidence. It may even be observed that this prac- 
tice, which has always been accepted as long as it was engaged in only for the 
benefit of the greatest number, is in fact authenticated through public confes- 
sions of its forgeries by the very people who might well object to it: the most 
recent manifestation of the preeminence of the signifier over the subject. 

The fact remains that police files have always been treated with a certain 
reserve, a reserve which goes well beyond the circle of historians, for some 
odd reason. 

Dupin's intended delivery of the letter to the Prefect of Police will dimin- 
ish the magnitude of this evanescent credit. What now remains of the signi- 
fier when, having already been relieved of its message for the Queen, its text 
is invalidated as soon as it leaves the Minister's hands? 

The only thing left for it to do is to answer this very question: what remains 
of a signifier when it no longer has any signification? This is the very question 
asked of it by the person Dupin now finds in the place marked by blindness. 

For this is clearly the question that has led the Minister there, assuming he is 
the gambler we are told he is, as his act suffices to indicate. For the gambler's 
passion is no other than the question asked of the signifier, which is figured 
by the automaton of chance. 

"What are you, figure of the dice I roll in your chance encounter (tyche) 19 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 29 

with my fortune? Nothing, if not the presence of death that makes human life 
into a reprieve obtained from morning to morning in the name of significa- 
tions of which your sign is the shepherd's crook. Thus did Scheherazade for 
a thousand and one nights, and thus have I done for eighteen months, experi- 
encing the ascendancy of this sign at the cost of a dizzying series of loaded 
tosses in the game of even or odd." 

This is why Dupin,yrom the place where he is [ilest], cannot help but feel rage 
of a manifestly feminine nature at he who questions in this manner. The high- 40 

caliber image, in which the poet's inventiveness and the mathematician's rigor 
were married to the impassivity of the dandy and the elegance of the cheat, 
suddenly becomes, for the very person who gave us a taste of it, the true mon- 
strum horrendum, to borrow his own words, "an unprincipled man of genius." 

It is here that the origin of the horror shows itself, and he who experiences 
it has no need to declare himself, most unexpectedly at that, "a partisan of 
the lady" in order to reveal it to us: ladies, as we know, detest it when prin- 
ciples are called into question, for their charms owe much to the mystery of 
the signifier. 

This is why Dupin will at last turn toward us the dumbfounding \medu- 
sante] face of this signifier of which no one but the Queen has been able to 
read anything but the other face. The commonplace practice of supplying a 
quotation is fitting for the oracle that this face bears in its grimace, as is the 
fact that it is borrowed from tragedy: 

Un destin sifuneste, 

S'ilnest digne d'Atree, est digne de Thyeste. 

Such is the signifier's answer, beyond all significations: "You believe you 
are taking action when I am the one making you stir at the bidding of the bonds 
with which I weave your desires. Thus do the latter grow in strength and mul- 
tiply in objects, bringing you back to the fragmentation of your rent child- 
hood. That will be your feast until the return of the stone guest whom I shall 
be for you since you call me forth." 

To return to a more temperate tone, let us say — as goes the joke with which 
some of you who followed me to the Congress in Zurich last year and I ren- 
dered homage to the local password — that the signifier's answer to whomever 
questions it is: "Eat your Dasein." 

Is that then what awaits the Minister at his appointment with fate? Dupin 
assures us that it is, but we have also learned not to be overly credulous of his 
diversions. 

The audacious creature is, of course, reduced here to the state of imbecilic 



30 Ecrits 

blindness in which man finds himself in relation to the wall-like letters that dic- 
tate his destiny. But, in summoning him to confront them, what effect can we 
expect the sole provocations of the Queen to have on a man like him? Love or 

41 hatred. The one is blind and will make him lay down his arms. The other is 
lucid, but will awaken his suspicions. But provided he is truly the gambler we 
are told he is, he will consult his cards one final time before laying them on the 
table and, upon seeing his hand, will leave the table in time to avoid disgrace. 

Is that all, and must we believe we have deciphered Dupin's true strategy 
beyond the imaginary tricks with which he was obliged to deceive us? Yes, no 
doubt, for if "any point requiring reflection," as Dupin states at the start, is 
examined "to better purpose in the dark," we may now easily read its solution 
in broad daylight. It was already contained in and easy to bring out of the title 
of our tale, according to the very formulation of intersubjective communica- 
tion that I have long since offered up to your discernment, in which the sender, 
as I tell you, receives from the receiver his own message in an inverted form. 
This is why what the "purloined letter," nay, the "letter en souffrance" means 
is that a letter always arrives at its destination. 

Guitrancourt and San Casciano, mid-May to mid-August 1956 

Presentation of the Suite 

To anyone wanting to get a feel for my seminar from this text, I hardly ever 
recommended it without advising him that this text had to serve to intro- 
duce him to the introduction that preceded it and that will follow it here. 

This introduction was designed for others who were leaving, having 
gotten a feel for my seminar. 

This advice usually was not followed, a taste for obstacles being the 
ornament of persevering in being. 

I am only concerning myself here with the reader's economy [of effort] 
to return to the topic of whom my discourse is addressed to and to indi- 
cate what can no longer be denied: my writings have their place within an 
adventure which is that of the psychoanalyst, assuming psychoanalysis goes 
so far as to call him into question. 

42 The detours of this adventure, and even its accidents, have led me to a 
teaching position. 

Whence an intimate reference which, by first looking over this intro- 
duction, will be grasped in the reminder of exercises done as a group. 

For the preceding text merely refines on the grace of one of those 
exercises. 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" ji 

One would thus make poor use of the introduction that follows were 
one to consider it difficult: That would be to transfer to the object that it 
presents what is related only to its aim, insofar as that aim is training. 

The four pages that are a conundrum here for certain people were thus 
not intended to be confusing. I have reworked them slightly to remove any 
pretext one might come up with for ignoring what they say. 

Which is that the remembering [melioration] at stake in the uncon- 
scious — and I mean the Freudian unconscious — is not related to the reg- 
ister that is assumed to be that of memory, insofar as memory is taken to 
be a property of a living being. 

To sharpen our focus on what this negative reference involves, I say that 
what has been imagined in order to account for this effect of living matter 
is not rendered any more acceptable to me by the resignation it suggests. 

Whereas it is quite obvious that, in doing without this subjection, we can 
find in the ordered chains of a formal language the entire appearance of 
remembering, and quite especially of the kind required by Freud's discovery. 

I will therefore go so far as to say that the burden of proof rests, rather, 
with those who argue that the constitutive order of the symbolic does not 
suffice to explain everything here. 

For the time being, the links of this order are the only ones that can be 
suspected to suffice to account for Freud's notion of the indestructibility of 
what his unconscious preserves. 

(I refer the reader to Freud's text on the Wunderblock which, on this 
point and many others as well, goes far beyond the trivial meaning attrib- 
uted to it by inattentive readers.) 

The program traced out for us is hence to figure out how a formal lan- 
guage determines the subject. 

But the interest of such a program is not simple, since it assumes that a 
subject will not fulfill it except by contributing something of his own to it. 

A psychoanalyst can but indicate his interest in it, which is precisely as 
great as the obstacle he finds in it. 

Those who share this interest agree and even the others would admit 43 

it, if they were appropriately questioned: we have here an aspect of sub- 
jective conversion that gave rise to a dramatic reaction in my companions, 
and the imputation of "intellectualization" expressed by others, with 
which they would like to thwart me, clearly shows what it protects when 
seen in this light. 

Probably no one made a more praiseworthy effort in these pages than 
someone close to me who, in the end, saw fit only to denounce in them the 
hypostasis that troubled his Kantianism. 



32 Ecrits 

But the Kantian brush itself needs its alkali. 

It is helpful here to introduce my objector, and even others who were 
less relevant, because of what they do each time — in explaining to them- 
selves their everyday subject, their patient, as they say, or even explaining 
themselves to him — they employ magical thinking. 

Let them enter through that door themselves; it is, in effect, the same 
step the first objector made to take from me the chalice of the hypostasis, 
whereas he had just filled the cup with his own hand. 

For, with my as, ps, ys, and 6s, I do not claim to extract from the real 
more than I have presupposed in its given — in other words, nothing here — 
but simply to demonstrate that they already bring with them a syntax by 
simply turning this real into chance [hasard]. 

Regarding which I propose that the effects of repetition that Freud calls 
"automatism" come from nowhere else. 

But, people object, my as, ps, ys, and 6s are not without a subject 
remembering them. This is precisely what I am calling into question here: 
what is repeated is a product, not of nothing from the real (which peo- 
ple believe they have to presuppose in it), but precisely oiwhat was not 
[ce qui n 'etaitpas] . 

Note that it then becomes less astonishing that what is repeated insists 
so much in order to get itself noticed. 

The least of my "patients" in analysis attests to this, and in words that 
confirm all the better my doctrine since they are the same words that led 
me to it — as those whom I train know, having often heard my very terms 
anticipated in the hot-off-the-presses text of an analytic session. 

Now, what I want to achieve is that the patient [malade] be heard in the 
proper manner at the moment at which he speaks. For it would be strange 
for one to listen only for the idea of what leads him astray at the moment 
at which he is simply prey to truth. 
44 This is helpful in taking the psychologist's assurance down a notch — 

in other words, the pedantry that invented the "level of aspiration," for 
example, expressly, no doubt, to indicate his own therein as an unsur- 
passable upper limit. 

It must not be thought that the philosopher with fine university creden- 
tials is the blackboard [planche] that can accommodate this divertissement. 

It is here that, by echoing old School debates, my discussion discovers 
the intellectual's debt, but it is also a question of the infatuation that must 
be removed. 

Caught in the act of unduly imputing to me a transgression of the Kant- 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 33 

ian critique, the subject, who was well-meaning in mentioning my text, is 
not Father Ubu and does not persist. 

But he has little taste for adventure left. He wants to sit down. It is a 
corporal antinomy to the analyst's profession. How can one remain seated 
when one has placed oneself in the situation of no longer having to answer 
a subject's question in any way than by lying him down first? It is obvi- 
ous that remaining standing is no less uncomfortable. 

This is why the question of the transmission of psychoanalytic expe- 
rience begins here, when the didactic aim is implied in it, negotiating a 
knowledge. 

The impact of a market structure is not null in the field of truth, but it 
is scabrous there. 

Introduction 

The class of my seminar that I have written up to present here was given on 
April 26, 1955. It represents a moment in the commentary that I devoted to 
Beyond the Pleasure Principle for the whole of that academic year. 

It is well known that many people who authorize themselves the title of 
psychoanalyst do not hesitate to reject this text by Freud as superfluous and 
even risky speculation, and we can gauge — on the basis of the antinomy par 
excellence constituted by the notion of the "death instinct" with which it con- 
cludes — to what extent it can be unthinkable, if you will allow me the term, 
to most of them. 

It is nevertheless difficult to consider this text — which serves as a prelude 45 

to the new topography represented by the terms "ego," "id," and "superego," 
which have become as prevalent in the work of theorists as in the popular 
mind — to be an excursion, much less a faux pas, in Freudian doctrine. 

This simple apprehension is confirmed when we fathom the motivations 
that link the abovementioned speculation with the theoretical revision of which 
it turns out to be constitutive. 

When we do so, we are left with no doubt but that the current use of these 
terms is bastardized and even ass-backwards; this can be clearly seen in the 
fact that the theorist and the man on the street use them identically. Which is, 
no doubt, what justifies the remark made by certain epigones to the effect that 
they find in these terms the means by which to bring the experience of psy- 
choanalysis back into the fold of what they call general psychology. 

Let me simply provide a few markers along our path. 

Repetition automatism (Wiederholungs^wang) — although the notion is 



34 Ecrits 

presented in the book in question here as designed to respond to certain para- 
doxes in clinical work, like the dreams found in traumatic neurosis and the 
negative therapeutic reaction — cannot be conceived of as an add-on to the 
doctrinal edifice, even if it is viewed as a crowning addition. 

For it is his inaugural discovery that Freud reaffirms in it: namely, the con- 
ception of memory implied by his "unconscious." The new facts provide him 
with an occasion to restructure that conception in a more rigorous manner by 
giving it a generalized form, but also to reopen his problematic to combat the 
decline, which one could sense already at that time, seen in the fact that peo- 
ple were taking its effects as a simple pregiven. 

What is revamped here was already articulated in the "Project," 20 in which 
Freud 's divination traced the avenues his research would force him to go down: 
the *P system, a predecessor of the unconscious, manifests its originality 
therein, in that it is unable to satisfy itself except by reminding an object that has 
been fundamentally lost. 
46 This is how Freud situates himself right from the outset in the opposition 

Kierkegaard taught us about, regarding whether the notion of existence is 
founded upon reminiscence or repetition. If Kierkegaard admirably discerns 
in that opposition the difference between Antiquity's conception of man and 
the modern conception of man, it appears that Freud makes the latter take its 
decisive step by ravishing the necessity included in this repetition from the 
human agent identified with consciousness. Since this repetition is symbolic 
repetition, it turns out that the symbol's order can no longer be conceived of 
there as constituted by man but must rather be conceived of as constituting him. 

This is why I felt obliged to give my audience practice in the notion of 
remembering implied by Freud's work: I did this due to the all-too-well- 
founded consideration that by leaving it implicit, the very basics of analysis 
remain fuzzy. 

It is because Freud does not compromise regarding the original quality of 
his experience that we see him constrained to evoke therein an element that 
governs it from beyond life — an element he calls the death instinct. 

The indication that Freud gives here to those who call themselves his fol- 
lowers can only scandalize people in whom the sleep of reason is sustained by 
the monsters it produces, to borrow Goya's pithy formulation. 

For, in order to remain at his usual level of rigor, Freud only delivers his 
notion to us accompanied by an example that dazzlingly exposes the funda- 
mental formalization which this notion designates. 

This game, in which the child practices making an object (which is, more- 
over, indifferent by its very nature) disappear from his sight, only to bring it 
back, and then obliterate it anew, while he modulates this alternation with dis- 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" jS 

tinctive syllables — this game, as I was saying, manifests in its radical traits the 
determination that the human animal receives from the symbolic order. 

Man literally devotes his time to deploying the structural alternative in 
which presence and absence each find their jumping-off point [prennent . . . 
leurappel]. It is at the moment of their essential conjunction and, so to speak, 
at the zero point of desire that the human object comes under the sway of the 
grip which, canceling out its natural property, submits it henceforth to the 
symbol's conditions. 

In fact, we have here nothing more than an illuminating insight into the 
entrance of the individual into an order whose mass supports him and welcomes 47 

him in the form of language, and superimposes determination by the signifier 
onto determination by the signified in both diachrony and synchrony. 

One can grasp in its very emergence the overdetermination that is the only 
kind of overdetermination at stake in Freud's apperception of the symbolic 
function. 

Simply connoting with (+) and (-) a series playing on the sole fundamen- 
tal alternative of presence and absence allows us to demonstrate how the 
strictest symbolic determinations accommodate a succession of [coin] tosses 
whose reality is strictly distributed "by chance" [au hasard\ 

Indeed, it suffices to symbolize, in the diachrony of such a series, groups of 
three which conclude with each toss 21 by defining them synchronically — for 

example, through the symmetry of constancy (+ + + and ), noted as 1, or 

of alternation (+ - + and - + -), noted as 3, the notation 2 being reserved for 
the dissymmetry revealed by the odd [impair] 22 in the form of a group of two 
similar signs either preceded or followed by the opposite sign (+ — , - + +, 

+ + -, and ) — for possibilities and impossibilities of succession to appear 

in the new series constituted by these notations that the following network sum- 
marizes. This network at the same time manifests the concentric symmetry 
implicit in the triad — which is, let it be noted, the very structure of concern in 
the question continually raised anew 23 by anthropologists whether the dualism 
found in symbolic organizations is of a fundamental or apparent character. 

Here is the network: 48 

1-3 NETWORK 




36 Ecrits 

In the series of the symbols 1, 2, and 3, one can observe, for example, that 
for as long as a uniform succession of 2s, which began after a 1 , lasts, the series 
will remember the even or odd rank of each of these 2s, since this rank is respon- 
sible for the fact that this sequence can only be broken by a 1 after an even 
number of 2s or by a 3 after an odd number of 2s. 

Thus, right from the primordial symbol's first composition with itself — 
and I will indicate that I have not proposed this composition as I have arbi- 
trarily — a structure, as transparent as it may still remain to its givens, brings 
out the essential link between memory and law. 

But we will see simultaneously how the symbolic determination becomes 
more opaque, at the same time as the nature of the signifier is revealed, sim- 
ply by recombining the elements of our syntax, in skipping a term in order to 
apply a quadratic relation to this binary. 

Let us thus posit that if the binary, 1 and 3, in the group (12 3), for exam- 
ple, joins with their symbols a symmetry to a symmetry (1 — 1, 3 — 3, 1 — 3, 
or 3 — 1), it shall be noted a. A dissymmetry joined to a dissymmetry (2 — 2 
alone) shall be noted y. But, unlike our first symbolization, the crossed con- 
junctions will have two signs, |3 and 5, at their disposal, |3 noting the conjunc- 
tion of symmetry with dissymmetry (1 — 2 and 3 — 2), and 5 noting the 
conjunction of dissymmetry with symmetry (2 — 1 and 2 — 3). 
49 Note that, although this convention restores a strict equality of combina- 

torial chances among four symbols, a, (3, y, and 5 (as opposed to the combi- 
natorial ambiguity that equated the chance of the symbol 2 with the chances 
of the two other symbols [1 and 3] in the preceding convention), the new syn- 
tax, in governing the succession of as, (3s, ys, and 5s, determines absolutely 
dissymmetrical distribution possibilities between a and y, on the one hand, 
and |3 and 5, on the other. 

Indeed, recognizing that any one of these terms can immediately follow 
any of the others, and can also be found at Time 4 starting with any one of 
them [at Time 1], it turns out, on the other hand, that Time 3 — in other words, 
the constitutive time of the binary — is subject to a law of exclusion which is 
such that, starting with an a or a 5 [at Time 1], one can only obtain an a or a 
|3 [at Time 3], and that starting with a y or a |3 [at Time 1], one can only obtain 
a y or 5 [at Time 3]. This can be written in the following form: 

A A DISTRIBUTION 



a, 6 o & a, B 

-^ ► a,p,Y,6 ► -^ 

Y» P Y> & 

Time 1 Time 2 Time 3 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" j7 

The symbols that are compatible from Time 1 to Time 3 line up here with each 
other in the different horizontal tiers that divide them in the distribution, 
whereas any one of them can be selected at Time 2. 

The fact that the link that has appeared here is nothing less than the sim- 
plest formalization of exchange is what confirms for us its anthropological 
interest. I will merely indicate at this level its constitutive value for a primor- 
dial subjectivity, the notion of which I will situate later. 

Given its orientation, this link is in fact reciprocal; in other words, it is not 
reversible but it is retroactive. Thus by determining which term is to appear 
at Time 4, the one at Time 2 will not be indifferent. 

It can be demonstrated that by setting the first and fourth terms of a series, 
there will always be a letter whose possibility will be excluded from the two 
intermediary terms, and that there are two other letters, one of which will 
always be excluded from the first of these intermediary terms, the other from 50 

the second. These letters are distributed in Tables Q and O below. 24 

table Q 




TABLE O 




In these tables, the first line allows us to situate between the two tables the 
combination sought out from Time 1 to Time 4, the letter in the second line 
being the letter that this combination excludes from the two times in their 
interval [Times 2 and 3]; the two letters in the third line are, from left to right, 
those which are excluded from Time 2 and Time 3, respectively. 

This could illustrate a rudimentary subjective trajectory, by showing that 
it is grounded in the actuality which has the future anterior in its present. The 
fact that, in the interval of this past that it is already insofar as it projects, a 



38 Ecrits 

hole opens up that is constituted by a certain caput mortuum of the signifier 
(which is set here at three-quarters of the possible combinations in which it 
must situate itself), 25 suffices to make it depend on absence, obliging it to 
repeat its contour. 

At the outset, subjectivity has no relation to the real, but rather to a syntax 
which is engendered by the signifying mark there. 

The construction of the network of as, |3s, ys, and 5s has the property (or 
insufficiency) of suggesting how the real, the imaginary, and the symbolic form 
in three tiers, although only the symbolic can intrinsically play there as rep- 
resenting the first two strata. 

It is by meditating as it were naively on the small number of steps required 
5 1 for syntax to triumph that it is worthwhile taking the time to explore the chain 

ordered here along the same lines as the chain that interested Poincare and 
Markov. 

Thus we notice that if, in our chain, one can encounter two (3s that follow 
each other without the interposition of a 5, it is always either directly (|3|3) or 
after the interposition of an indeterminate number of ay couples (for exam- 
ple, (3aya . . . y (3), but that after the second |3, no new |3 can appear in the chain 
before the appearance of a 5. Nevertheless, the above-defined succession of 
two (3s cannot recur without a second 5 being added to the first in a link [liai- 
son] equivalent (apart from a reversal of the ay couple into ya) to the link 
imposed on the two (3s — namely, without the interposition of a (3. 

The immediate consequence of which is the dissymmetry that I announced 
earlier in probability of appearance for the different symbols of the chain. 

Whereas the as and ys can, in fact, through a felicitous random [du hasard] 
series, each repeat separately so as to overrun the entire chain, it is impossi- 
ble for (3 and 5, even with the most favorable luck, to increase their percent- 
age if not in strictly equal proportions (within one term), which limits to 50% 
the maximum possible frequency of each of them. 

The probability of the combination represented by the (3s and the 5s being 
equivalent to that presupposed by the as and the ys — and the real outcome of 
the tosses being, moreover, left strictly to chance — we see separate out from 
the real a symbolic determination which, as faithful as it may be in recording 
any partiality of the real, merely produces all the more clearly the disparities 
that it brings with it. 

This disparity can also be seen by simply considering the structural con- 
trast between Tables Q and O, that is, the direct or crossed way in which the 
grouping (and order) of the exclusions is subordinated by reproducing it in 
the order of the extremes, depending on the table to which the latter belongs. 

This is why, in the series of four letters, the two intermediary and extreme 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 39 

couples can be identical if the latter is written in the order provided in Table 
(such as aaaa, aapp, PpYY? PP&5, YYYY> YY&&, 85aa, and 55pp, which are 
possible); they cannot be identical if the latter are written in the order of 
Table Q (pppp, |3|3cxcx, YYPP? YY aa > $$$$> 55yy, aa85, and cxcxyy, which are 
impossible). 

Remarks whose recreational character must not lead us astray. 52 

For there is no other link [lien] than that of this symbolic determination in 
which the signifying overdetermination, the notion of which Freud brings us, 
can be situated, and which was never able to be conceived of as a real over- 
determination by a mind like his — everything contradicting the idea that he 
abandoned himself to this conceptual aberration in which philosophers and 
physicians find it all too easy to calm their religious excitations. 

This position regarding the autonomy of the symbolic is the only position 
that allows us to clarify the theory and practice of free association in psycho- 
analysis. For relating its mainspring to symbolic determination and to its 
laws is altogether different from relating it to the scholastic presuppositions 
of an imaginary inertia that prop it up in associationism, whether philosoph- 
ical or pseudophilosophical, before claiming to be experimental. Having 
abandoned its examination, psychoanalysts find here yet another jumping- 
off point for the psychologizing confusion into which they constantly fall, 
some of them deliberately. 

In fact, only examples of preservation (whose suspension is indefinite) based 
on the exigencies of the symbolic chain, such as the examples that I have just 
provided, allow us to conceptualize where the indestructible persistence of 
unconscious desire is situated, that persistence, however paradoxical it may 
seem in Freud's doctrine, nevertheless being one of the features of it that is 
the most strongly asserted by Freud. 

This characteristic is, in any case, incommensurate with certain effects rec- 
ognized in authentically experimental psychology and which, regardless of 
the delays or time lags to which they are subject, eventually weaken and die 
out like every vital response. 

This is precisely the question to which Freud returns once again in Beyond 
the Pleasure Principle, in order to indicate that the insistence which I take to be 
the essential characteristic of the phenomena of repetition automatism, seems 
to him to be explainable only by something prevital and transbiological. This 
conclusion may be surprising, but it is Freud's, speaking about what he was 
the first to have spoken about. And one must be deaf not to hear it. Coming 
from his pen, as it does, it will not be thought to involve recourse to spiritu- 
alism: for it is the structure of determination that is in question here. The mat- 
ter that it displaces in its effects extends far beyond the matter of cerebral 53 



40 Ecrits 

organization, to the vicissitudes of which certain among them are entrusted, 
but others remain no less active and structured as symbolic even though they 
are materialized differently. 

Thus, if man comes to think about the symbolic order, it is because he is 
first caught in it in his being. The illusion that he has formed this order through 
his consciousness stems from the fact that it is through the pathway of a spe- 
cific gap in his imaginary relationship with his semblable that he has been able 
to enter into this order as a subject. But he has only been able to make this 
entrance by passing through the radical defile of speech, a genetic moment of 
which we have seen in a child 's game, but which, in its complete form, is repro- 
duced each time the subject addresses the Other as absolute, that is, as the Other 
who can annul him himself, just as he can act accordingly with the Other, that 
is, by making himself into an object in order to deceive the Other. This dialec- 
tic of inter subjectivity, the necessary usage of which I have demonstrated in 
the course of the past three years of my seminar at Saint Anne Hospital, from 
the theory of transference to the structure of paranoia, readily finds support 
in the following schema: 



L SCHEMA 



(Es) S • -■ -% ©' other 




(ego) a Q + O ® Other 



This schema is by now familiar to my students. The two middle terms here [a 
and a'] represent the couple involved in reciprocal imaginary objectification 
that I have brought out in "The Mirror Stage." 

The specular relationship with the other — by which I at first wanted, in 
fact, to return the theory of narcissism, so crucial to Freud's work, to its dom- 
inant position in the function of the ego — can only reduce to its effective sub- 
ordination the whole fantasmatization brought to light by analytic experience 
by interposing itself, as the schema expresses it, between this shy of [en-dega\ 
54 the Subject and this beyond [au-deld] of the Other, where speech in effect inserts 

it, insofar as the existences that are grounded in speech are entirely at the mercy 
of its faith [foi]. 

It is by having confused these two couples that the legatees of a praxis and 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 41 

a teaching that as decisively settled the question as Freud 's did regarding the 
fundamentally narcissistic nature of all being in love ( Verliebtheii) were able 
to so utterly deify the chimera of so-called genital love as to attribute to it the 
virtue of "oblativity," a notion that gave rise to so many therapeutic mistakes. 

But by simply eliminating any and all reference to the symbolic poles of 
intersubjectivity in order to reduce analytic treatment to a Utopian rectifica- 
tion of the imaginary couple, we have now arrived at a form of practice in 
which, under the banner of "object relations," what any man of good faith can 
only react to with a feeling of abjection is consummated. 

This is what justifies the true gymnastics of the inter subjective register con- 
stituted by some of the exercises over which my seminar may have seemed to 
tarry. 

The similarity between the relationship among the terms of the L schema 
and the relationship that unites the four times distinguished above (in the ori- 
ented series in which we see the first finished form of a symbolic chain) can- 
not fail to strike one as soon as one considers the connection between them. 

Parenthesis of Parentheses (Added in 1966) 

I will express here my perplexity at the fact that none of the people who 
took it upon themselves to decipher the ordering to which my chain lent 
itself, thought of writing in the form of parentheses the structure thereof 
that I had nevertheless clearly enunciated. 

A parenthesis enclosing one or several other parentheses — that is, (( )) 
or (()()... ( )) — is equivalent to the above-analyzed distribution of Ps 
and 6s, in which it is easy to see that the redoubled parenthesis is funda- 
mental. 

I will call the latter "quotes." 

I intend to use this redoubled parenthesis to cover the structure of the 
subject (that is, the S in my L schema), insofar as it implies a redoubling, 5 5 

or rather the sort of division that involves a lining [doublure] function. 

I have already placed in this lining the direct or inverse alternation of 
ayay . . . pairs, on the condition that the number of signs be even or zero. 

Between the inside parentheses, an alternation of yaya . . . y signs, the 
number of signs being zero or odd. 

On the other hand, inside the parentheses, as many ys as one would 
like, starting with zero. 

Outside of the quotes we find, on the contrary, any series of as, which 
includes none, one, or several parentheses stuffed with ayay ... a signs, 
the number of signs being zero or odd. 



42 Ecrits 

If we replace the as and the ys by Is and Os, we can write the so-called 
L chain in a form that seems to me to be more "telling" [parlante]. 

L Chain: (10. .. (00. . .0) 0101. ..0 (00. ..0).. .01) 11111... (1010. ..1) 
111... etc. 

"Telling" in the sense that a reading of it will be facilitated at the cost 
of a supplementary convention which accords it with the L schema. 

This convention is to give the 0s between parentheses the value of 
moments of silence, a value of scansion being left to the 0s in the alterna- 
tions, a convention justified by the fact that they are not homogeneous, 
as we shall see below. 

What is inside the quotes can then represent the structure of the S (Es) 
in my L schema, symbolizing the subject supposedly completed by the 
Freudian Es, the subject of the psychoanalytic session, for example. The 
Es then appears there in the form given to it by Freud, insofar as he dis- 
tinguishes it from the unconscious — namely, as logistically disjoint and 
subjectively silent (the silence of the drives). 

It is then the alternation of the 01s that represents the imaginary grill 
(aa') of the L schema. 

It remains for me to define the privilege of the alternation character- 
istic of the between-two of the quotes (01 pairs) — that is, obviously, of 
the status of a and a' in themselves. 26 

What is outside of the quotes will represent the field of the Other (A 
in the L schema). Repetition dominates there in the form of the 1 , the unary 
5 6 trait, representing (as a complement to the preceding convention) the times 

marked by the symbolic as such. 

The subject S receives his message in an inverted form from there as 
well (interpretation). 

Isolated from this chain, the parenthesis including (10 ... 01) repre- 
sents the ego of the psychological cogito — that is, of the false cogito — which 
can just as well prop up perversion pure and simple. 27 

The only remainder required by this attempt is the formalism of a cer- 
tain remembering [memoration] related to the symbolic chain, whose law 
one could easily formulate with respect to the L chain. 

(This law is essentially defined by the relay constituted, in the alter- 
nation of 0s and Is, by the surmounting [franckissement] of one or several 
parenthetical signs and of which signs.) 

What must be kept in mind here is the rapidity with which a formal- 
ization is obtained that is suggestive both of a remembering that is pri- 
mordial in the subject and of a structuration in which it is notable that 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 43 

stable disparities can be distinguished therein (indeed, the same dissym- 
metrical structure persists if, for example, we reverse all the quotes). 28 

This is but an exercise, but it fulfills my intent to inscribe therein the 
sort of contour where what I have called the signifier's caput mortuum takes 
on its causal aspect. 

This effect is as manifest when grasped here as in the fiction of "The 
Purloined Letter." 

The essence of the latter is that the letter was able to have its effects on 57 

the inside — on the tale's actors, including the narrator — just as much as 
on the outside — on us, its readers, and also on its author — without any- 
one ever having had to worry about what it meant. This is the usual fate 
of everything that is written. 

But at present we are only at the point of erecting an arch on which a bridge 
will be built in years to come. 29 

This is why, in order to demonstrate to my audience what distinguishes 
true intersubjectivity from the dyadic relationship implied by the notion of 
"projection," I had already used the reasoning approvingly recounted by Poe 
himself in the story that will be the subject of the present seminar, as the rea- 
soning that guided a supposedly prodigal child in helping him win more often 
than he should have otherwise in the game of even or odd. 

In following this reasoning — which is childish, that's the word for it, but 58 

which still manages to seduce certain people in other locales — we must grasp 
the point at which the lure therein appears. 

Here the subject is the one who is questioned: he has to guess whether the 
number of objects that his opponent hides in his hand is even or odd. 

After a round won or lost by me, the boy essentially tells us, I know that if 
my opponent is a simpleton, "his amount of cunning" will not exceed the 
change from even to odd, but if he is "a simpleton a degree above the first," 
it will cross his mind that I will think of that myself and hence that it makes 
sense for him to play even again. 

The child thus relied upon the objectification of the higher or lower num- 
ber of his opponent's cerebral folds in order to achieve his success. A point of 
view whose link with imaginary identification is immediately indicated by the 
fact that it is through an internal imitation of his opponent 's attitudes and mim- 
icry that he claims to arrive at the proper assessment of his object. 

But what then of the next level, when my opponent, having recognized that 
I am intelligent enough to follow him in this move, will manifest his own intel- 
ligence in realizing that it is by acting like an idiot that he has his best chance 



44 Ecrits 

of deceiving me? There is no other valid time of the reasoning in this moment, 
precisely because it can but repeat thereafter in an indefinite oscillation. 

And apart from the case of pure imbecility, in which the reasoning seemed 
to be objectively grounded, the child cannot but think that his opponent will 
arrive at the obstacle of this third time since he granted him the second, by 
which he himself is considered by his opponent to be a subject who objecti- 
fies him, for it is true that he may he this subject; hence we see him caught with 
him in the impasse implied by every purely dyadic intersubjectivity, which is 
that of having no recourse against an absolute Other. 

Let us note in passing the vanishing role played by intelligence in the con- 
stitution of the second time in which the dialectic detaches itself from the con- 
tingencies of the pregiven; let us note, too, that I need but impute intelligence 
to my opponent for its function to be useless since, from that point on, it col- 
lapses back into these contingencies. 
59 I will not say, however, that the path of imaginary identification with the 

opponent at the instant of each of these rounds is a path that is sealed off in 
advance; I will say that it excludes the properly symbolic process which 
appears as soon as this identification occurs, not with the opponent, but with 
his reasoning as articulated by this identification (this difference is, moreover, 
enunciated in Poe 's text). The fact proves, moreover, that such a purely imag- 
inary identification generally fails. 

Hence each player, if he reasons, can only resort to something beyond the 
dyadic relationship — in other words, to some law which presides over the suc- 
cession of the rounds of the game. 

This is so true that if I am the one who selects the number to be guessed — 
that is, if I am the active subject — I will at each instant attempt to convince 
my opponent that there is a law which presides over a certain regularity in my 
selection, in order to pull the ground of his understanding out from under him 
as often as possible by breaking that law. 

The more this approach manages to free itself from real regularities that 
are sketched out in spite of myself, the more successful it will effectively be, 
which is why someone who participated in one of the trials of this game that 
I did not hesitate to turn into in-class exercises, admitted that, at a moment at 
which he had the feeling, whether justified or not, of being too often found 
out, he freed himself from it by basing himself on the conventionally trans- 
posed succession of letters in a verse by Mallarme for the series of rounds that 
he thereafter proposed to his opponent. 

But had the game lasted as long as the entire poem and if, by some mira- 
cle, the opponent had been able to recognize it, the latter would then have won 
every round. 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 45 

This is what allowed me to say that if the unconscious exists, in Freud's 
sense of the term — I mean if we understand the implications of the lesson that 
he draws from the experiences of the psychopathology of everyday life, for 
example — it is not unthinkable that a modern calculating machine, by detect- 
ing the sentence that, unbeknown to him and in the long term, modulates a 
subject's choices, could manage to win beyond any usual proportions in the 
game of even and odd. 

This is a pure paradox, no doubt, but in it is expressed the fact that it is not 
because it lacks the supposed virtue of human consciousness that we refuse to 
call the machine to which we would attribute such fabulous performances a 
"thinking machine," but simply because it would think no more than the ordi- 60 

nary man does, without that making him any less prey to the summonses 
[appels] of the signifier. 

Thus the possibility suggested here was of interest insofar as it conveyed 
to me the effect of distress and even anxiety that certain participants felt and 
were willing to share with me. 

A reaction about which one can wax ironic, coming as it does from ana- 
lysts whose entire technique relies upon the unconscious determination that 
is granted in that technique to so-called free association, and who can find 
clearly spelled out in the text by Freud that I just mentioned that a number is 
never chosen at random. 

But it is a legitimate reaction if one considers that nothing has taught them 
to leave behind everyday opinion by distinguishing what it neglects: namely, 
the nature of Freudian overdetermination — in other words, the nature of 
symbolic determination such as I promote it here. 

If this overdetermination had to be considered real — as my example sug- 
gested to them, because, like everyone else, they confused the machine 's cal- 
culations with its mechanism 30 — then, indeed, their anxiety would be 
justified, for in a gesture more sinister than that of touching the ax, I would 
be the one who brings it down on "the laws of chance." Being good deter- 
minists, those who found this gesture so moving rightly felt that if we 
changed these laws, there would no longer be any conceivable law at all. 

But these laws are precisely those of symbolic determination. For it is clear 
that they predate any real observation of randomness \hasard\ as is clear from 
the fact that we judge whether an object is apt or not to be used to obtain a 
series (always symbolic, in this case) of random throws according to its obe- 
dience to these laws — for example, whether or not a coin, or this object 
admirably known as a "die" \de\ qualifies for this function. 

Once this practical training was over, I had to illustrate in a concrete man- 61 

ner the dominance that I assert the signifier has over the subject. If it is a truth, 



46 Ecrits 

then it can be found everywhere, and we should be able to start with anything 
within range of our tap and make it flow like wine in Auerbach's tavern. 

This is why I took the very tale from which I had extracted the dubious 
reasoning about the game of even or odd, without seeing anything more in 
that tale at first. I found something useful in it that my notion of symbolic 
determination would have already prohibited me from considering to be sim- 
ply accidental \hasard\ even if it had not turned out, in the course of my exam- 
ination, that Poe — as a fine precursor of research into combinatorial strategy 
which is in the process of revamping the order of the sciences — had been 
guided in his fiction by the same aim [dessein] as mine. At least I can say that 
what I brought out in my expose of it touched my audience enough for it to 
be at their request that I am publishing a version of it here. 

In reworking it in accordance with the requirements of writing [lecrit], which 
are different from those of speech, I could not help but present the further 
development I have provided since that time of certain notions it introduced. 

This is why the emphasis, with which I have increasingly promoted the 
notion of signifier in the symbol, occurred retroactively here. To obscure its 
traits through a sort of historical feint would have seemed, I believe, artificial 
to my students. I can only hope that the fact that I spared myself this task will 
not disappoint their memory of it. 



Notes 

1 . The necessary reference here may be story, if the structure did not suffice, although 
found in my essay, "Logical Time and the it aspires to do so. 

Assertion of Anticipated Certainty," in Ecrits I am eliminating that indication, which was 

1 966, 1 97—2 1 3. overly imperfect, because in rereading my text 

2. See "The Function and Field of Speech for this reprinting someone has confirmed to 
and Language in Psychoanalysis," in Ecrits me that, after the era of those who are selling 
1 966, 244. me out (even today, December 9, 1 968), another 

3. To completely understand what follows era is coming in which people read my work 
one must reread the short and readily avail- to explicate it further. 

able text of "The Purloined Letter." The latter shall take place elsewhere than 

4. See Emile Benveniste, "Communication on this page. 

animale et langage humain," Diogene I, and 7. 1 would like to pose again to Benveniste 

my Rome Report ["The Function and Field of the question of the antithetical meaning of 

Speech and Language"], Ecrits 1966, 297. [In certain words, whether primal or not, after the 

English, see Emile Benveniste, Problems in Gen- masterful correction he made to the erroneous 

eral Linguistics, trans. M. Meek (Coral Gables: path Freud took in studying the question on 

University of Miami Press, 1971), 49— 54.] philological ground (see La Psychanalyse 1 

5. See Ecrits 1966, 58. [1956]: 5-16). For I think that the question 

6. [Added in 1968:] I had at first added a remains unanswered once the instance of the 
note on the meaning these three [Latin] words signifier has been rigorously formulated, 
would provide by way of commentary on this Bloch and Von Wartburg date back to 1875 



Seminar on "The Purloined Letter" 



47 



the first appearance of the signification of the 
verb depister as I used it the second time in this 
sentence. [In English, see Emile Benveniste, 
Problems in General Linguistics, 65—75. See 
also Freud's article "The Antithetical Mean- 
ing of Primal Words," SEXl, 155-61.] 

8. The very Utopia to which Jorge Luis 
Borges, in his work which harmonizes so well 
with the phylum of my subject matter, has 
accorded an importance which others reduce 
to its proper proportions. See Les Temps 
Modernes 113-14 (June-July 1955): 2135-36 
and 118 (October 1955): 574-75. 

9. Poe 's emphasis. 

10. This is so true that philosophers, in 
those hackneyed examples with which they 
argue on the basis of the one and the many, 
will not put to the same purposes a simple 
sheet of white paper ripped down the middle 
and a broken circle, or even a shattered vase, 
not to mention a cut worm. 

1 1 . See Our Exagmination Round His Fact- 
ificationfor Incamination of "Work, in Progress " 
(Paris: Shakespeare & Co., 12 rue de l'Odeon, 
1929). 

12. See Ecrits\%6, 59. 

13. I felt obliged at this point to demon- 
strate the procedure to the audience using a 
letter from that period which concerned 
Chateaubriand and his search for a secretary. I 
was amused to find that Chateaubriand had 
completed the first version of his memoirs 
(recently published in its original form) in the 
very month of November 1841 in which "The 
Purloined Letter" appeared in Chambers' 
Journal. Will Chateaubriand's devotion to the 
power he decries, and the honor which that 
devotion does him ("the gift" had not yet been 
invented), place him in the category to which 
we will later see the Minister assigned: among 
men of genius with or without principles? 

14. Poe is the author of an essay by this 
title. 

15. [Added in 1966:] And even from the 
cook herself. 

16. Virgil's line reads: facilis descensus 
Averno. ["The descent to Hades is easy"; see 
Virgil's Aeneid, book 6, line 126.] 

17. Let us recall the witty distich attributed 
before his fall to the most recent person to 



have rejoined Candide's meeting in Venice. 
"II nest plus aujourd'hui que cinq wis sur la 
terre, /Les quatre wis des cartes et le roi dAn- 
gleterre" (There are only five kings left on 
earth today: /The four kings of cards and the 
King of England.) 

18. This statement was openly made by a 
noble Lord speaking to the Upper House in 
which his dignity earned him a seat. 

19. 1 am referring to the fundamental oppo- 
sition Aristotle makes between these two 
terms [automaton and tyche] in the conceptual 
analysis of chance he provides in his Physics. 
Many discussions would be clarified if it were 
not overlooked. 

20. 1 am referring here to the Entwurfeiner 
Psychologie ["Project for a Scientific Psychol- 
ogy"] written in 1895 which, unlike the 
famous letters to Fliess (with which it was 
included [in The Origins of Psychoanalysis] 
since it was addressed to him), was not cen- 
sored by its editors. Certain mistakes found in 
the German edition, owing to the misreading 
of the handwritten manuscript, even indicate 
how little attention was paid to its meaning. It 
is clear in this passage that I am merely punc- 
tuating a position that was developed in my 
seminar. 

21. [Added in 1966:] For greater clarity, let 
me illustrate this notation using the following 
random [hasard] series: 

+ ++- + + -- + - 

12 3 2 2 2 2 3 etc. 

22. This dissymmetry is truly the one that 
unites the usages of the English word that, as 
far as I know, has no equivalent in any other 
language: "odd." The French usage of the 
word "impair" to designate an aberration of 
conduct shows us something of a sketch 
thereof; but the word "disparate" itself proves 
inadequate here. 

23. See the revitalizing reprising of it by 
Claude Levi-Strauss in his article "Les organ- 
isations dualistes existent-elles?" in Bijdragen 
tot de taal-, land- en Volkenkunde, Deel 1 12, 2 
(Gravenhage, 1956), 99-128. This article can 
be found in French in a collection of works by 
Claude Levi-Strauss published as Anthropolo- 
gie structural (Paris: Plon, 1958). [In English, 



Ecrits 



see "Do Dual Organizations Exist?" in Struc- 
tural Anthropology, trans. C. Jacobson and B. 
G. Schoepf (New York: Basic Books, 1963).] 

24. These two letters correspond to the dex- 
trogyrate and levogyrate nature of a figuration 
that situates the excluded terms in quadrants. 

25. [Added in 1966:] If one does not take into 
account the order of the letters, this caput mor- 
tuum is only 7/16. 

26. This is why I have since introduced a 
more appropriate topology. 

27. See the Abbot of Choisy, whose famous 
memoirs can be translated as: / think, when I 
am the one who dresses like a woman. 

28. Let me add here the network of the as, 
Ps, ys, and 6s, which is constituted by a trans- 
formation of the 1—3 Network. As all mathe- 
maticians know, it is obtained by transforming 
the segments of the first network into the cuts 
of the second and by marking the oriented paths 
joining these cuts. It is as follows (I am placing 
it next to the first for greater clarity): 

1-3 NETWORK 




the letters are based: 

1.1-a 
0.0 = y 
1.0 = p 

0.1=6 

(One can see here why I said that there are two 
types of in my L chain, for there are those 0s 
that correspond to y = 000 and those 0s that cor- 
respond to y = 010.) 

29. [Added in 1 966:] The text written in 1 955 
resumes here. The introduction of a structural 
approach to the field in psychoanalytic theory 
through such exercises was, in fact, followed by 
important developments in my teaching. Con- 
cepts related to subjectivization progressed 
hand-in-hand with a reference to the analysis 
situs in which I claim to materialize the subjec- 
tive process. 

30. It was in order to dispel this illusion that 
I closed that year's seminar with a lecture on 
"Psychoanalysis and Cybernetics" [Seminar II, 
chapter 23], which disappointed many because 
I barely spoke in it of anything other than 
binary numeration, the arithmetic triangle, and 
even of the simple gate, defined by the fact that 
it must be open or closed — in short, because it 
seemed that I had not gone very far beyond the 
Pascalian stage of the question. 



a, P, Y, 6 NETWORK 




Here I propose the convention upon which 



On My Antecedents 65 



In taking a step back now to present the work that marked my entry into 
psychoanalysis, I will remind the reader by what doorway this entry 
occurred. 

As a physician and a psychiatrist, I had introduced, under the heading of 
"paranoiac knowledge," several end results of the method of clinical 
exhaustion that my doctoral thesis in medicine exemplified. 1 

Rather than mention the group (Evolution Psychiatrique) that was will- 
ing to publish my exposition of these results, or even mention their echo 
in the surrealist environment in which a former link was reestablished on 
the basis of a new relay, including Salvador Dali's "critical paranoia" and 
Rene Crevel's Le Clavecin de Diderot — my offspring can be found in the 
first issues of the journal Minotaure 1 — I will indicate the origin of my inter- 
est in it. 

It stems from the work of Gatian de Clerambault, my only master in 
psychiatry. 

His notion of "mental automatism," with its metaphorical, mechanis- 
tic ideology, which is assuredly open to criticism, seems to me, in its attempt 
to come to grips with the [patient's] subjective text, closer to what can be 
constructed on the basis of a structural analysis than any other clinical 
approach in French psychiatry. 

I was sensitive to the hint of a promise that I perceived in it due to the 



52 Ecrits 

contrast between it and the decline that could be seen in a semiology that 
was ever more bogged down in assumptions related to rationality. 
66 Clerambault achieved, through the quality of his gaze and the biases of 

his thought, a sort of recurrence of what has recently been described for 
us in a figure that dates back to the birth of the clinic. 3 

Clerambault was very familiar with the French tradition, but it was Krae- 
pelin, whose clinical genius was of a higher caliber, who trained him. 

Oddly enough, but necessarily, I believe, I was thereby led to Freud. 

For faithfulness to the symptom's formal envelope, which is the true clin- 
ical trace for which I acquired a taste, led me to the limit at which it swings 
back in creative effects. In the case included in my dissertation (the case of 
Aimee), there were literary effects — of high enough quality to have been 
collected, under the (reverent) heading of involuntary poetry, by Eluard. 

The function of ideals presented itself to me here in a series of redupli- 
cations that led me to the notion of a structure, which was more instruc- 
tive than the account the clinicians in Toulouse would have provided, for 
they would have lowered its price by situating it in the register of passion. 

Moreover, the sort of gust effect that, in my subject, blew down the screen 
known as a delusion as soon as her hand touched, in a serious act of aggres- 
sion, one of the images in her theater — who was doubly fictitious for her 
since she was also a star in reality — redoubled the conjugation of her poetic 
space with a gulf-like scansion. 

This brought me closer to the stage machinery of acting out [passage a 
facte] and, if only by confining myself to the all-purpose word "self-pun- 
ishment" that Berlin-style criminology offered me through the mouthpieces 
of Alexander and Staub, I was led to Freud. 

The way in which a knowledge [connaissance] is specified on the basis 
of its stereotypy, and also of its discharges, providing evidence of another 
function, [seemed to me to] lead to an enrichment which no academicism, 
even that of the avant-garde, could have turned away. 

Perhaps it will be understood that by crossing the doorstep of psycho- 
analysis, I immediately recognized in its practice knowledge-related biases 
that are far more interesting, since they are those that must be eliminated 
in its fundamental listening. 
6 j I had not awaited that moment to meditate upon the fantasies through 

which the idea of the ego is apprehended, and if I presented the "mirror 
stage" in 1936, 4 when I had yet to be granted the customary title of ana- 
lyst, at the first International Congress at which I had my first taste of an 
association that was to give me plenty of others, I was not lacking in merit 
for doing so. For its invention brought me to the very heart of a resistance 



On My Antecedents 5j 

in theory and technique which, constituting an ever more blatant problem 
thereafter, was, it must be admitted, far from being perceived by the milieu 
I started out in. 

I have thought it well to first offer the reader a short article, which was 
written around the same time as that presentation. 

My students occasionally delude themselves into thinking that they have 
found "already there" in my writings what my teaching has only brought 
out since then. Is it not enough that what is there did not bar the way to 
what came later? Let the reference to language that is sketched out here be 
seen as the fruit of the only imprudence that has never failed me: that of 
trusting in nothing but the experience of the subject who is the only mate- 
rial of analytic work. 

My title, "Beyond . . . ," did not hesitate to paraphrase the other Beyond 
that Freud assigns to his pleasure principle in 1920. Which leads us to won- 
der: Did Freud throw off the yoke thanks to which he maintained this prin- 
ciple by pairing it with the reality principle? 

In his Beyond, Freud makes room for the fact that the pleasure principle 
— to which he has, in sum, given a new meaning by instating its signify- 
ing articulation of repetition in the circuit of reality, in the form of the 
primary process — takes on a still newer meaning by helping force open its 
traditional barrier related to a jouissance, a jouissance that is pinpointed at 
that time in masochism, and even opens onto [the question of] the death 
drive. 

What happens, under such conditions, to this intertwining by which the 
identity of thoughts that stem from the unconscious offers its woof to the 
secondary process, by permitting reality to become established to the plea- 68 

sure principle 's satisfaction} 

That is the question with which the reversed reprisal of the Freudian 
project, by which I have recently characterized my project, could be 
announced. 

While we have the beginnings of it here, it could go no further. Let us 
simply say that it does not exaggerate the scope of psychoanalytic action 
[Facte psychanalytique] when it assumes that the latter transcends the sec- 
ondary process to attain a reality that is not produced in it, even if it dis- 
pels the illusion that reduced the identity of thoughts to the thought of their 
identity. 

Although everyone agrees, in fact (even those who are dumb enough 
not to realize that they agree), that the primary process encounters noth- 
ing real except the impossible, which in the Freudian perspective remains 



54 Ecrits 

the best definition that can be given of reality [reel], the point is to know 
more about what Else [d 9 Autre] it encounters so that we can concern our- 
selves with it. 

Thus it is not to be duped by an effect of perspective to see here the first 
delineation of the imaginary, whose letters, associated with those of the 
symbolic and the real, will decorate much later (just before my Rome dis- 
course) the pots — that are forever empty, since they are all so symbolic — 
in which I will prepare the theriac with which to resolve the confusions of 
analytic cogitation. 

There is nothing here that is not justified by my attempt to refute the mis- 
guided idea that there must be something, anything whatsoever, in the sub- 
ject that corresponds to a reality [reel] system — or even, as people in other 
circles say, to a characteristic function of reality. It is to this very mirage 
that a theory of the ego is currently devoted which, in basing itself on the 
return Freud assures this agency in his Group Psychology and the Analysis 
of the Ego, goes astray since that text includes nothing but the theory of 
identification. 

The aforementioned theory [ego psychology] fails to refer to the nec- 
essary antecedent to Group Psychology, which served as its basis: the arti- 
cle entitled "On Narcissism." It was, of course, published in 1914, a year 
in which the attention of the analytic community was stretched a bit thin. 

There is nothing here, in any case, which allows us to consider unequiv- 
ocal the reality that people invoke by combining in it the two terms, Wirk- 
lichkeit and Realitat, that Freud distinguishes in this article, the second being 
especially reserved for psychical reality. 
69 Whence derives the value, which is wirklich, operative, of the wedge 

that I drive in here by putting back in its place the deceptive truism that 
identicalness to oneself, which is presumed to exist in the ego's usual sense 
[of itself], has something to do with a supposed instance of reality [reel]. 

If Freud reminds us of the relationship between the ego and the per- 
ception-consciousness system, it is only to indicate that our reflective tra- 
dition — we would be wrong to think that it has had no social impact insofar 
as it has served as a basis for political forms of personal status — has tested 
its standards of truth in this system. 

But it is in order to call these standards of truth into question that Freud 
links the ego, on the basis of a twofold reference, to one 's own body — that 
is narcissism — and to the complexity of the three orders of identification. 

The mirror stage establishes the watershed between the imaginary and 
the symbolic in the moment of capture by an historic inertia, responsibil- 



On My Antecedents 55 

ity for which is borne by everything that alleges to be psychology, even if 
it is by pathways that claim to release it from that responsibility. 

This is why I did not give my article on the reality principle the sequel 
it announced, which was to assail Gestalt theory and phenomenology. 

Instead, I constantly emphasized a moment in analytic practice which 
is not one of history but of configuring insight*, which I designated as a 
stage, even if it emerged as a phase. 

Must this phase be reduced to a biological crisis? The dynamic of this phase, 
as I outline it, is based on diachronic effects: the delayed coordination of 
the nervous system related to man's prematurity at birth, and the formal 
anticipation of its resolution. 

But to presume the existence of a harmony that is contradicted by many 
facts of ethology is tantamount to dupery. 

It masks the crux of a function of lack with the question of the place that 
this function can assume in a causal chain. Now, far from imagining elim- 
inating it from it, I currently consider such a function to be the very ori- 
gin of causalist noesis, which goes so far as to mistake it for its crossing 
into reality \passage au reel]. 

But to consider it effective due to its imaginary discordance is to still 
leave too much room for the presumption of birth. 

This function involves a more critical lack, its cover being the secret to 70 

the subject's jubilation. 

Here we can see that any dwelling [attardement] on the genesis of the 
ego shares in the vanity of what it judges. Which seems self-evident if we 
think about it: Can any step in the imaginary go beyond the imaginary's 
limits if it does not stem from another order? 

This is nevertheless what psychoanalysis clearly promises, and it would 
remain mythical were analysis to retreat to the same level as the imaginary. 

To pinpoint it in the mirror stage, we first have to know how to read in 
it the paradigm of the properly imaginary definition that is given of 
metonymy: the part for the whole. For let us not forget that my concept 
envelops the so-called partial images — the only ones that warrant the term 
"archaic" — found in the analytic experience of fantasy; I group those 
images together under the heading of images of the fragmented body, and 
they are confirmed by the assertion of fantasies of the so-called paranoid 
phase in the phenomenology of Kleinian experience. 

What is involved in the triumph of assuming [assomption] the image of 
one's body in the mirror is the most evanescent of objects, since it only 
appears there in the margins: the exchange of gazes, which is manifest in 



56 Ecrits 

the fact that the child turns back toward the person who is assisting the 
child in some way, if only by being present during the game. 

Let me add to this something that a movie, which was made by people 
with no knowledge of my conceptions, showed us when it captured on film 
a little girl looking at herself naked in the mirror: with an awkward ges- 
ture, her hand quickly encountered the phallic lack. 

Regardless of what covers the image, nevertheless, the latter merely cen- 
ters a power that is deceptive insofar as it diverts alienation — which 
already situates desire in the Other's field — toward the totalitarian rivalry 
which prevails due to the fact that the semblable exercises a dyadic fasci- 
nation on him: that "one or the other" is the depressive return of the sec- 
ond phase in Melanie Klein's work; it is the figure of Hegelian murder. 

Let me add here, by way of an apologue with which to summarize the 
early misrecognition that takes root here, the use of the inversion produced 
in planar symmetry [right-left reversal]. It could only take on value 
through a more in-depth discussion of spatial orientation, which philoso- 
phy has not been more interested in, surprisingly enough, since Kant, hold- 
ing his glove at the end of his hand, based an aesthetics on it — an aesthetics 
that is nevertheless just as simple to turn inside out as the glove itself is. 

But this is already to situate the experience at a point that does not allow 
71 one to delude oneself regarding the link with the ability to see. Even a blind 

man is a subject here because he knows he is an object of other people's 
gazes. But the problem lies elsewhere and its articulation is as theoretical 
as that of Molyneux's problem: 5 we would have to know what the ego would 
be in a world where no one knows anything about planar symmetry. 

Lastly, let me remind you of the reference points of specular knowledge 
[connaissance] based on a semiology that runs the gamut from the most sub- 
tle depersonalization to the hallucination of one 's double. They are known 
to have no intrinsic diagnostic value as concerns the structure of the sub- 
ject (the psychotic, among others). It is more important to note, however, 
that they do not constitute a more consistent reference point for fantasy in 
psychoanalytic treatment. 

I thus find myself situating these texts in a future perfect: they will have 
anticipated my insertion of the unconscious into language. In seeing them 
spread out over the years that were not very full, aren't I exposing myself 
to the reproach of having given into dwelling on the past [attardement]? 

Apart from the fact that I certainly had to gain a following in our field 
of practice, I will plead that I could do no better during that time than pre- 
pare my audience. 



On My Antecedents 5y 

Present generations of psychiatrists will find it hard to imagine that, at 
the time that I was doing my residency, there were only three of us who 
got involved in psychoanalysis; and without being ungrateful to the group 
of people involved in Evolution Psychiatrique, I will say that although it 
was to their credit that psychoanalysis saw the light of day [in France], psy- 
choanalysis was not radically called into question by them. The intrusion 
of worldly matters did not increase either their solidarity or their infor- 
mation to this end. 

In fact, no teaching other than a routine fast-track existed prior to 1951 
when I began mine in a private capacity. 

While the quantity of recruits, from which an effect of quality is engen- 
dered, completely changed after the war, perhaps the standing-room-only 
crowd that came to hear me speak about "Training Analysis" will serve as 72 

a reminder that I played an important role therein. 

Up until then, however, the major institution that offered me the oppor- 
tunity to give several public lectures was the College Philosophique, where, 
at Jean Wanl's invitation, the intellectual fevers of the time faced off. 6 

Allow me to add that this note owes what is biographical in it only to 
my desire to enlighten the reader. 



Notes 

1 . My thesis was published as De lapsychose frangaise that attests to the date of the theses it 
parano'iaque dans ses rapports avec la personnal- contained (1938). I, in fact, neglected to send 
ite (Paris: Le Francois, 1932). It was based on the write-up of my talk to those who prepared 
30 cases, although its method required that it the report on the Congress. 

include a monograph: the case of Aimee. This 5. See the article by Alain Grosrichard, 

fact explains the gallant assessment of it, by a "Une experience psychologique au XVIIIe 

luminary, found on page 536. siecle," Cahiers Pour VAnalyse II (May 1966), 

2. They include "Le probleme du style" which would also allow us to further explore 
("The Problem of Style") and "Motifs du the question of the subject from the fiction of 
crime parano'iaque" ("Motives of Paranoiac the philosophically inclined blind man to the 
Crime"); the latter article was devoted to the fiction of the blind philosopher. 

Papin sisters and was left out of a recent dis- 6. One of the talks I gave there was on the 

cussion of this subject by a contemporary. "Individual Myth of the Neurotic," the begin- 

3. See Michel Foucault's Naissance de la ning of a duly structuralist reference (see the 
clinique (Paris: PUF, 1964) [The Birth of the first text by Claude Levi-Strauss on myth). 
Clinic (New York: Pantheon, 1973)]. The mimeographed text of the talk, which 

4. It was at the Congress in Marienbad came out without being corrected by me, will 
(August 3, 1936) that my first pivotal inter- testify to its existence for a later reprisal. [The 
vention in psychoanalytic theory took place. text, originally printed in French in 1953, 
The reader will find an ironic reference to it appeared in English as "The Neurotic's Indi- 
on pages 184-85 of this collection, along with vidual Myth," trans. M. N. Evans, PQ 
a reference to the volume of the Encyclopedie XLVIII, 3 (1979): 405-25.] 



73 



Beyond the "Reality Principle" 



THE SECOND GENERATION OF FREUD'S SCHOOL CAN DEFINE 
ITS DEBT AND ITS DUTY IN TERMS OF A FUNDAMENTAL PRIN- 
CIPLE OF HIS DOCTRINE: THE REALITY PRINCIPLE. 

For the psychiatrist or psychologist of the 1 930s, initiation into psychoana- 
lytic method no longer involves a conversion that constitutes a break in 
one's intellectual development, a conversion that thus attests less to a care- 
fully thought out choice of an avenue of research than to the outburst of 
secret affective strife. The appealing features that analysis once offered to 
the detours of compensation — the ethical seduction of devotion to a contro- 
versial cause, combined with the economic seduction of a form of specula- 
tion running counter to established values — are not missed. The new 
psychology not only fully accepts psychoanalysis; by constantly corrobo- 
rating it by research in disciplines that begin from other starting points, it 
demonstrates the value of psychoanalysis' pioneering work. Psychoanaly- 
sis is thus, one could say, approached from a normal angle of incidence by 
what I will call — without commenting on the arbitrary nature of such a for- 
mulation — the second generation of analysts. It is this angle of incidence 
that I would like to define here in order to indicate the path by which it is 
reflected back. 



Beyond the "Reality Principle" 5<j 

PART I. PSYCHOLOGY WAS CONSTITUTED AS A SCIENCE WHEN 
THE RELATIVITY OF ITS OBJECT WAS POSITED BY FREUD, EVEN 
THOUGH IT WAS RESTRICTED TO FACTS CONCERNING DESIRE. 

Critique ofAssociationism 

The Freudian revolution, like any revolution, derives its meaning from its con- 
text, that is, from the form of psychology that dominated at the time it 
occurred. Now, any judgment about that form of psychology presupposes an 
exegesis of the documents in which it is propounded. I will establish the frame 74 

of this article by asking the reader to credit me here, at least provisionally, with 
having done this basic work, so that I can provide what seems to me to be an 
essential moment of critique. For while I consider it legitimate to privilege the 
historical method in studying facts of consciousness, I do not use it as a pre- 
text to elude the intrinsic critique that questions their value. Such a critique, 
grounded in the secondary order conferred upon these facts in history by the 
element of reflection they involve, remains immanent in the data recognized 
by the method — in our case, in the expressed forms of the doctrine and the 
technique — assuming the method simply requires each of the forms in ques- 
tion to be what it purports to be. This will allow us to see why the late nine- 
teenth century form of psychology that claimed to be scientific and forced 
itself even on its adversaries, thanks both to its apparatus of objectivity and 
its profession of materialism, simply failed to be positive, excluding from the 
outset both objectivity and materialism. 

Indeed, one might say that this form of psychology was based on a so-called 
associationist conception of the psyche, not so much because it formulated this 
conception into a theory, but because it received a series of postulates from 
this conception — as though they were commonsense data — that determined 
its very way of situating problems. Of course, we see right from the outset 
that the framework with which it classified the phenomena into sensations, 
perceptions, images, beliefs, logical operations, judgments, and so on, was bor- 
rowed unchanged from scholastic psychology, which had itself borrowed it 
from centuries of philosophy. We must thus realize that this framework, far 
from having been created for an objective conception of psychical reality, was 
merely the product of a sort of conceptual decline in which the vicissitudes of 
a specific effort that impels man to seek a guarantee of truth for his own knowl- 
edge were retraced — a guarantee which, as we can see, is transcendent by its 
position and therefore remains transcendent in its form, even when philoso- 



Go Ecrits 

phers deny its existence. What hint of transcendence do the concepts that are 
relics of such research themselves retain? To answer this question would 
involve defining what associationism introduces that is not positive into the 
very constitution of the object of psychology. We will see how difficult it is 

75 to sort out at this level, in recalling that contemporary psychology preserves 
many of these concepts and that the purification of principles is what occurs 
last in every science. 

But question begging blossoms in the general economy of problems that 
characterizes the stage of a theory at any particular moment in time. Thus 
considered as a whole, which is facilitated by our ability to view it with hind- 
sight, associationism will strikingly reveal to us its metaphysical implications. 
In order to oppose it simply to a conception that is more or less judiciously 
defined in the theoretical foundations of various contemporary schools by the 
term "function of reality," let us say that associationist theory is dominated 
by the "function of truth." 

Associationism is based on two concepts: the first, the "engram," is mechanis- 
tic; the second, the "associative link" of the mental phenomenon, is fallaciously 
considered to be given by experience. The first is a research formulation, 
and a rather flexible one at that, designed to designate the psychophysical 
element; it merely introduces the hypothesis, which is nevertheless funda- 
mental, of the passive production of this element. It is notable that the asso- 
ciationist school added a postulate, that of the atomistic nature of this 
element. It is, in fact, this postulate that limited the vision of its adherents to 
the point of making them "overlook" experimental facts in which the sub- 
ject's activity in organizing the form is manifest, facts which are, moreover, 
so compatible with a materialist interpretation that their inventors later con- 
ceptualized them from a materialist vantage point. 

The second of these concepts, that of the associative link, is based on the 
experience of the living being's reactions. It is extended, however, to mental 
phenomena without the question begging implied in it being in any way cri- 
tiqued, question begging that this concept borrows precisely from the psy- 
chical pregiven, in particular, the question begging which assumes that the 
mental form of similarity is given, even though it is in itself so difficult to ana- 
lyze. The very pregivenness of the phenomenon that is purportedly explained 
here is thus smuggled into the explanatory concept. All this involves verita- 
ble conceptual sleight of hand (whose innocence does not excuse its crude- 
ness) which, as Janet stressed, in functioning as a veritable intellectual flaw 

76 characteristic of a school, truly becomes a master key used at every turning 



Beyond the "Reality Principle" 61 

point in the theory. Needless to say, one can thereby totally ignore the need 
for the kind of analysis known as "phenomenological analysis" — which no 
doubt requires subtlety but whose absence renders null and void any expla- 
nation in psychology. 

We must thus wonder about the meaning of these failings in the develop- 
ment of a discipline that claims to be objective. Is it due to materialism, as a 
certain critic maintained without meeting with any objection? Or worse still, 
is objectivity itself impossible to attain in psychology? 

People will denounce the theoretical flaw here once they recognize that the 
problem of knowledge is posed in associationism's structure from a philo- 
sophical perspective. This is certainly the traditional position on this problem 
which, having been inherited, in its first disguise, from Locke's so-called 
empiricist formulations, is found anew in two of the doctrine 's fundamental 
concepts — namely, in the ambiguity of a critique which, (1) with the thesis 
"nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuerit in sensu," reduces reality's action 
to its point of contact with pure sensation, that mythical entity, in other words, 
reduces it to being nothing but the blind spot of knowledge, since nothing is 
recognized there, and which (2) imposes all the more strongly, whether this is 
made explicit or not in "nisi intellectus ipse," as the dialectical antinomy of an 
incomplete thesis, the primacy of pure mind, insofar as it constitutes the true 
moment of knowledge, through the essential decree of identification, recog- 
nizing the object at the same time that it asserts it. 

This is the source of the atomistic conception of the engram from which the 
blindnesses of the doctrine with respect to experience stem, while the associa- 
tive link, through its uncriticized implications, brings with it a fundamentally 
idealist theory of knowledge phenomena. 

This last point, which is obviously paradoxical in a doctrine whose preten- 
sions are those of a naive materialism, clearly appears as soon as one attempts 
to formulate it in a slightly systematic manner, that is, in a manner that subjects 
it to the coherence of its concepts. Taine's attempt, which is that of a popular- 
izer, but still consistent, is precious to us in this regard. We see in it a construction 
on the basis of knowledge phenomena, the objective of which is to reduce the 
higher activities to complexes of elementary reactions; it is reduced thereby to 77 

seeking differential criteria of elementary reactions in the control of the higher 
activities. In order to fully grasp this paradox, consider the striking definition 
he gives of perception as a "veridical hallucination." 

The dynamism of concepts borrowed from a transcendental dialectic is thus 
such that associationist psychology, in attempting to base itself on that dialec- 
tic, fails to constitute its object in positive terms, failing all the more fatally in 



62 Ecrits 

that it receives those concepts emptied of the reflection they bring with them. 
Indeed, once the phenomena are defined in that form of psychology as a func- 
tion of their truth, they are submitted in their very conception to a classifica- 
tion on the basis of value. Such a hierarchy not only vitiates, as we have seen, 
the objective study of the phenomena as regards their import in knowledge 
itself, but by subordinating all of the psychical pregiven to its perspective, it 
also skews the analysis thereof and impoverishes its meaning. 

By assimilating the phenomenon of hallucination with the sensory order, 
associationist psychology thus merely reproduces the absolutely mythical 
import that the philosophical tradition attributes to this phenomenon in the 
standard question regarding the error of the senses. The fascination charac- 
teristic of this theoretically scandalous role no doubt explains the true mis- 
recognitions in the analysis of the phenomenon that allow for the perpetuation 
of a position regarding the problem that is so erroneous, yet still tenaciously 
held to by many a clinician. 

Let us now consider the problems of the image. The latter, which is no doubt 
the most important phenomenon in psychology due to the wealth of concrete 
data we have about it, is also important due to the complexity of its function, 
a complexity that one cannot attempt to encompass with a single term, unless 
it is with that of "information function." The various acceptations of this term 
that, running from the ordinary to the archaic, target the notion regarding an 
event, the stamp of an impression or the organization by an idea, express rather 
well, in fact, the roles of the image as the intuitive form of the object, the plas- 
tic form of the engram, and the generative form of development. This extraor- 
dinary phenomenon — the problems of which run from mental phenomenology 
to biology and the action of which echoes from the conditions of the mind to 
the organic determinisms of a perhaps unsuspected depth — is reduced in asso- 
78 ciationism to its function as an illusion. The image, being viewed, according to 

the spirit of the theory, as a weakened sensation insofar as it attests less surely to 
reality, is considered to be the echo and shadow of sensation, and is consequendy 
identified with its trace, the engram. The conception of the mind as a "poly- 
pary of images," which is essential to associationism, has been criticized above 
all for asserting a purely metaphysical mechanism; it has less often been pointed 
out that its essential absurdity lies in the intellectualist impoverishment that it 
imposes upon images. 

In fact, a very large number of psychical phenomena are considered to sig- 
nify nothing, according to the conceptions of this school. These phenomena 
thus supposedly cannot be included within the framework of an authentic psy- 
chology, which has to take into account the fact that a certain intentionality is 
phenomenologically inherent in its object. In associationism, this is equivalent 



Beyond the "Reality Principle" 63 

to considering them to be insignificant, in other words, to rejecting them either 
to the nothingness of neglect or to the emptiness of "epiphenomena." 

Such a conception thus creates two categories of psychical phenomena: those 
phenomena that fit into some level of the operations of rational knowledge, 
and all the others, including feelings, beliefs, delusions, assents, intuitions, and 
dreams. The former necessitated an associationist analysis of the psyche; the 
latter must be explained by some determinism that is foreign to their "appear- 
ance" and that is said to be "organic" insofar as it reduces them to being either 
the prop of a physical object or related to a biological end. 

Psychical phenomena are thus granted no reality of their own: those that 
do not belong to "true" reality have only an illusory reality. This true reality 
is constituted by the system of references that are valid in already established 
sciences — in other words, mechanisms that are considered tangible in the phys- 
ical sciences, to which may be added the motivations considered utilitarian in 
the natural sciences. The role of psychology is merely to reduce psychical phe- 
nomena to this system and to verify the system by determining through it the 
very phenomena that constitute our knowledge of it. It is insofar as this psy- 
chology is a function of this truth that it is not a science. 

The Truth of Psychology and the Psychology of Truth 79 

Let me try to make my point clear. I am not playing at being paradoxical by 
claiming that science need know nothing about truth. But I am not forgetting 
that truth is a value that (cor)responds to the uncertainty with which man's 
lived experience is phenomenologically marked or that the search for truth 
historically motivates, under the heading of the spiritual, the mystic's flights 
and the moralist's rules, the ascetic's progress and the mystagogue 's finds alike. 

This search, by imposing on an entire culture the preeminence of truth in 
testimony, created a moral attitude that was and remains for science a condi- 
tion of its existence. But truth in its specific value remains foreign to the order 
of science: science can be proud of its alliances with truth; it can adopt the phe- 
nomenon and value of truth as its object; but it cannot in any way identify 
truth as its own end. 

If there seems to be something artificial about this, one should dwell an instant 
on the lived criteria of truth and wonder what, in the dizzying relativisms that 
contemporary physics and mathematics have arrived at, subsists of the most con- 
crete of these criteria: Where are certainty, that proof of mystical knowledge, 
self evidence, the foundation of philosophical speculation, and noncontradiction 
itself, the more modest requirement of the empirical/ rationalist construction? 



64 Ecrits 

To consider an example that is more within the reach of our judgment, can we 
say that scientists wonder if the rainbow is true} All that matters to them is 
that this phenomenon be communicable in some language (the condition of 
the intellectual order) , that it be reportable in some form (the condition of the 
experimental order), and that it be possible to insert into the chain of symbolic 
identifications with which their science unifies the diversity of its own object 
(the condition of the rational order). 

It must be admitted that physicomathematical theory at the end of the nine- 
teenth century was still based on foundations that were intuitive enough that 
one could consider those foundations, which have since been eliminated, 
responsible for the prodigious fecundity of that theory and thus see in them 
80 the omnipotence implied in the idea of truth. Furthermore, the practical suc- 

cesses of this science conferred upon it a brilliant prestige for the masses which 
is not unrelated to the phenomenon of self-evidence. Science thus found itself 
in a good position to serve as the ultimate object of the passion for truth, lead- 
ing everyman to bow to the new idol called "scientism" and leading "schol- 
ars" ["clerc"] to the eternal pedantry that mutilates what they are able to grasp 
of reality, because they do not realize how much their truth is relative to the 
walls of their tower. This is the mutilation committed by associationist psy- 
chologists because they are only interested in the act of knowing, that is, in 
their own activity as scientists; the fact that it is speculative does not make it 
have any the less cruel consequences for living beings and for human beings. 

Indeed, a similar point of view forces upon the physician an astonishing con- 
tempt for psychical reality, the scandalous nature of which, perpetuated in our 
times by the maintenance of an entirely academic approach to training, is 
expressed both in the biased nature of observation and in hybrid conceptions 
like that of "pithiatism." But because it was in the physician, that is, in the 
practitioner par excellence of inner life, that this point of view appeared in the 
most flagrant manner as a systematic negation, the negation of this very point 
of view also had to come from a physician. I am not referring to the purely 
critical negation that flourished, around that same time, in speculation about 
the "immediate data of consciousness," but rather to a negation that was effi- 
cient in that it asserted itself in the form of a new positivity. Freud took this 
fruitful step no doubt because, as he indicates in his autobiography, he was 
made to do so by his concern with healing, that is, by an activity in which we 
must recognize the very intelligence of human reality insofar as it attempts to 
transform that reality, as opposed to those who enjoy relegating this activity 
to the subordinate rank of an "art." 



Beyond the "Reality Principle" 65 

Freud 9 s Revolutionary Method 8 1 

The first sign of an attitude of submission to reality in Freud 's work was the 
recognition that, since the majority of psychical phenomena in man are appar- 
ently related to a social relations function, there is no reason to exclude the 
pathway which provides the most usual access to it: the subject's own account 
of these phenomena. 

We may well wonder, moreover, on what the physician of that time based 
the ostracism with which he greeted the patient's account on grounds of prin- 
ciple, if it was not his annoyance at seeing that his own biases were so ordi- 
nary as to be shared by everyone else. Indeed, it is the attitude shared by an 
entire culture which guided the abstraction that I analyzed earlier as that of 
the learned: to the patient and the physician alike, psychology is the field of 
the "imaginary," in the sense of the illusory. Consequently, the symptom, which 
has a real signification, cannot be psychological except "in appearance," and 
it is distinguished from the ordinary register of psychical life by some discor- 
dant feature in which its "serious" character manifests itself. 

Freud understood that it was this very choice that made the patient's 
account worthless. If we wish to recognize a reality that is proper to psychi- 
cal reactions, we must not begin by choosing among them; we must begin by 
no longer choosing. In order to gauge their efficacy, we must respect their suc- 
cession. Certainly, there is no question of restoring the chain of those reac- 
tions through the narrative, but the very moment in which the account is given 
can constitute a significant fragment of the chain, on condition that we 
demand that the patient provide the entire text and that we free him from the 
chains of the narrative. 

This is the way in which what we may call "analytic experience" is con- 
stituted: its first condition is formulated in a law oj non-omission , which pro- 
motes everything that "is self-explanatory," the everyday and the ordinary, 
to the status of interesting that is usually reserved for the remarkable; but it 
is incomplete without the second condition, the law of non-systematiiation, 
which, positing incoherence as a condition of analytic experience, presumes 
significant all the dross of mental life — not only the representations in which 82 

scholastic psychology sees only nonmeaning (dream scenarios, presenti- 
ments, daydreams, and confused or lucid delusions), but also the phenomena 
that are not even granted a civil status in it, so to speak, since they are alto- 
gether negative (slips of the tongue and bungled actions). Let us note that 
these two laws, or better, rules of analytic experience, the first of which was 
isolated by Pichon, appear in Freud's work in the form of a single rule that 



66 Ecrits 

he formulated, in accordance with the concept prevailing at the time, as the 
law of free association. 

A Phenomeno logical Description of Psychoanalytic Experience 

It is analytic experience itself that constitutes the element of therapeutic tech- 
nique, but the doctor may propose, if he has some theoretical sense, to define 
what it contributes to observation. He will then have many an opportunity to 
marvel, if that is indeed the form of astonishment that corresponds in research 
to the appearance of a relationship that is so simple that it seems to evade 
thought's grasp. 

The pregiven of this experience is, first, some language, a language — in 
other words, a sign. How complex is the problem of what it signifies, when 
the psychologist relates it to the subject of knowledge, that is, to the subject's 
thought? What relationship is there between the latter and language? Is the 
subject's thought but a language, albeit a secret one, or is it but the expression 
of a pure, unformulated thought? Where can we find the measure that is com- 
mon to the two terms of this problem, that is, the unity of which language is 
the sign? Is it contained in words: names, verbs, or even adverbs? In the den- 
sity of their history? Why not in the mechanisms that form them phonetically? 
How can we choose in this maze into which we are dragged by philosophers 
and linguists, psychophysicists and physiologists? How can we choose a ref- 
erence which, the more elementary we posit it to be, the more mythical it seems 
to us? 

But the psychoanalyst, in order not to detach analytic experience from the 
language of the situation that it implies, the situation of the interlocutor, comes 
upon the simple fact that language, prior to signifying something, signifies to 
83 someone. It is simply because the analyst is there listening that the man who 

speaks addresses him, and since he forces his discourse not to want to say any- 
thing [ne rien vouloir dire\ he becomes what this man wants to tell him. What 
the man says may, in fact, "have no meaning," but what he says to the analyst 
conceals one anyway. It is in the impulse to respond that the listener senses 
this; and it is by suspending this impulse to respond that the analyst under- 
stands the meaning of the discourse. He then recognizes in it an intention, one 
of the intentions that represent a certain tension in social relations: a demand- 
ing intention, a punitive intention, a propitiatory intention, a demonstrative 
intention, or a purely aggressive intention. Having thus understood this inten- 
tion, let us observe how language transmits it. It does so in two ways about 
which analysis teaches us a great deal: it is expressed, but not understood by 
the subject, in what his discourse relates about his lived experience, and this 



Beyond the "Reality Principle" 6y 

is true as long as the subject assumes the moral anonymity of expression (this 
is the form of symbolism); it is conceptualized, but denied by the subject, in 
what his discourse asserts about his lived experience, and this is true as long 
as the subject systematizes his conception (this is the form of negation). In 
analytic experience, intention thus turns out to be unconscious insofar as it is 
expressed and conscious insofar as it is repressed [reprimee]. And language, 
being approached via its function of social expression, reveals both its sig- 
nificant unity in intention and its constitutive ambiguity as subjective expres- 
sion, admitting something that contradicts thought or using thought to lie. 
Let us note in passing that these relations, which analytic experience offers 
up here to phenomenological exploration, provide a wealth of directives to 
all theories of "consciousness," especially morbid consciousness, since their 
incomplete recognition renders the majority of these theories useless. 

But let us pursue our outline of analytic experience. The listener is thus sit- 
uated in it as an interlocutor. The subject solicits him to assume this role, 
implicitly at first, but soon explicitly. Remaining silent nevertheless, and 
hiding everything including even his facial expressions (which are, more- 
over, barely noticed in him), the psychoanalyst patiently refuses to play this 
role. Is there not a threshold at which such an attitude must bring the sub- 
ject's monologue to a halt? If the subject continues, it is by virtue of the law 
of analytic experience; but is he still addressing the listener who is truly 
present or is he instead addressing some other now, someone who is imagi- 84 

nary but realer still: the phantom of a memory, witness of his solitude, statue 
of his duty, or messenger of his fate? 

In his very reaction to the listener's refusal [to assume the role of inter- 
locutor], the subject reveals the image he has replaced him with. He commu- 
nicates to the analyst the outline of this image through his imploring, 
imprecations, insinuations, provocations, and ruses, through the fluctuations 
of the intention that he directs at the analyst and that the latter motionlessly 
but not impassively takes note of. Nevertheless, as these intentions become 
more explicit in his discourse, they interweave with the accounts with which 
the subject supports them, gives them consistency, and gives them a rest. In 
this discourse, he formulates what he suffers from and what he wants to over- 
come through his analysis, he confides his secret failures and his successful 
designs, he judges his own character and his relations with other people. He 
thus informs the analyst about the entirety of his behavior, and the analyst, 
who witnesses a moment of that behavior, finds in it a basis for its critique. 
After such a critique, this behavior shows the analyst that the very image that 
he sees emerge from the subject's current behavior is actually involved in all 



68 Ecrits 

of his behavior. But the analyst's discoveries do not stop there, for as the sub- 
ject's demands take the form of pleas, his testimony broadens through its 
appeals to the witness. These are pure narratives that appear "outside the sub- 
ject" that the subject now throws into the stream of his discourse: unintended 
events and fragments of the memories that constitute his history, and, among 
the most disjointed, those that surface from his childhood. But we see that 
among these, the analyst stumbles anew upon the very image that, by playing 
the game as he does, he has awakened in the subject, the trace of which he 
found impressed upon himself by the subject. He certainly knew that this image 
was of human essence, since it provokes passion and oppresses, but it hid its 
characteristics from his gaze, like he himself does from the patient's. He dis- 
covers these characteristics in a family portrait that includes the image of the 
father or of the mother, of the all-powerful adult — tender or terrible, kindly 
or punishing — the image of a brother, a rival sibling, a reflection of the sub- 
ject himself or of one of his companions. 

But the very image that the subject makes present through his behavior, 

and that is constantly reproduced in it, is ignored by him, in both senses of the 

word: he does not know that this image explains what he repeats in his behav- 

8 5 ior, whether he considers it to be his own or not; and he refuses to realize [me'con- 

nait] the importance of this image when he evokes the memory it represents. 

Now, while the analyst completes the task of recognizing this image, the 
subject, through the debate that he carries on, completes the process of impos- 
ing its role on the analyst. The analyst derives the power he will have at his 
disposal in his action on the subject from this position. 

In effect, the analyst then acts in such a way that the subject becomes aware 
of the unity of the image that is refracted in him into disparate effects, depend- 
ing on whether he plays it out, incarnates it, or knows it. I will not describe 
here how the analyst proceeds in his intervention. He operates on the two reg- 
isters of intellectual elucidation through interpretation and handling affect 
through the transference. But to establish the times at which he does so is a mat- 
ter for technique, which defines them as a function of the subject's reactions; 
adjusting the speed at which he does so is a matter of tact, thanks to which the 
analyst is informed about the rhythm of these reactions. 

Let us simply say that, as the subject pursues his analysis and the lived 
process in which the image is reconstituted, his behavior stops mimicking the 
image 's suggestion, his memories reassume their real density, and the analyst 
sees his own power decline, having been rendered useless by the demise of the 
symptoms and the completion of the personality. 



Beyond the "Reality Principle" 69 

Discussion of the Objective Value of the Experience 

Such is the phenomenological description that can be given of what happens 
in the series of experiences that form a psychoanalysis. Some might say that 
it is the work of an illusionist were the result not precisely to dispel an illu- 
sion. Its therapeutic action, on the contrary, must be essentially defined as a 
twofold movement through which the image, which is at first diffuse and bro- 
ken, is progressively assimilated with reality, in order to be progressively dis- 
similated from reality, that is, restored to its proper reality. This action attests 
to the efficacy of this reality. 

But if it is not an illusory kind of work, then it must be a simple technique, 
some will say, and as an experience it is highly unsuitable for scientific obser- 
vation since it is based on conditions that are diametrically opposed to objec- 
tivity. For have I not just described this experience as a constant interaction 86 
between the observer and the object? It is, in effect, in the very movement that 
the subject gives it through his intention that the observer is informed of this 
intention — I have even stressed the primordial nature of this pathway. 
Inversely, through the assimilation that it fosters between himself and the 
image, it subverts from the outset the function of this image in the subject. Of 
course, he only identifies the image in the very progress of this subversion — 
I have not tried to dissimulate the constitutive nature of this process. 

The absence of a fixed reference in the system that is observed and the use, 
for the purposes of observation, of the very subjective movement that is 
eliminated everywhere else as a source of error, are challenges, it seems, to a 
sound method. 

Let me also indicate the challenge to proper usage that can be seen here. In 
the very case study [observation] that he provides us, can the observer hide his 
personal stake in the game? The intuitions of his finds are elsewhere referred 
to as delusions and we find it hard to discern from what experiences the insis- 
tence of his perspicacity proceeds. No doubt, the pathways by which truth is 
discovered are unsoundable, and there have even been mathematicians who 
have admitted to having seen the truth in dreams or having stumbled upon it 
by accident. Nevertheless, propriety requires one to present one *s discovery 
as having proceeded from a process that conforms more closely to the purity 
of the idea. Science, like Caesar's wife, must be above suspicion. 

In any case, the scientist's good reputation has been assured for quite some 
time now. Nature can no longer reveal itself in any sort of human form and every 
step forward in science has effaced from nature an anthropomorphic trait. 



yo Ecrits 

While I think I can speak ironically about what these objections betray by way 
of emotional resistance, I do not think I can dispense with responding to their 
ideological import. Without going too far afield on epistemological questions, 
I will posit first that physical science, as purified as it may seem in its modern 
progress from any intuitive category, nevertheless betrays, indeed all the more 
strikingly, the structure of the intelligence that constructed it. If someone like 

87 Meyerson could show that physical science is subjected in all its processes to 
the form of intellectual identification (a form that is so constitutive of human 
knowledge that he finds it anew through reflection in ordinary thought 
processes), and if the phenomenon of light (to provide here the standard of 
reference and the atom of action) manifests a relationship to the human sen- 
sorium that is more obscure here, don't these points — ideal points by which 
physics is related to man, but which are the poles around which physics 
revolves — demonstrate the most unsettling homologies to the pivotal roles 
assigned to human knowledge, as I mentioned earlier, by a tradition of reflec- 
tion that does not resort to experimentation? 

Be that as it may, the anthropomorphism that has been eliminated by 
physics in the notion of force, for example, is an anthropomorphism that is not 
noetic but psychological, for it is essentially the projection of human intention. 
To require a similar elimination in an anthropology that is in the process of 
being born and to impose such an elimination upon its most distant goals, would 
be to misrecognize its object and to authentically manifest an anthropocen- 
trism of another order, that of knowledge. 

Indeed, man has relations with nature that are specified, on the one hand, 
by the properties of identificatory thought, and on the other hand, by the use 
of instruments or artificial tools. His relations with his semblable proceed along 
pathways that are far more direct: I am not designating language here, or the 
elementary social institutions that are marked with artificiality in their struc- 
ture, regardless of their genesis. I am thinking, rather, of emotional commu- 
nication, which is essential to social groups and manifests itself immediately 
enough in the fact that man exploits his semblable, recognizes himself in this 
semblable, and is attached to this semblable by the indelible psychical link that 
perpetuates the truly specific vital misery of his first years of life. 

These relations can be contrasted with the relations that constitute knowl- 
edge, in the narrow sense of the term, as relations of connaturality: I mean to 
evoke with this term their homology to more immediate, global, and adapted 
forms that characterize, on the whole, animals' psychical relations with their 
natural environment and by which such psychical relations are distinguished 
from psychical relations in man. I shall return to the value of the teachings of 

88 animal psychology. In any case, man's idea of a world that is united to him 



Beyond the "Reality Principle" ji 

through a harmonious relationship allows us to divine its basis in the anthro- 
pomorphism of the myth of nature. As the effort is achieved that animates this 
idea, the reality of this basis is revealed in the ever vaster subversion of nature 
implied by the hominiiation of the planet: the "nature" of man is its relation- 
ship to man. 

The Object of Psychology Is Defined in Essentially Relativistic Terms 

It is in the specific reality of interpersonal relations that a psychology can define 
its own object and its method of investigation. The concepts implied by this 
object and this method are not subjective, but relativistic. Although they are 
anthropomorphic in their foundations, these concepts can develop into gen- 
eral forms of psychology, assuming their abovementioned extension to ani- 
mal psychology proves valid. 

Furthermore, the objective value of a form of research is demonstrated like 
the reality of motion is demonstrated: by the efficacy of its progress. What 
best confirms the excellence of the pathway that Freud defined by which to 
approach the phenomenon, with a purity that distinguished him from all other 
psychologists, is the prodigious advance that gave him a lead on all others in 
psychological reality. 

I will demonstrate this in part two of this article. I will simultaneously show 
the felicitous use he was able to make of the notion of the image. And if, with 
the term "imago," he did not fully extract it from the confused state of every- 
day intuition, he nevertheless masterfully exploited its concrete importance, 
preserving the entirety of its informational function in intuition, memory, and 
development. 

He demonstrated this function in discovering through analytic experience 
the process of identification. The latter is quite different from the process of 
imitation, which is distinguished by its partial and groping form of approxi- 
mation; identification contrasts with imitation not simply as the global assim- 
ilation of a structure but as the virtual assimilation of development implied by 89 
that structure in a still undifferentiated state. 

We thus know that a child perceives certain affective situations — for exam- 
ple, the particular bond between two individuals in a group — with far more 
immediate perspicacity than an adult. An adult, despite his greater psychical 
differentiation, is in fact inhibited both in human knowledge and in the con- 
duct of his relationships by conventional categories that censor them. But the 
absence of these categories serves a child less in permitting him to better per- 
ceive the signs than the primal structure of his psyche serves him in immedi- 
ately imbuing him with the essential meaning of the situation. But this is not 



j2 Ecrits 

the whole of his advantage: along with the significant impression, it also brings 
with it the germ, which it will develop in all its richness, of the social interac- 
tion that is expressed in it. 

This is why a man's character can include an identification with a parental 
feature that disappeared before the time of his earliest memories. What is trans- 
mitted by the psychical pathway are traits that give the individual the partic- 
ular form of his human relations, in other words, \i\s personality. But what man's 
behavior thus reflects are not simply these traits, which nevertheless are often 
among the most hidden, but the current situation in which the parent, who 
was the object of the identification, found himself when the identification 
occurred — for example, in a situation of conflict or of inferiority in the mar- 
ried couple. 

The result of this process is that man's individual behavior bears the mark 
of a certain number of typical psychical relations in which a certain social struc- 
ture is expressed, at the very least the constellation within that structure that 
especially dominates the first years of his childhood. 

These fundamental psychical relations have been revealed in analytic expe- 
rience and defined by analytic theory with the term "complexes." We should 
see in this term the most concrete, fruitful concept that has been contributed 
to the study of human behavior, as opposed to the concept of instinct which, 
up until the former's introduction, had proven to be as inadequate in this field 
as it was sterile. Although analytic doctrine has, in fact, related complexes to 
instincts, it seems that the theory is better clarified by the former than it is sup- 
ported by the latter. 
90 It is through the pathway of the complex that the images that inform the 

broadest units of behavior are instated in the psyche, images with which the 
subject identifies one after the other in order to act out, as sole actor, the drama 
of their conflicts. This comedy, which is situated by the genius of the species 
under the sign of laughter and tears, is a commedia dell'arte in that each indi- 
vidual improvises it and makes it mediocre or highly expressive depending on 
his gifts, of course, but also depending on a paradoxical law that seems to show 
the psychical fecundity of all vital insufficiency. It is a commedia dell'arte in 
the sense that it is performed in accordance with a typical framework and tra- 
ditional roles. One can recognize in it the very characters that have typified 
folklore, stories, and theater for children and adults — the ogre, the bogey- 
man, the miser, and the noble father — that complexes express in more schol- 
arly terms. We will see the figure of harlequin in an image to which the second 
part of this article will lead us. 



Beyond the "Reality Principle" js 

After having highlighted Freud 's phenomenologically acquired knowledge, I 
now turn to a critique of his metapsychology. It begins, precisely, with the 
introduction of the notion of "libido." Freudian psychology, propelling its 
induction with an audacity that verges on recklessness, claims to move from 
interpersonal relations, isolating them as determined by our culture, to the 
biological function that is taken to be their substratum; it locates this function 
in sexual desire. 

We must nevertheless distinguish between two different uses of the term 
"libido," which are constantly confounded in analytic theory: libido as an ener- 
getic concept, regulating the equivalence of phenomena, and libido as a sub- 
stantialist hypothesis, relating the phenomena to matter. 

I refer to the hypothesis as substantialist, and not as materialist, because 
recourse to the idea of matter is but a naive, outmoded form of authentic mate- 
rialism. In any case, it is the metabolism of the sexual function in man that 
Freud designates as the basis of the infinitely varied "sublimations" manifested 
in his behavior. 

I will not debate this hypothesis here, because it seems to me to lie outside 91 

of psychology's proper field. I will nevertheless emphasize that it is based on 
a clinical discovery of essential value: a correlation that constantly manifests 
itself between the exercise, type, and anomalies of the sexual function, on the 
one hand, and a large number of psychical forms and "symptoms," on the other 
hand. Let me add here that the mechanisms by which the hypothesis is devel- 
oped, which are very different from those of associationism, lead to facts that 
can be observationally verified. 

In effect, if the libido theory posits, for example, that childhood sexuality 
goes through an anal stage of organization and grants erotic value to the excre- 
tory function and the excremental object alike, this interest can be observed 
in the child exactly where the theory says it should be. 

As an energetic concept, on the contrary, libido is merely the symbolic nota- 
tion for the equivalence between the dynamisms invested by images in behav- 
ior. It is the very condition of symbolic identification and the essential entity of 
the rational order, without which no science could be constituted. With this 
notation, the efficacy of images — although it cannot yet be tied to a unit of 
measurement, but is already provided with a positive or negative sign — can 
be expressed through the equilibrium that the images establish and, in some 
sense, by balancing a pair of scales. 

The notion of libido in this usage is no longer metapsychological: it is the 
instrument of psychology's progress toward positive knowledge. The com- 
bination, for example, of the notion of libidinal cathexis with a structure as 



J4 Ecrits 

concretely defined as that of the "superego," represents — regarding both the 
ideal definition of moral conscience and the functional abstraction of so-called 
reactions of opposition and imitation — progress that can only be compared to 
that provided in the physical sciences by the relationship "weight divided by 
volume" when it replaced the quantitative categories heavy and light. 

The elements of ^positive determination were thus introduced between psy- 
chical realities that a relativistic definition has allowed us to objectify. This 
determination is dynamic or relative to the facts regarding desire. 

It was possible in this way to establish a scale for the constitution of man's 
92 objects of interest, and especially for those, which are prodigiously diverse, 

that remain an enigma, if psychology in theory posits reality such as knowl- 
edge constitutes it: anomalies of emotion and drive, idiosyncrasies of attrac- 
tion and repulsion, phobias and panic attacks, nostalgias and irrational wills; 
personal curiosities, selective collecting, inventions of knowledge, and job 
vocations. 

On the other hand, a classification of what one might call the "imaginary 
posts" that constitute the personality was defined, posts which are distributed 
and in which the images mentioned above as informing development — the id, 
the ego, and the archaic and secondary instances of the superego — are com- 
posed according to their types. 

Two questions arise here: how is the reality to which man's knowledge is 
universally attuned constituted by these images, these objects of interest? And 
how is the /constituted, in which the subject recognizes himself, by his typi- 
cal identifications? 

Freud answers these two questions by again moving onto metapsycholog- 
ical ground. He posits a "reality principle" whose role in his theory I propose 
to critique. But before doing so, I must first examine what has been provided 
by the studies that have been contributing to the new psychological science, 
alongside Freud's discipline, regarding the reality of the image and forms of 
knowledge. These will constitute the two parts of my second article. 

Marienbad and Noirmoutier, August— October 1936 



The Mirror Stage as Formative 
of the / Function 

as Revealed in Psychoanalytic Experience 

Delivered on July 17, 1949, in Zurich at the Sixteenth 
International Congress of Psychoanalysis 



93 



The conception of the mirror stage I introduced at our last congress thirteen 
years ago, having since been more or less adopted by the French group, seems 
worth bringing to your attention once again — especially today, given the light 
it sheds on the / function in the experience psychoanalysis provides us of it. 
It should be noted that this experience sets us at odds with any philosophy 
directly stemming from the cogito. 

Some of you may recall the behavioral characteristic I begin with that is 
explained by a fact of comparative psychology: the human child, at an age 
when he is for a short while, but for a while nevertheless, outdone by the chim- 
panzee in instrumental intelligence, can already recognize his own image as 
such in a mirror. This recognition is indicated by the illuminative mimicry of 
the A ha-Erle/>nis y which Kohler considers to express situational apperception, 
an essential moment in the act of intelligence. 

Indeed, this act, far from exhausting itself, as in the case of a monkey, in 
eventually acquired control over the uselessness of the image, immediately 
gives rise in a child to a series of gestures in which he playfully experiences 
the relationship between the movements made in the image and the reflected 
environment, and between this virtual complex and the reality it duplicates — 
namely, the child's own body, and the persons and even things around him. 

This event can take place, as we know from Baldwin's work, from the age 
of six months on; its repetition has often given me pause to reflect upon the 
striking spectacle of a nursling in front of a mirror who has not yet mastered 94 



y6 Ecrits 

walking, or even standing, but who — though held tightly by some prop, human 
or artificial (what, in France, we call a trotte-bebe [a sort of walker]) — over- 
comes, in a flutter of jubilant activity, the constraints of his prop in order to 
adopt a slightly leaning-forward position and take in an instantaneous view 
of the image in order to fix it in his mind. 

In my view, this activity has a specific meaning up to the age of eighteen 
months, and reveals both a libidinal dynamism that has hitherto remained prob- 
lematic and an ontological structure of the human world that fits in with my 
reflections on paranoiac knowledge. 

It suffices to understand the mirror stage in this context as an identification, 
in the full sense analysis gives to the term: namely, the transformation that 
takes place in the subject when he assumes [assume] an image — an image that 
is seemingly predestined to have an effect at this phase, as witnessed by the 
use in analytic theory of antiquity's term, "imago." 

The jubilant assumption [assomption] of his specular image by the kind of 
being — still trapped in his motor impotence and nursling dependence — the 
little man is at the infans stage thus seems to me to manifest in an exemplary 
situation the symbolic matrix in which the /is precipitated in a primordial form, 
prior to being objectified in the dialectic of identification with the other, and 
before language restores to it, in the universal, its function as subject. 

This form would, moreover, have to be called the "ideal-I" 1 — if we wanted 
to translate it into a familiar register — in the sense that it will also be the root- 
stock of secondary identifications, this latter term subsuming the libidinal nor- 
malization functions. But the important point is that this form situates the 
agency known as the ego, prior to its social determination, in a fictional direc- 
tion that will forever remain irreducible for any single individual or, rather, 
that will only asymptotically approach the subject's becoming, no matter how 
successful the dialectical syntheses by which he must resolve, as I, his discor- 
dance with his own reality. 

For the total form of his body, by which the subject anticipates the matu- 
95 ration of his power in a mirage, is given to him only as a gestalt, that is, in an 

exteriority in which, to be sure, this form is more constitutive than constituted, 
but in which, above all, it appears to him as the contour of his stature that 
freezes it and in a symmetry that reverses it, in opposition to the turbulent 
movements with which the subject feels he animates it. Through these two 
aspects of its appearance, this gestalt — whose power [pregnance] should be 
considered linked to the species, though its motor style is as yet unrecogniz- 
able — symbolizes the /'s mental permanence, at the same time as it prefigures 
its alienating destination. This gestalt is also replete with the correspondences 
that unite the /with the statue onto which man projects himself, the phantoms 



The Mirror Stage as Formative of the / Function 77 

that dominate him, and the automaton with which the world of his own mak- 
ing tends to achieve fruition in an ambiguous relation. 

Indeed, for imagos — whose veiled faces we analysts see emerge in our daily 
experience and in the penumbra of symbolic effectiveness 2 — the specular image 
seems to be the threshold of the visible world, if we take into account the mir- 
rored disposition of the imago of one's own body in hallucinations and dreams, 
whether it involves one 's individual features, or even one 's infirmities or object 
projections; or if we take note of the role of the mirror apparatus in the appear- 
ance of doubles, in which psychical realities manifest themselves that are, more- 
over, heterogeneous. 

The fact that a gestalt may have formative effects on an organism is attested 
to by a biological experiment that is so far removed from the idea of psychi- 
cal causality that it cannot bring itself to formulate itself in such terms. The 
experiment nevertheless acknowledges that it is a necessary condition for the 
maturation of the female pigeon's gonad that the pigeon see another member 
of its species, regardless of its sex; this condition is so utterly sufficient that 
the same effect may be obtained by merely placing a mirror's reflective field 
near the individual. Similarly, in the case of the migratory locust, the shift within 
a family line from the solitary to the gregarious form can be brought about 
by exposing an individual, at a certain stage of its development, to the exclu- 
sively visual action of an image akin to its own, provided the movements of 
this image sufficiently resemble those characteristic of its species. Such facts 
fall within a realm of homeomorphic identification that is itself subsumed 96 

within the question of the meaning of beauty as formative and erogenous. 

But mimetic facts, understood as heteromorphic identification, are of just 
as much interest to us insofar as they raise the question of the signification of 
space for living organisms — psychological concepts hardly seeming less 
appropriate for shedding light here than the ridiculous attempts made to reduce 
these facts to the supposedly supreme law of adaptation. We need but recall 
how Roger Caillois (still young and fresh from his break with the sociologi- 
cal school at which he trained) illuminated the subject when, with the term 
"legendary psychasthenia," he subsumed morphological mimicry within the 
derealizing effect of an obsession with space. 

As I myself have shown, human knowledge is more independent than ani- 
mal knowledge from the force field of desire because of the social dialectic 
that structures human knowledge as paranoiac; 3 but what limits it is the "scant 
reality" surrealistic unsatisfaction denounces therein. These reflections lead 
me to recognize in the spatial capture manifested by the mirror stage, the effect 
in man, even prior to this social dialectic, of an organic inadequacy of his nat- 
ural reality — assuming we can give some meaning to the word "nature." 



j8 Ecrits 

The function of the mirror stage thus turns out, in my view, to be a partic- 
ular case of the function of imagos, which is to establish a relationship between 
an organism and its reality — or, as they say, between the Innenwelt and the 
Umwelt. 

In man, however, this relationship to nature is altered by a certain dehis- 
cence at the very heart of the organism, a primordial Discord betrayed by the 
signs of malaise and motor uncoordination of the neonatal months. The objec- 
tive notions of the anatomical incompleteness of the pyramidal tracts and of 
certain humoral residues of the maternal organism in the newborn confirm 
my view that we find in man a veritable specific prematurity of birth. 
97 Let us note in passing that this fact is recognized as such by embryologists, 

under the heading "fetalization," as determining the superiority of the so-called 
higher centers of the central nervous system, and especially of the cerebral 
cortex which psychosurgical operations will lead us to regard as the intra- 
organic mirror. 

This development is experienced as a temporal dialectic that decisively pro- 
jects the individual's formation into history: the mirror stage is a drama whose 
internal pressure pushes precipitously from insufficiency to anticipation — and, 
for the subject caught up in the lure of spatial identification, turns out fan- 
tasies that proceed from a fragmented image of the body to what I will call an 
"orthopedic" form of its totality — and to the finally donned armor of an alien- 
ating identity that will mark his entire mental development with its rigid struc- 
ture. Thus, the shattering of the Innenwelt to Umwelt circle gives rise to an 
inexhaustible squaring of the ego's audits. 

This fragmented body — another expression I have gotten accepted into the 
French school's system of theoretical references — is regularly manifested in 
dreams when the movement of an analysis reaches a certain level of aggres- 
sive disintegration of the individual. It then appears in the form of discon- 
nected limbs or of organs exoscopically represented, growing wings and 
taking up arms for internal persecutions that the visionary Hieronymus Bosch 
fixed for all time in painting, in their ascent in the fifteenth century to the imag- 
inary zenith of modern man. But this form turns out to be tangible even at the 
organic level, in the lines of "fragilization" that define the hysteric's fantas- 
matic anatomy, which is manifested in schizoid and spasmodic symptoms. 

Correlatively, the / formation is symbolized in dreams by a fortified camp, 
or even a stadium — distributing, between the arena within its walls and its outer 
border of gravel-pits and marshes, two opposed fields of battle where the sub- 
ject bogs down in his quest for the proud, remote inner castle whose form (some- 
times juxtaposed in the same scenario) strikingly symbolizes the id. Similarly, 
though here in the mental sphere, we find fortified structures constructed, the 



The Mirror Stage as Formative of the / Function 39 

metaphors for which arise spontaneously, as if deriving from the subject's very 
symptoms, to designate the mechanisms of obsessive neurosis: inversion, iso- 98 

lation, reduplication, undoing what has been done, and displacement. 

But were I to build on these subjective data alone — were I to so much as 
free them from the experiential condition that makes me view them as based 
on a language technique — my theoretical efforts would remain exposed to the 
charge of lapsing into the unthinkable, that of an absolute subject. This is why 
I have sought, in the present hypothesis grounded in a confluence of objec- 
tive data, a method of symbolic reduction as my guiding grid. 

It establishes a genetic order in ego defenses, in accordance with the wish 
formulated by Anna Freud in the first part of her major book, and situates (as 
against a frequently expressed prejudice) hysterical repression and its returns 
at a more archaic stage than obsessive inversion and its isolating processes, 
situating the latter as prior to the paranoiac alienation that dates back to the 
time at which the specular / turns into the social /. 

This moment at which the mirror stage comes to an end inaugurates, 
through identification with the imago of one 's semblable and the drama of 
primordial jealousy (so well brought out by the Charlotte Biihler school in 
cases of transitivism in children), the dialectic that will henceforth link the / 
to socially elaborated situations. 

It is this moment that decisively tips the whole of human knowledge [savoir] 
into being mediated by the other's desire, constitutes its objects in an abstract 
equivalence due to competition from other people, and turns the /into an appa- 
ratus to which every instinctual pressure constitutes a danger, even if it cor- 
responds to a natural maturation process. The very normalization of this 
maturation is henceforth dependent in man on cultural intervention, as is exem- 
plified by the fact that sexual object choice is dependent upon the Oedipus 
complex. 

In light of my conception, the term "primary narcissism," by which ana- 
lytic doctrine designates the libidinal investment characteristic of this 
moment, reveals in those who invented it a profound awareness of semantic 
latencies. But it also sheds light on the dynamic opposition between this libido 
and sexual libido, an opposition they tried to define when they invoked 
destructive and even death instincts in order to explain the obvious relation- 
ship between narcissistic libido and the alienating / function, and the aggres- 
siveness deriving therefrom in all relations with others, even in relations 
involving aid of the most good-Samaritan variety. 

The fact is that they encountered that existential negativity whose reality 
is so vigorously proclaimed by the contemporary philosophy of being and 99 

nothingness. 



So Ecrits 

Unfortunately, this philosophy grasps that negativity only within the lim- 
its of a self *-sufficiency of consciousness, which, being one of its premises, 
ties the illusion of autonomy in which it puts its faith to the ego's constitutive 
misrecognitions. While it draws considerably on borrowings from psychoan- 
alytic experience, this intellectual exercise culminates in the pretense of 
grounding an existential psychoanalysis. 

At the end of a society's historical enterprise to no longer recognize that 
it has any but a utilitarian function, and given the individual's anxiety faced 
with the concentration-camp form of the social link whose appearance seems 
to crown this effort, existentialism can be judged on the basis of the justifica- 
tions it provides for the subjective impasses that do, indeed, result therefrom: 
a freedom that is never so authentically affirmed as when it is within the 
walls of a prison; a demand for commitment that expresses the inability of 
pure consciousness to overcome any situation; a voyeuristic-sadistic ideal- 
ization of sexual relationships; a personality that achieves self-realization 
only in suicide; and a consciousness of the other that can only be satisfied by 
Hegelian murder. 

These notions are opposed by the whole of analytic experience, insofar as 
it teaches us not to regard the ego as centered on the perception-consciousness 
system or as organized by the "reality principle" — the expression of a scien- 
tific bias most hostile to the dialectic of knowledge — but, rather, to take as 
our point of departure the function of misrecognition that characterizes the ego 
in all the defensive structures so forcefully articulated by Anna Freud. For, 
while Verneinung [negation] represents the blatant form of that function, its 
effects remain largely latent as long as they are not illuminated by some 
reflected light at the level of fate where the id manifests itself. 

The inertia characteristic of the / formations can thus be understood as 
providing the broadest definition of neurosis, just as the subject's capture by 
his situation gives us the most general formulation of madness — the kind found 
within the asylum walls as well as the kind that deafens the world with its sound 
and fury. 

The sufferings of neurosis and psychosis provide us schooling in the pas- 
sions of the soul, just as the balance arm of the psychoanalytic scales — when 
we calculate the angle of its threat to entire communities — provides us with 
ioo an amortization rate for the passions of the city. 

At this intersection of nature and culture, so obstinately scrutinized by the 
anthropology of our times, psychoanalysis alone recognizes the knot of imag- 
inary servitude that love must always untie anew or sever. 

For such a task we can find no promise in altruistic feeling, we who lay bare 



The Mirror Stage as Formative of the /Function 81 

the aggressiveness that underlies the activities of the philanthropist, the ide- 
alist, the pedagogue, and even the reformer. 

In the subject to subject recourse we preserve, psychoanalysis can accom- 
pany the patient to the ecstatic limit of the "Thou art that," where the cipher 
of his mortal destiny is revealed to him, but it is not in our sole power as prac- 
titioners to bring him to the point where the true journey begins. 

Notes 

1. 1 have let stand the peculiar translation I "L'efficacite symbolique," in Revue de I'his- 

adopted in this article for Freud's Ideal I ch [je- wire des religions CXXXV, 1 (1949): 5—27. 
ideal], without further comment except to say 3. See, on this point, the texts that follow, 

that I have not maintained it since. pages 1 1 1 and 180 [Ecrits 1966]. 

2. See Claude Levi-Strauss' essay, entitled 



ioi Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis 



Theoretical paper presented in Brussels in mid-May 1948 at the 
Eleventh Congress of French-Speaking Psychoanalysts 



The preceding paper presented to you the use I make of the notion of aggres- 
siveness in clinical work and therapy. 1 That notion must now be put to the test 
before you to determine whether or not we can wrest a concept from it that 
may lay claim to scientific usefulness — in other words, a concept that can objec- 
tify facts that are of a comparable order in reality or, more categorically, that 
can establish a dimension of analytic experience in which these objectified facts 
may be regarded as variables. 

All of us here at this gathering share an experience based on a technique 
and a system of concepts to which we are faithful, as much because the sys- 
tem was developed by the man who opened up all of that experience 's path- 
ways to us, as because it bears the living mark of its stages of development. In 
other words, contrary to the dogmatism with which we are taxed, we know 
that this system remains open as regards both its completion and a number of 
its articulations. 

These hiatuses seem to come together in the enigmatic signification 
Freud expressed with the term "death instinct" — attesting, rather like the 
figure of the Sphinx, to the aporia this great mind encountered in the most 
profound attempt to date to formulate one of man's experiences in the bio- 
logical register. 

This aporia lies at the heart of the notion of aggressiveness, whose role in 
the psychical economy we appreciate better every day. 

That is why the question of the metapsychological nature of the deadly 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis 83 

tendencies is constantly being raised by our theoretically inclined colleagues, 
not without contradiction, and often, it must be admitted, in a rather for- 
malistic way. 

I would simply like to proffer a few remarks or theses inspired by my years 1 02 

of reflection upon this veritable aporia in psychoanalytic doctrine, and by the 
sense I have — after reading numerous works — of our responsibility for the 
current evolution of laboratory psychology and psychotherapy. I am refer- 
ring, on the one hand, to so-called "behaviorist" research that seems to me to 
owe its best results (insignificant as they sometimes appear compared to the 
sizable theoretical apparatus with which they are framed) to the often implicit 
use it makes of categories psychoanalysis has contributed to psychology; and, 
on the other hand, to the kind of treatment, given to both adults and children, 
that might be placed under the heading of "psychodrama," which looks to abre- 
action for its therapeutic power — trying to exhaust it at the level of role play- 
ing — and to which classical psychoanalysis has, once again, contributed the 
actual guiding notions. 

Thesis I: Aggressiveness manifests itself in an experience that is 
subjective in its very constitution. 

It is, in fact, useful to reconsider the phenomenon of psychoanalytic experi- 
ence. In trying to get at the basics, reflection upon this is often omitted. 

It can be said that psychoanalytic action develops in and through verbal 
communication, that is, in a dialectical grasping of meaning. Thus it presup- 
poses a subject who manifests himself verbally in addressing another subject. 

It cannot be objected to us that this latter subjectivity must be null and void, 
according to the ideal physics lives up to — eliminating it by using recording 
devices, though it cannot avoid responsibility for human error in reading the 
results. 

Only a subject can understand a meaning; conversely, every meaning phe- 
nomenon implies a subject. In analysis, a subject presents himself as capable 
of being understood and is, in effect; introspection and supposedly projective 
intuition are not the a priori vitiations that psychology, taking its first steps 
along the path of science, believed to be irreducible. This would be to create 
an impasse out of moments that are abstractly isolated from a dialogue, 
whereas one should instead trust in its movement: it was to Freud 's credit that 1 03 

he assumed the risks involved before overcoming them by means of a rigor- 
ous technique. 

Can his results ground a positive science? Yes, if the experience can be ver- 
ified by everyone. Now this experience, constituted between two subjects, one 



84 Ecrits 

of whom plays in the dialogue the role of ideal impersonality (a point that will 
require explanation later), may, once completed — its only conditions having 
to do with the capability of this subject, which is something that may be required 
in all specialized research — be begun anew by the second subject with a third. 
This apparently initiatory path is simply transmission by recurrence, which 
should surprise no one since it stems from the very bipolar structure of all sub- 
jectivity. Only the speed at which the experience spreads is affected thereby; 
and while it may be debated whether the experience is restricted to the region 
in which a specific culture reigns — although no sound anthropology can raise 
objections on that score — all the indicators suggest that its results can be rel- 
ativized sufficiently to become generalizable, thus satisfying the humanitar- 
ian postulate inseparable from the spirit of science. 

Thesis II: Aggressiveness presents itself in analysis 

as an aggressive intention and as an image of corporal dislocation, and 

it is in such forms that it proves to be effective. 

Analytic experience allows us to experience intentional pressure. We read it 
in the symbolic meaning of symptoms — once the subject sheds the defenses 
by which he disconnects them from their relations with his everyday life and 
history — in the implicit finality of his behavior and his refusals, in his bun- 
gled actions, in the avowal of his favorite fantasies, and in the rebuses of his 
dream life. 

We can almost measure it in the demanding tone that sometimes perme- 
ates his whole discourse, in his pauses, hesitations, inflections, and slips of the 
tongue, in the inaccuracies of his narrative, irregularities in his application of 
the fundamental rule, late arrivals at sessions, calculated absences, and often 
in his recriminations, reproaches, fantasmatic fears, angry emotional reactions, 
and displays designed to intimidate. Actual acts of violence are as rare as might 
104 be expected given the predicament that led the patient to the doctor, and its 

transformation, accepted by the patient, into a convention of dialogue. 

The specific effect of this aggressive intention is plain to see. We regularly 
observe it in the formative action of an individual on those who are depend- 
ent upon him: intentional aggressiveness gnaws away, undermines, and dis- 
integrates; it castrates; it leads to death. "And I thought you were impotent!" 
growled a mother with a tiger's cry, to her son, who, not without great diffi- 
culty, had confessed to her his homosexual tendencies. One could see that her 
permanent aggressiveness as a virile woman had taken its toll. It has always 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis 85 

been impossible, in such cases, for us to divert the blows of the analytic enter- 
prise itself. 

This aggressiveness is, of course, exercised within real constraints. But we 
know from experience that it is no less effective when conveyed by one 's mien 
[expressivite]: a harsh parent intimidates by his mere presence, and the image 
of the Punisher scarcely needs to be brandished for the child to form such an 
image. Its effects are more far-reaching than any physical punishment. 

After the repeated failures encountered by classical psychology in its 
attempts to account for the mental phenomena known as "images" — a term 
whose expressive value is confirmed by all its semantic acceptations — psy- 
choanalysis proved itself capable of accounting for the concrete reality they 
represent. That was because it began with their formative function in the sub- 
ject, and revealed that if common images make for certain individual differ- 
ences in tendencies, they do so as variations of the matrices that other specific 
images — which in my vocabulary correspond to antiquity's term "imago" — 
constitute for the "instincts" themselves. 

Among the latter images are some that represent the elective vectors of 
aggressive intentions, which they provide with an efficacy that might be called 
magical. These are the images of castration, emasculation, mutilation, dis- 
memberment, dislocation, evisceration, devouring, and bursting open of the 
body — in short, the imagos that I personally have grouped together under the 
heading "imagos of the fragmented body," a heading that certainly seems to 
be structural. 

There is a specific relationship here between man and his own body that is 
also more generally manifested in a series of social practices: from tattooing, 
incision, and circumcision rituals in primitive societies to what might be called 105 

the procrustean arbitrariness of fashion, in that it contradicts, in advanced soci- 
eties, respect for the natural forms of the human body, the idea of which is a 
latecomer to culture. 

One need but listen to the stories and games made up by two to five year 
olds, alone or together, to know that pulling off heads and cutting open bel- 
lies are spontaneous themes of their imagination, which the experience of a 
busted-up doll merely fulfills. 

One must leaf through a book of Hieronymus Bosch's work, including 
views of whole works as well as details, to see an atlas of all the aggressive 
images that torment mankind. The prevalence that psychoanalysis has dis- 
covered among them of images based on a primitive autoscopy of the oral 
organs and organs derived from the cloaca is what gives rise to the shapes of 
the demons in Bosch's work. Even the ogee of the angustiae of birth can be 



86 Ecrits 

found in the gates to the abyss through which they thrust the damned; and 
even narcissistic structure may be glimpsed in the glass spheres in which the 
exhausted partners of the "Garden of Earthly Delights" are held captive. 

These phantasmagorias crop up constantly in dreams, especially when an 
analysis appears to reflect off the backdrop of the most archaic fixations. I will 
mention here a dream recounted by one of my patients, whose aggressive drives 
manifested themselves in obsessive fantasies. In the dream he saw himself in 
a car, with the woman with whom he was having a rather difficult love-affair, 
being pursued by a flying fish whose balloon-like body was so transparent that 
one could see the horizontal level of liquid it contained: an image of vesical 
persecution of great anatomical clarity. 

These are all basic aspects of a gestalt that is characteristic of aggression in 
man and that is tied to both the symbolic character and cruel refinement of the 
weapons he builds, at least at the artisanal stage of his industry. The imagi- 
nary function of this gestalt will be clarified in what follows. 

Let us note here that to attempt a behaviorist reduction of the analytic 
process — to which a concern with rigor, quite unjustified in my view, might 
impel some of us — is to deprive the imaginary function of its most important 
subjective facts, to which favorite fantasies bear witness in consciousness and 
1 06 which have enabled us to conceptualize the imago, which plays a formative 

role in identification. 

Thesis III: The mainsprings of aggressiveness determine the rationale 
for analytic technique. 

Dialogue in itself seems to involve a renunciation of aggressiveness; from 
Socrates onward, philosophy has always placed its hope in dialogue to make 
reason triumph. And yet ever since Thrasymachus made his mad outburst at 
the beginning of that great dialogue, The Republic, verbal dialectic has all too 
often proved a failure. 

I have emphasized that the analyst cures through dialogue, curing cases of 
madness that are just as serious. What virtue, then, did Freud add to dialogue? 

The rule proposed to the patient in analysis allows him to advance in an 
intentionality that is blind to any other purpose than that of freeing him from 
suffering or ignorance of whose very limits he is unaware. 

His voice alone will be heard for a period of time whose duration depends 
on the analyst's discretion. In particular, it will soon become apparent to him, 
indeed confirmed, that the analyst refrains from responding at the level of giv- 
ing advice or making plans. This constraint seems to run counter to the desired 
end and so must be justified by some profound motive. 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis 8y 

What, then, lies behind the analyst's attitude, sitting there as he does across 
from him? The concern to provide the dialogue with a participant who is as 
devoid as possible of individual characteristics. We efface ourselves, we leave 
the field in which the interest, sympathy, and reactions a speaker seeks to find 
on his interlocutor's face might be seen, we avoid all manifestations of our 
personal tastes, we conceal whatever might betray them, we depersonalize our- 
selves and strive to represent to the other an ideal of impassability. 

We are not simply expressing thereby the apathy we have had to bring about 
in ourselves to be equal to the task of understanding our subject, nor are we 
striving to make our interpretative interventions take on the oracular quality 
they must possess against this backdrop of inertia. 

We wish to avoid the trap hidden in the appeal, marked by faith's eternal 107 

pathos, the patient addresses to us. It harbors a secret within itself: "Take upon 
yourself," he tells us, "the suffering that weighs so heavily on my shoulders; 
but I can see that you are far too content, composed, and comfortable to be 
worthy of bearing it." 

What appears here as the arrogant affirmation of one 's suffering will show 
its face — and sometimes at a moment decisive enough to give rise to the kind 
of "negative therapeutic reaction" that attracted Freud 's attention — in the form 
of the resistance of amour-propre , to use the term in all the depth given it by 
La Rochefoucauld, which is often expressed thus: "I can't bear the thought of 
being freed by anyone but myself." 

Of course, due to a more unfathomable heartfelt exigency, the patient 
expects us to share in his pain. But we take our cue from his hostile reaction, 
which already made Freud wary of any temptation to play the prophet. Only 
saints are sufficiently detached from the deepest of our shared passions to avoid 
the aggressive repercussions of charity. 

As for presenting our own virtues and merits as examples, the only person 
I have ever known to resort to that was some big boss, thoroughly imbued 
with the idea, as austere as it was innocent, of his own apostolic value; I still 
recall the fury he unleashed. 

In any case, such reactions should hardly surprise us analysts, we who expose 
the aggressive motives behind all so-called philanthropic activity. 

We must, nevertheless, bring out the subject's aggressiveness toward us, 
because, as we know, aggressive intentions form the negative transference that 
is the inaugural knot of the analytic drama. 

This phenomenon represents the patient's imaginary transference onto us 
of one of the more or less archaic imagos, which degrades, diverts, or inhibits 
the cycle of a certain behavior by an effect of symbolic subduction, which has 
excluded a certain function or body part from the ego's control by an accident 



88 Ecrits 

of repression, and which has given its form to this or that agency of the per- 
sonality through an act of identification. 

It can be seen that the most incidental pretext is enough to arouse an aggres- 

108 sive intention that reactualizes the imago — which has remained permanent at 
the level of symbolic overdetermination that we call the subject's uncon- 
scious — along with its intentional correlate. 

Such a mechanism often proves to be extremely simple in hysteria: in the 
case of a girl afflicted with astasia-abasia, which for months had resisted the 
most varied forms of therapeutic suggestion, I was immediately identified with 
a constellation of the most unpleasant features that the object of a passion 
formed for her, a passion marked, moreover, by a fairly strong delusional tone. 
The underlying imago was that of her father, and it was enough for me to 
remark that she had not had his support (a lack which I knew had dominated 
her biography in a highly fanciful manner) for her to be cured of her symp- 
tom, without, it might be said, her having understood anything or her mor- 
bid passion having in any way been affected. 

Such knots are, as we know, more difficult to untie in obsessive neurosis, 
precisely because of the well-known fact that its structure is particularly 
designed to camouflage, displace, deny, divide, and muffle aggressive inten- 
tions; it does so by a defensive decomposition that is so similar in its princi- 
ples to that illustrated by the stepping and staggering technique that a number 
of my patients have themselves employed military fortification metaphors to 
describe themselves. 

As to the role of aggressive intention in phobia, it is, as it were, manifest. 

Thus it is not inadvisable to reactivate such an intention in psychoanalysis. 

What we try to avoid in our technique is to allow the patient's aggressive 
intention to find support in a current idea about us that is well enough devel- 
oped for it to become organized in such reactions as opposition, negation, osten- 
tation, and lying that our experience has shown to be characteristic modes of 
the agency known as the ego in dialogue. 

I am characterizing this agency here, not by the theoretical construction 
Freud gives of it in his metapsychology — that is, as the "perception-con- 
sciousness" system — but by what he recognized as the ego's most constant 

109 phenomenological essence in analytic experience, namely, Verneinung [nega- 
tion], urging us to detect its presence in the most general index of an inver- 
sion owing to a prior judgment. 

In short, by "ego" I designate [1] the nucleus given to consciousness — 
though it is opaque to reflection — that is marked by all the ambiguities which, 
from self-indulgence to bad faith, structure the human subject's lived experi- 
ence of the passions; [2] the "I" that, while exposing its facticity to existential 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis <%> 

criticism, opposes its irreducible inertia of pretenses and misrecognition to the 
concrete problematic of the subject's realization. 

Far from attacking it head on, the analytic maieutic takes a detour that 
amounts, in the end, to inducing in the subject a guided paranoia. Indeed, one 
aspect of analytic action is to bring about the projection of what Melanie Klein 
calls "bad internal objects," which is a paranoiac mechanism certainly, but in 
this context it is highly systematized, in some sense filtered, and properly 
checked. 

This is the aspect of our praxis that corresponds to the category of space, 
provided we include in it the imaginary space in which the dimension of symp- 
toms develops, which structures them like excluded islets, inert scotomas, or 
parasitic autonomisms in the person's functioning. 

Corresponding to the other dimension, the temporal, is anxiety and its 
impact, whether patent as in the phenomenon of flight or inhibition, or latent 
as when it only appears with the imago that arouses it. 

Again, let me repeat, this imago reveals itself only to the extent that our 
attitude offers the subject the pure mirror of a smooth surface. 

To understand what I'm saying here, imagine what would happen if a patient 
saw in his analyst an exact replica of himself. Everyone senses that the 
patient's excess of aggressive tension would prove such an obstacle to the man- 
ifestation of transference that its useful effect could only be brought about 
very slowly — and this is what happens in certain training analyses. If we imag- 
ine it, in the extreme case, experienced in the uncanny form characteristic of 
the apprehensions of one 's double, the situation would trigger uncontrollable 
anxiety. 

Thesis IV: Aggressiveness is the tendency correlated with a mode of 1 10 

identification I call narcissistic, which determines the formal structure of man's 
ego and of the register of entities characteristic of his world. 

The subjective experience of analysis immediately inscribes its results in con- 
crete psychology. Let me simply indicate here what it contributes to the psy- 
chology of the emotions when it demonstrates the meaning common to states 
as diverse as fantasmatic fear, anger, active sorrow, and psychasthenic fatigue. 

To shift now from the subjectivity of intention to the notion of a tendency 
to aggress is to make a leap from the phenomenology of our experience to 
metapsychology. 

But this leap manifests nothing more than a requirement of our thought 
which, in order now to objectify the register of aggressive reactions, and given 
our inability to seriate it according to its quantitative variations, must include 



go Ecrits 

it in a formula of equivalence. That is what we do with the notion of "libido." 

The aggressive tendency proves to be fundamental in a certain series of 
significant personality states, namely, the paranoid and paranoiac psychoses. 

In my work I have emphasized that there is a correlation — due to their 
strictly parallel seriation — between the quality of aggressive reaction to be 
expected from a particular form of paranoia and the stage of mental genesis 
represented by the delusion that is symptomatic of that form. The correlation 
appears even more profound when the aggressive act dissolves the delusional 
construction; I have shown this in the case of a curable form, self-punishing 
paranoia. 

Thus aggressive reactions form a continuous series, from the violent, 
unmotivated outburst of the act, through the whole range of belligerent 
forms, to the cold war of interpretative demonstrations. This series parallels 
another, that of imputations of harm, the explanations for which — without 
mentioning the obscure kakon to which the paranoiac attributes his discor- 
dance with all living things — run the gamut from poison (borrowed from the 
register of a highly primitive organicism), to evil spells (magic), influence 
in (telepathy), physical intrusion (lesions), diversion of intent (abuse), theft of 

secrets (dispossession), violation of privacy (profanation), injury (legal 
action), spying and intimidation (persecution), defamation and character 
assassination (prestige), and damages and exploitation (claims). 

I have shown that in each case this series — in which we find all the succes- 
sive envelopes of the person's biological and social status — is based on an orig- 
inal organization of ego and object forms that are also structurally affected 
thereby, even down to the spatial and temporal categories in which the ego 
and the object are constituted. The latter are experienced as events in a per- 
spective of mirages, as affections with something stereotypical about them that 
suspends their dialectical movement. 

Janet, who so admirably demonstrated the signification of feelings of per- 
secution as phenomenological moments of social behaviors, did not explore 
their common characteristic, which is precisely that they are constituted by 
stagnation in one of these moments, similar in strangeness to the faces of actors 
when a film is suddenly stopped in mid-frame. 

Now, this formal stagnation is akin to the most general structure of human 
knowledge, which constitutes the ego and objects as having the attributes of 
permanence, identity, and substance — in short, as entities or "things" that are 
very different from the gestalts that experience enables us to isolate in the mobil- 
ity of the field constructed according to the lines of animal desire. 

Indeed, this formal fixation, which introduces a certain difference of level, 
a certain discordance between man as organism and his Umwelt, is the very 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis 91 

condition that indefinitely extends his world and his power, by giving his 
objects their instrumental polyvalence and symbolic polyphony, as well as their 
potential as weaponry. 

What I have called paranoiac knowledge is therefore shown to correspond 
in its more or less archaic forms to certain critical moments that punctuate the 
history of man's mental genesis, each representing a stage of objectifying iden- 
tification. 

We can glimpse its stages in children by simple observation, in which Char- 
lotte Buhler, Elsa Kohler, and, following in their footsteps, the Chicago School 
have revealed several levels of significant manifestations, though only ana- 112 

lytic experience can give them their exact value by making it possible to rein- 
tegrate subjective relations in them. 

The first level shows us that the very young child 's experience of itself — 
insofar as it is related to the child's semblable — develops on the basis of a sit- 
uation that is experienced as undifferentiated. Thus, around the age of eight 
months, in confrontations between children — which, if they are to be fruit- 
ful, must be between children whose difference in age is no more than two and 
a half months — we see gestures of fictitious actions by which one subject 
renews the other's imperfect gesture by confusing their distinct application, 
and synchronies of spectacular capture that are all the more remarkable as they 
precede the complete coordination of the motor systems they involve. 

Thus the aggressiveness that is manifested in the retaliations of slaps and 
blows cannot be regarded solely as a playful manifestation of the exercise of 
strength and their employment in getting to know the body. It must be under- 
stood within a broader realm of coordination: one that will subordinate the 
functions of tonic postures and vegetative tension to a social relativity, whose 
prevalence in the expressive constitution of human emotions has been remark- 
ably well emphasized by Wallon. 

Furthermore, I believed I myself could highlight the fact that, on such occa- 
sions, the child anticipates at the mental level the conquest of his own body's 
functional unity, which is still incomplete at the level of volitional motricity 
at that point in time. 

What we have here is a first capture by the image in which the first moment 
of the dialectic of identifications is sketched out. It is linked to a gestalt phe- 
nomenon, the child's very early perception of the human form, a form which, 
as we know, holds the child's interest right from the first months of life and, 
in the case of the human face, right from the tenth day. But what demonstrates 
the phenomenon of recognition, implying subjectivity, are the signs of tri- 
umphant jubilation and the playful self-discovery that characterize the child's 
encounter with his mirror image starting in the sixth month. This behavior 



92 Ecrits 

113 contrasts sharply with the indifference shown by the very animals that per- 
ceive this image — the chimpanzee, for example — once they have tested its van- 
ity as an object; and it is even more noteworthy as it occurs at an age when the 
child lags behind the chimpanzee in instrumental intelligence, only catching 
up with the latter at eleven months of age. 

What I have called the "mirror stage" is of interest because it manifests the 
affective dynamism by which the subject primordially identifies with the visual 
gestalt of his own body. In comparison with the still very profound lack of 
coordination in his own motor functioning, that gestalt is an ideal unity, a salu- 
tary imago. Its value is heightened by all the early distress resulting from the 
child's intra-organic and relational discordance during the first six months of 
life, when he bears the neurological and humoral signs of a physiological pre- 
maturity at birth. 

It is this capture by the imago of the human form — rather than Einfiihlung, 
the absence of which is abundantly clear in early childhood — that dominates 
the whole dialectic of the child's behavior in the presence of his semblable 
between six months and two and a half years of age. Throughout this period, 
one finds emotional reactions and articulated evidence of a normal transitivism. 
A child who beats another child says that he himself was beaten; a child who 
sees another child fall, cries. Similarly, it is by identifying with the other that 
he experiences the whole range of bearing and display reactions — whose struc- 
tural ambivalence is clearly revealed in his behaviors, the slave identifying with 
the despot, the actor with the spectator, the seduced with the seducer. 

There is a sort of structural crossroads here to which we must accommo- 
date our thinking if we are to understand the nature of aggressiveness in man 
and its relation to the formalism of his ego and objects. It is in this erotic rela- 
tionship, in which the human individual fixates on an image that alienates him 
from himself, that we find the energy and the form from which the organiza- 
tion of the passions that he will call his ego originates. 

Indeed, this form crystallizes in the subject's inner conflictual tension, which 
leads to the awakening of his desire for the object of the other's desire: here 
the primordial confluence precipitates into aggressive competition, from 
which develops the triad of other people, ego, and object. Spangling the space 
of spectacular communion, this triad is inscribed there according to its own 

1 14 formalism, and it so completely dominates the affect oiEinfilhlung that a child 
at that age may not recognize the people he knows best if they appear in com- 
pletely different surroundings. 

But if the ego seems to be marked, right from the outset, by this aggressive 
relativity — which minds starved for objectivity might equate with an animal's 
emotional erections when it is distracted by a desire in the course of its exper- 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis 93 

imental conditioning — how can we escape the conclusion that each great 
instinctual metamorphosis, punctuating the individual's life, throws its delim- 
itation back into question, composed as it is of the conjunction of the subject's 
history with the unthinkable innateness of his desire? 

This is why man's ego is never reducible to his lived identity, except at a 
limit that even the greatest geniuses have never been able to approach; and 
why, in the depressive disruptions constituted by reversals experienced due to 
a sense of inferiority, the ego essentially engenders deadly negations that freeze 
it in its formalism. "What happens to me has nothing to do with what I am. 
There's nothing about you that is worthwhile." 

Thus the two moments, when the subject negates himself and when he 
accuses the other, become indistinguishable; and we see here the paranoiac 
structure of the ego that finds its analog in the fundamental negations high- 
lighted by Freud in the three delusions: jealousy, erotomania, and interpreta- 
tion. It is the very delusion of the misanthropic beautiful soul, casting out onto 
the world the disorder that constitutes his being. 

Subjective experience must be fully accredited if we are to recognize the 
central knot of ambivalent aggressiveness, which at the present stage of our 
culture is given to us in the dominant form of resentment, including even its 
most archaic aspects in the child. Thus, Saint Augustine, because he lived at 
a similar time, without having to suffer from a "behaviorist" resistance — in 
the sense in which I use the term — foreshadowed psychoanalysis by giving 
us an exemplary image of such behavior in the following terms: "Vidi ego et 
expertus sum %e lantern parvulum: nondum loquebatur et intuebatur pallidus amaro 
aspectu conlactaneum suum " ("I myself have seen and known an infant to be 
jealous even though it could not speak. It became pale, and cast bitter looks 
on its foster-brodier"). Thus Augustine forever ties the situation of spectac- 
ular absorption (the child observed), the emotional reaction (pale), and the 
reactivation of images of primordial frustration (with an envenomed look) — 115 

which are the psychical and somatic coordinates of the earliest aggressive- 
ness — to the infant (preverbal) stage of early childhood. 

Only Melanie Klein, studying children on the verge of language, dared to 
project subjective experience into that earlier period; observation, nevertheless, 
enables us to affirm its role there in the simple fact, for example, that a child 
who does not yet speak reacts differently to punishment than to brutality. 

Through Klein we have become aware of the function of the imaginary 
primordial enclosure formed by the imago of the mother's body; through her 
we have the mapping, drawn by children's own hands, of the mother's inner 
empire, and the historical atlas of the internal divisions in which the imagos 
of the father and siblings — whether real or virtual — and the subject's own 



94 Ecrits 

voracious aggression dispute their deleterious hold over her sacred regions. 
We have also become aware of the persistence in the subject of the shadow of 
"bad internal objects," related to some accidental "association" (to use a term 
concerning which we should emphasize the organic meaning analytic experi- 
ence gives it, as opposed to the abstract meaning it retains from Humean ide- 
ology). Hence we can understand by what structural means re-evoking certain 
imaginary personae and reproducing certain situational inferiorities may dis- 
concert the adult's voluntary functions in the most rigorously predictable 
way — namely, by their fragmenting impact on the imago involved in the ear- 
liest identification. 

By showing us the primordial nature of the "depressive position," the 
extremely archaic subjectivization of a kakon, Melanie Klein pushes back the 
limits within which we can see the subjective function of identification at work, 
and she especially enables us to situate the first superego formation as 
extremely early. 

But it is important to delimit the orbit within which the following relations, 
some of which have yet to be elucidated, are situated in our theoretical work — 
guilt tension, oral harmfulness, hypochondriacal fixation, not to mention pri- 
mordial masochism which I am excluding from my remarks here — in order 
to isolate the notion of an aggressiveness linked to the narcissistic relationship 
1 1 6 and to the structures of systematic misrecognition and objectification that char- 

acterize ego formation. 

A specific satisfaction, based on the integration of an original organic chaos 
\desarroi\ corresponds to the Urbildoi this formation, alienating as it may be 
due to its function of rendering foreign. This satisfaction must be conceived 
of in the dimension of a vital dehiscence constitutive of man and makes 
unthinkable the idea of an environment that is preformed for him; it is a "neg- 
ative" libido that enables the Heraclitean notion of Discord — which the Eph- 
esian held to be prior to harmony — to shine once more. 

Thus, there is no need to look any further to find the source of the energy 
the ego borrows to put in the service of the "reality principle," a question Freud 
raises regarding repression. 

This energy indubitably comes from "narcissistic passion" — provided one 
conceives of the ego according to the subjective notion I am proposing here 
as consonant with the register of analytic experience. The theoretical diffi- 
culties encountered by Freud seem, in fact, to stem from the mirage of objec- 
tification, inherited from classical psychology, constituted by the idea of the 
"perception-consciousness" system, in which the existence of everything the 
ego neglects, scotomizes, and misrecognizes in the sensations that make it react 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis $5 

to reality, and of everything it doesn't know, exhausts, and ties down in the 
meanings it receives from language, suddenly seems to be overlooked — a sur- 
prising oversight on the part of the man who succeeded in forcing open the 
borders of the unconscious with the power of his dialectic. 

Just as the superego's insane oppression lies at the root of the well-founded 
imperatives of moral conscience, mad passion — specific to man, stamping his 
image on reality — is the obscure foundation of the will's rational mediations. 

The notion of aggressiveness as a tension correlated with narcissistic struc- 
ture in the subject's becoming allows us to encompass in a very simply for- 
mulated function all sorts of accidents and atypicalities in that becoming. 

I shall indicate here how I conceive of its dialectical link with the function 
of the Oedipus complex. In its normal form, its function is that of sublima- 
tion, which precisely designates an identificatory reshaping of the subject 117 
and — as Freud wrote when he felt the need for a "topographical" coordina- 
tion of psychical dynamisms — a secondary identification by introjection of the 
imago of the parent of the same sex. 

The energy for that identification is provided by the first biological surge 
of genital libido. But it is clear that the structural effect of identification with 
a rival is not self-evident, except at the level of fable, and can only be con- 
ceptualized if the way is paved for it by a primary identification that structures 
the subject as rivaling with himself. In fact, a note of biological impotence is 
met with again here — as is the effect of anticipation characteristic of the human 
psyche's genesis — in the fixation of an imaginary "ideal," which, as analysis 
has shown, determines whether or not the "instinct" conforms to the indi- 
vidual's physiological sex. A point, let it be said in passing, whose anthropo- 
logical import cannot be too highly stressed. But what interests me here is what 
I shall refer to as the "pacifying" function of the ego-ideal: the connection 
between its libidinal normativeness and a cultural normativeness, bound up 
since the dawn of history with the imago of the father. Here, obviously, lies 
the import that Freud's work, Totem and Taboo , still has, despite the mythical 
circularity that vitiates it, insofar as from a mythological event — the killing 
of the father — it derives the subjective dimension that gives this event its mean- 
ing: guilt. 

Indeed, Freud shows us that the need for a form of participation, which neu- 
tralizes the conflict inscribed after killing him in the situation of rivalry among 
the brothers, is the basis for identification with the paternal totem. Oedipal 
identification is thus the identification by which the subject transcends the 
aggressiveness constitutive of the first subjective individuation. I have stressed 



S)6 Ecrits 

elsewhere that it constitutes a step in the establishment of the distance by which, 
with feelings akin to respect, a whole affective assumption of one 's fellow man 
is brought about. 

Only the anti-dialectical mentality of a culture which, dominated as it is by 
objectifying ends, tends to reduce all subjective activity to the ego's being, can 
justify Von den Steinen's astonishment when confronted by a Bororo who said, 

118 "I'm an ara." All the "primitive mind" sociologists scurry about trying to 
fathom this profession of identity, which is no more surprising upon reflec- 
tion than declaring, "I'm a doctor" or "I'm a citizen of the French Republic," 
and certainly presents fewer logical difficulties than claiming, "I'm a man," 
which at most can mean no more than, "I'm like the person who, in recogniz- 
ing him to be a man, I constitute as someone who can recognize me as a man." 
In the final analysis, these various formulations can be understood only in ref- 
erence to the truth of "I is an other," less dazzling to the poet's intuition than 
it is obvious from the psychoanalyst's viewpoint. 

Who, if not us, will call back into question the objective status of this "I," 
which a historical evolution peculiar to our culture tends to confuse with the 
subject? The specific impact of this anomaly on every level of language 
deserves to be displayed, and first and foremost as regards the first person as 
grammatical subject in our languages [langues] — the "I love" that hyposta- 
sizes a tendency in a subject who denies it. An impossible mirage in linguistic 
forms, among which the most ancient are to be found, and in which the sub- 
ject appears fundamentally in the position of a determinative or instrumental 
of the action. 

Let us not pursue here the critique of all the abuses of the cogito ergo sum, 
recalling instead that, in analytic experience, the ego represents the center of 
all resistances to the treatment of symptoms. 

It was inevitable that analysis, after emphasizing the reintegration of ten- 
dencies excluded by the ego — those tendencies underlying the symptoms it 
tackled at first, most of which were related to failed Oedipal identification — 
should eventually discover the "moral" dimension of the problem. 

Parallel to that, what came to the fore were, on the one hand, the role played 
by the aggressive tendencies in the structure of symptoms and personality and, 
on the other, all sorts of "uplifting" conceptions of the liberated libido, one of 
the first of which can be attributed to French psychoanalysts under the head- 
ing of "oblativity." 

It is, in fact, clear that genital libido operates by blindly going beyond the 
individual for the sake of the species and that its sublimating effects in the Oedi- 
pal crisis are at the root of the whole process of man's cultural subordination. 

119 Nevertheless, one cannot overemphasize the irreducible character of narcis- 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis ,97 

sistic structure and the ambiguity of a notion that tends to misrecognize the 
constancy of aggressive tension in all moral life that involves subjection to this 
structure: for no amount of oblativity could free altruism from it. This is why 
La Rochefoucauld could formulate his maxim, in which his rigor concurs with 
the fundamental theme of his thought, on the incompatibility between mar- 
riage and delight. 

We would be allowing the cutting edge of analytic experience to become 
dull if we deluded ourselves, if not our patients, into believing in some sort of 
pre-established harmony that would free social conformity — made possible 
by the reduction of symptoms — of its tendency to induce aggressiveness in 
the subject. 

Theoreticians in the Middle Ages showed a rather different kind of pene- 
tration when they debated whether love could be understood in terms of a 
"physical" theory or an "ecstatic" theory, both of which involved the reab- 
sorption of man's ego, the one by its reintegration into a universal good, the 
other by the subject's effusion toward an object devoid of alterity. 

In all of an individual's genetic phases and at every degree of a person's 
human accomplishment, we find this narcissistic moment in the subject in a 
before in which he must come to terms with a libidinal frustration and in an 
after in which he transcends himself in a normative sublimation. 

This conception allows us to understand the aggressiveness involved in the 
effects of all the subject's regressions, aborted undertakings, and refusals of 
typical development, especially at the level of sexual realization — and more 
precisely within each of the great phases that the libidinal metamorphoses bring 
about in human life, whose major function analysis has demonstrated: wean- 
ing, the Oedipal stage, puberty, maturity, and motherhood, not to mention the 
involutional climacteric. I have often said that the emphasis initially placed in 
psychoanalytic doctrine on the Oedipal conflict's aggressive retortions in the 
subject corresponded to the fact that the effects of the complex were first 
glimpsed in failed attempts to resolve it. 

There is no need to emphasize that a coherent theory of the narcissistic 
phase clarifies the ambivalence peculiar to the "partial drives" of scotophilia, 1 20 

sadomasochism, and homosexuality, as well as the stereotypical, ceremonial 
formalism of the aggressiveness that is manifested in them. I am talking here 
about the often barely "realized" apprehension of other people in the practice 
of certain of these perversions, their subjective value actually being very dif- 
ferent from that ascribed to them in the otherwise very striking existential 
reconstructions Sartre provided. 

I should also like to mention in passing that the decisive function I ascribe 
to the imago of one 's own body in the determination of the narcissistic phase 



S)8 Ecrits 

enables us to understand the clinical relation between congenital anomalies of 
functional lateralization (left-handedness) and all forms of inversion of sex- 
ual and cultural normalization. This reminds us of the role attributed to gym- 
nastics in the "beautiful and good" ideal of education among the Ancient 
Greeks and leads us to the social thesis with which I will conclude. 

Thesis V: This notion of aggressiveness as one of the intentional coordinates 

of the human ego, especially as regards the category of space, allows us to 

conceive of its role in modern neurosis and in the malaise in civilisation. 

Here I want to merely sketch out a perspective regarding the verdicts analytic 
experience allows us to come to in the present social order. The preeminence 
of aggressiveness in our civilization would already be sufficiently demonstrated 
by the fact that it is usually confused in everyday morality with the virtue of 
strength. Quite rightly understood as indicative of ego development, aggres- 
siveness is regarded as indispensable in social practice and is so widely 
accepted in our mores that, in order to appreciate its cultural peculiarity, one 
must become imbued with the meaning and efficient virtues of a practice like 
that ofyang in the public and private morality of the Chinese. 

Were it not superfluous, the prestige of the idea of the struggle for life would 
be sufficiently attested to by the success of a theory that was able to make us 
endorse a notion of selection based solely on the animal's conquest of space 
121 as a valid explanation for the developments of life. Indeed, Darwin's success 

seems to derive from the fact that he projected the predations of Victorian 
society and the economic euphoria that sanctioned for that society the social 
devastation it initiated on a planetary scale, and that he justified its predations 
with the image of a laissez-faire system in which the strongest predators com- 
pete for their natural prey. 

Before Darwin, however, Hegel had provided the definitive theory of the 
specific function of aggressiveness in human ontology, seeming to prophesy 
the iron law of our own time. From the conflict between Master and Slave, he 
deduced the entire subjective and objective progress of our history, revealing 
in its crises the syntheses represented by the highest forms of the status of the 
person in the West, from the Stoic to the Christian, and even to the future cit- 
izen of the Universal State. 

Here the natural individual is regarded as nil, since the human subject is 
nothing, in effect, before the absolute Master that death is for him. The satis- 
faction of human desire is possible only when mediated by the other's desire 
and labor. While it is the recognition of man by man that is at stake in the con- 
flict between Master and Slave, this recognition is based on a radical negation 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis 9$ 

of natural values, whether expressed in the master's sterile tyranny or in work's 
productive tyranny 

The support this profound doctrine lent to the slave 's constructive Sparta- 
cism, recreated by the barbarity of the Darwinian century, is well known. 

The relativization of our sociology by the scientific collection of the cul- 
tural forms we are destroying in the world — and the analyses, bearing truly 
psychoanalytic marks, in which Plato's wisdom shows us the dialectic com- 
mon to the passions of the soul and of the city— can enlighten us as to the rea- 
son for this barbarity Namely, to employ the jargon that corresponds to our 
approaches to man's subjective needs, the increasing absence of all the satu- 
rations of the superego and ego-ideal that occur in all kinds of organic forms 
in traditional societies, forms that extend from the rituals of everyday inti- 
macy to the periodical festivals in which the community manifests itself. We 
no longer know them except in their most obviously degraded guises. Fur- 
thermore, in abolishing the cosmic polarity of the male and female principles, 
our society is experiencing the full psychological impact of the modern phe- 122 

nomenon known as the "battle of the sexes." Ours is an immense community, 
midway between a "democratic" anarchy of the passions and their hopeless 
leveling out by the "great winged hornet" of narcissistic tyranny; it is clear 
that the promotion of the ego in our existence is leading, in conformity with 
the utilitarian conception of man that reinforces it, to an ever greater realiza- 
tion of man as an individual, in other words, in an isolation of the soul that is 
ever more akin to its original dereliction. 

Correlatively, it seems — I mean for reasons whose historical contingency 
is based on a necessity that certain of my considerations make it possible to per- 
ceive — we are engaged in a technological enterprise on the scale of the entire 
species. The question is whether the conflict between Master and Slave will 
find its solution in the service of the machine, for which a psychotechnics, that 
is already yielding a rich harvest of ever more precise applications, will strive 
to provide race-car drivers and guards for regulating power stations. 

The notion of the role of spatial symmetry in man's narcissistic structure 
is essential in laying the groundwork for a psychological analysis of space, 
whose place I can merely indicate here. Animal psychology has shown us that 
the individual's relation to a particular spatial field is socially mapped in cer- 
tain species, in a way that raises it to the category of subjective membership. 
I would say that it is the subjective possibility of the mirror projection of such 
a field into the other's field that gives human space its originally "geometri- 
cal" structure, a structure I would willingly characterize as kaleidoscopic. 

Such, at least, is the space in which the imagery of the ego develops, and 
which intersects the objective space of reality. But does it provide us a secure 



ioo Ecrits 

basis? Already in the Lebensraum ("living space") in which human competi- 
tion grows ever keener, an observer of our species from outer space would 
conclude we possess needs to escape with very odd results. But doesn't con- 
ceptual extension, to which we believed we had reduced reality [reel], later 
seem to refuse to lend its support to the physicist's thinking? Having extended 

123 our grasp to the farthest reaches of matter, won't this "realized" space — which 
makes the great imaginary spaces in which the free games of the ancient sages 
roamed seem illusory to us — thus vanish in turn in a roar of the universal 
ground? 

Whatever the case may be, we know how our adaptation to these exigen- 
cies proceeds, and that war is increasingly proving to be the inevitable and 
necessary midwife of all our organizational progress. The adaptation of 
adversaries, opposed in their social systems, certainly seems to be progress- 
ing toward a confluence of forms, but one may well wonder whether it is moti- 
vated by agreement as to their necessity, or by the kind of identification Dante, 
in the Inferno, depicts in the image of a deadly kiss. 

Moreover, it doesn't seem that the human individual, as the material for 
such a struggle, is absolutely flawless. And the detection of "bad internal 
objects," responsible for reactions (that may prove extremely costly in terms 
of equipment) of inhibition and headlong flight — which we have recently 
learned to use in the selection of shock, fighter, parachute, and commando 
troops — proves that war, after having taught us a great deal about the gene- 
sis of the neuroses, is perhaps proving too demanding in its need for ever more 
neutral subjects to serve an aggression in which feeling is undesirable. 

Nevertheless, we have a few psychological truths to contribute here too: 
namely, the extent to which the ego's supposed "instinct of self-preservation" 
willingly gives way before the temptation to dominate space, and above all the 
extent to which the fear of death, the "absolute Master" — presumed to exist in 
consciousness by a whole philosophical tradition from Hegel onward — is psy- 
chologically subordinate to the narcissistic fear of harm to one 's own body. 

I do not think it was futile to have highlighted the relation between the spa- 
tial dimension and a subjective tension, which — in the malaise of civilization — 
intersects with the tension of anxiety, approached so humanely by Freud, and 
which develops in the temporal dimension. I would willingly shed light on the 
latter, too, using the contemporary significations of two philosophies that 
would seem to correspond to the philosophies I just mentioned: that of Berg- 
son, owing to its naturalistic inadequacy, and that of Kierkegaard owing to its 
dialectical signification. 

Only at the intersection of these two tensions should one envisage the 

1 24 assumption by man of his original fracturing, by which it might be said that at 



Aggressiveness in Psychoanalysis 101 

every instant he constitutes his world by committing suicide, and the psycho- 
logical experience of which Freud had the audacity to formulate as the "death 
instinct, " however paradoxical its expression in biological terms may be. 

In the "emancipated" man of modern society, this fracturing reveals that 
his formidable crack goes right to the very depths of his being. It is a self- 
punishing neurosis, with hysterical /hypochondriacal symptoms of its func- 
tional inhibitions, psychasthenic forms of its derealizations of other people 
and of the world, and its social consequences of failure and crime. It is this 
touching victim, this innocent escapee who has thrown off the shackles that 
condemn modern man to the most formidable social hell, whom we take in 
when he comes to us; it is this being of nothingness for whom, in our daily 
task, we clear anew the path to his meaning in a discreet fraternity — a fra- 
ternity to which we never measure up. 

Note 

1. Apart from the first line, this text is reproduced here in its original form. 



i25 A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions 
of Psychoanalysis in Criminology 



Presentation Given at the Thirteenth Conference of 
French- Speaking Psychoanalysts (May 29, 1950) 

Written in Collaboration with Michel Cenac 



L On the Motor Force of Truth in the Human Sciences 

While theory in the physical sciences has never really escaped from the 
requirement of internal coherence that is the very motor force of knowledge, 
the human sciences, being embodied as behaviors in the very reality of their 
object, cannot elude the question of the meaning of these behaviors or ensure 
that the answer to this question need not be in terms of truth. 

The fact that human reality implies a process of revelation leads certain 
people to think of history as a dialectic inscribed in matter; it is a truth that no 
"behaviorist"* ritual engaged in by the subject to protect his object can cas- 
trate of its creative and deadly tip, and it makes scientists themselves, who are 
devoted to "pure" knowledge, primarily responsible. 

No one knows this better than psychoanalysts who, in their understanding 
of what their subjects confide to them, as in their handling of the behaviors 
that are conditioned by analytic technique, work on the basis of a form of rev- 
elation whose truth conditions its efficacy. 

Now isn't the search for truth what constitutes the object of criminology 
in the judicial realm and also what unifies its two facets: the truth of the crime, 
which is the facet that concerns the police, and the truth of the criminal, the 
anthropological facet? 

The question we will address today is: What can the technique that guides 
the analyst's dialogue with the subject and the psychological notions that ana- 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology 103 

lytic experience has defined contribute to this search for truth? We are less 
interested in indicating analysis' contribution to the study of delinquency, 126 

which was discussed in the other presentations here, than in laying out its legit- 
imate limits, and are certainly not interested in propagating the letter of ana- 
lytic doctrine without concern for method, but rather in rethinking it, as we 
are advised to constantly do, in relation to a new object. 

77. On the Sociological Reality of Crime and Law and on the Relation 
of Psychoanalysis to their Dialectical Foundation 

Neither crime nor criminals are objects that can be conceptualized apart from 
their sociological context. 

The statement that the "law makes the sin" remains true outside the escha- 
tological perspective of Grace in which Saint Paul formulated it. 

It is scientifically verified by the observation that there is no society that 
does not include positive law, whether traditional or written, common law or 
civil law. Nor is there any society in which we do not find all the degrees of 
transgression of the law that define crime. 

Supposed "unconscious," "forced," "intuitive" obedience by primitive 
man to the group's rules is an ethnological conception deriving from an imag- 
inary insistence that has cast a shadow on many other conceptions of "ori- 
gins," but it is just as mythical as they are. 

Every society, lastly, manifests the relationship between crime and law by 
punishments whose infliction, regardless of the forms it takes, requires sub- 
jective assent. Whether the criminal himself actually inflicts the punishment 
that the law requires as the price to be paid for his crime — as in the case of incest 
between matrilineal cousins on the Trobriand Islands, whose outcome Mali- 
nowski recounts in his book, Crime and Custom in Savage Society , which is essen- 
tial on this subject (and regardless of the various psychological motives for this 
act or even the vindictive oscillations that the curses of he who commits sui- 
cide can engender in the group) — or whether the sanction stipulated by a code 
of criminal law includes a procedure involving widely varied social systems, 
subjective assent is necessary to the very signification of the punishment. 

The beliefs by which this punishment is explained in the individual, and the 
institutions by which the punishment is inflicted in the group, allow us to define 1 27 

in any given society what we call "responsibility" in our own society. 

But the responsible entity is not always equivalent. Let us say that if, orig- 
inally, it is the society as a whole (a society is always self-contained in theory, 
as ethnologists have emphasized) that is considered to be destabilized by the 
action of one of its members and that must be set right, this member is held 



104 Ecrits 

individually responsible to so small an extent that the law often requires sat- 
isfaction at the expense either of one of his partisans or of the whole of an 
"ingroup"* that he is part of. 

It sometimes even happens that a society considers itself to be so impaired 
in its structure that it takes steps to exclude its ills in the form of a scapegoat, 
or even to regenerate itself by resorting to something external. We see here 
a collective or mystical responsibility, of which our own mores contain 
traces, assuming this form of responsibility is not staging a return for oppo- 
site reasons. 

But even in cases in which the punishment strikes only the individual per- 
petrator of a crime, he is not [in all cases] held responsible with respect to the 
same function or, as it were, the same image of himself. This is evident when 
we reflect upon the difference between a person who has to answer for his acts 
before a judge who represents the Holy Office and a person who does so before 
a judge who presides over the People 's Court. 

It is here that psychoanalysis, with the agencies that it distinguishes in the 
modern individual, can shed light on vacillations in the contemporary notion 
of responsibility and the related advent of an objectification of crime that it 
can collaborate on. 

While psychoanalysis cannot, since its experience is limited to the individ- 
ual, claim to grasp the totality of any sociological object or even the whole set 
of forces currently operating in our society, the fact remains that it discovered 
in analytic experience relational tensions that seem to play a basic role in all 
societies, as if the discontent in civilization went so far as to lay bare the very 
meeting point of nature and culture. We can extend analysis' equations to cer- 
tain human sciences that can utilize them — especially, as we shall see, to crim- 
inology — provided we perform the correct transformation. 

Let us add that if reliance on the subject's confession, which is one of the 
keys to criminological truth, and reintegration of the subject into the social 
128 community, which is one of the goals of its application, seem to find an espe- 

cially favorable form in analytic dialogue, it is above all because this dialogue, 
which can be continued until it reaches the most radical significations, inter- 
sects with the universal — the universal that is included in language and that, 
far from being eliminable from anthropology, constitutes its very foundation 
and goal. For psychoanalysis is merely an extension of anthropology in its 
technique that explores in the individual the import of the dialectic which scands 
our society's creations and in which Saint Paul's statement finds anew its 
absolute truth. 

To he who would ask where our remarks are heading, we would respond, 
at the risk, willingly accepted, of eliminating the clinician's smugness [suffi- 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology io5 

sance] and preventionistic pharisaism from them, by referring him to one of 
Plato's dialogues that recount the deeds of the hero of dialectic, especially to 
the Gorgias, whose subtitle, which invokes rhetoric and is well designed to dis- 
suade our uncultivated contemporaries from studying it, harbors a veritable 
treatise on the motives of the Just and the Unjust. 

In the Gorgias, Socrates refutes infatuation with the Master, which is incar- 
nated in a free man of Athens, whose limits are marked by the reality of the 
Slave. This form marks the shift to the free man of Wisdom, by admitting the 
absolute nature of Justice, he being trained in it solely by virtue of language 
in the Interlocutor's maieutic. Thus Socrates — by making the Master perceive 
the dialectic (which is bottomless like the Danaids' vessel) of man's passions 
for power and recognize the law of his own political being in the City's injus- 
tice — brings him to bow before the eternal myths that express the meaning of 
punishment, as a way of making amends for the individual and of setting an 
example for the group, while he himself, in the name of the same universal, 
accepts his own destiny and submits in advance to the insanely harsh verdict 
of the City that makes him a man. 

It is worth recalling the historical moment at which a tradition was born 
that conditioned the appearance of all our sciences and that Freud firmly rooted 
his work in when he proffered with poignant confidence: "The voice of the 
intellect is a soft one, but it does not rest till it has gained a hearing." We think 
we hear in this a muffled echo of Socrates' own voice addressing Callicles, 
when he opines that "Philosophy always says the same thing." 

///. On Crime as Expressing the Symbolism of the Superego as a 129 

Psychopathological Agency: Although Psychoanalysis Unreali^es [Irrealise] 
Crime, It Does Not Dehumanize the Criminal 

While we cannot even grasp the concrete reality of crime without relating it to 
a symbolism whose actual forms combine harmoniously in society, but which 
is inscribed in the radical structures that language unconsciously transmits, 
psychoanalytic experience has demonstrated just how extensively, to what for- 
merly unknown limits, this first symbolism reverberates in individuals, in their 
physiology as well as in their conduct, by studying its pathogenic effects. 

Thus it was by starting with one of the relational significations that the psy- 
chology of "intellectual syntheses," in its reconstruction of individual func- 
tions, had located at the earliest possible stage, that Freud inaugurated a form 
of psychology that has bizarrely been called "depth psychology," no doubt 
because of the utterly superficial scope of what it replaced. 

Psychoanalysis boldly designated these pathogenic effects, whose mean- 



io6 Ecrits 

ing it was discovering, by the feeling that corresponded to them in lived expe- 
rience: guilt. 

Nothing can better demonstrate the importance of the Freudian revolution 
than the use (technical or everyday, implicit or rigorous, avowed or surrepti- 
tious) that has been made, in psychology, of this now truly ubiquitous cate- 
gory, which was thoroughly neglected before — nothing if not the strange 
attempt by certain people to reduce guilt to "genetic" or "objective" forms, 
supposedly guaranteed by a kind of "behaviorist" experimentalism that would 
have been exhausted long ago had it actually forced itself not to read in human 
actions the significations that specify them as human. 

We are also beholden to Freud for having brought the notion of the first 
situation into psychology so that it could prosper there, in the course of time — 
not as an abstract confrontation sketching out a relationship, but as a dramatic 
crisis that is resolved in a structure — this first situation being that of crime in 
130 its two most abhorrent forms, incest and parricide, whose shadow engenders 

all the pathogenesis of the Oedipus complex. 

We can understand why Freud, the physician, having received in the field 
of psychology such a significant contribution from the social realm, was 
tempted to return the favor, and why he wanted to demonstrate the origin of 
universal Law in the primal crime in Totem and Taboo in 1912. Whatever crit- 
icism his method in that book might be open to, what was essential was his 
recognition that man began with law and crime, after Freud the clinician had 
shown that their significations sustained everything right down to the very 
form of the individual — not only in his value to the other but in his erection 
for himself. 

This is how the concept of the superego came into being, first based on the 
effects of unconscious censorship explaining previously identified psy- 
chopathological structures, soon shedding light on the anomalies of everyday 
life, and finally being correlated with the simultaneous discovery of an 
immense morbidity and of its psychogenic roots: character neurosis, failure 
mechanisms, sexual impotence, and "der gehemmte Mensch." 

The modern face of man was thus revealed and it contrasted strangely with 
the prophecies of late nineteenth-century thinkers; it seemed pathetic when com- 
pared with both the illusions nourished by libertarians and the moralists' wor- 
ries inspired by man's emancipation from religious beliefs and the weakening 
of his traditional ties. To the concupiscence gleaming in old man Karamazov's 
eyes when he questioned his son — "God is dead, thus all is permitted" — mod- 
ern man, the very one who dreams of the nihilistic suicide of Dostoevsky's 
hero or forces himself to blow up Nietzsche 's inflatable superman, replies with 
all his ills and all his deeds: "God is dead, nothing is permitted anymore." 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology ioj 

These ills and deeds all bear the signification of self-punishment. Will it 
thus be necessary to see all criminals as self-punishing? For, according to the 
legislator's icy humor, no one is supposed to be ignorant of the law, and thus 
everyone can foresee its repercussions and must be considered to be seeking 
out its blows. 

This ironic remark, by obliging us to define what psychoanalysis recog- 
nizes as crimes and offenses [delits] emanating from the superego, should allow 
us to formulate a critique of the scope of this notion in anthropology. 

Consider the remarkable first observations with which Franz Alexander and 1 3 1 

Hugo Staub brought psychoanalysis into criminology. Their content is con- 
vincing, whether it concerns "the attempted homicide by a neurotic," or the 
odd thefts by a medical student (who did not stop until he was imprisoned by 
the Berlin police and who, rather than earn the diploma to which his knowl- 
edge and real gifts gave him the right, preferred to exercise them by breaking 
the law), or even "the man obsessed with car trips." Consider anew Marie Bona- 
parte 's analysis of "The Case of Mrs. Lefebvre." Here the morbid structure of 
the crime and offenses is obvious — the forced way in which the crimes were 
carried out, the stereotypy seen in their repetition, the provocative style of the 
defense and the confession, the incomprehensibility of the motives — all of this 
confirms "coercion by a force that the subject was unable to resist," and the 
judges in all these cases came to this same conclusion. 

These behaviors become perfectly clear, however, in light of an Oedipal 
interpretation. But what makes them morbid is their symbolic character. Their 
psychopathological structure is not found in the criminal situation that they 
express, but in their unreal mode of expression. 

To fully explain this, let us contrast these behaviors with something that is 
a constant element in the annals of armies and that derives its full import from 
the very broad and yet narrow range of asocial elements in our population 
from which we have, for over a century, recruited defenders of our homeland 
and even of our social order. We are referring to the propensity found in mil- 
itary units, on the day of glory that places them in contact with the enemy 
civilian population, to rape one or more women in the presence of a male who 
is preferably old and has first been rendered powerless. There is nothing to 
indicate that the individuals who engage in such an act morally differ — either 
before or afterward, as sons or husbands, fathers or citizens — from anyone 
else. This simple act might well be described as a random news item [fait . . . 
divers] owing to the diverse quantity of credence it is lent depending on its 
source — and even, strictly speaking, as a divertissement owing to the mate- 
rial that this diversity offers up to propaganda. 

We say that it is a real crime, even though it is committed in a precisely 132 



io8 Ecrits 

Oedipal form, and the perpetrators would be justly punished for it if the 
heroic conditions under which it is considered to have been carried out did 
not most often place responsibility for it on the group to which the individu- 
als belong. 

Let us thus concur with Marcel Mauss' clear formulations, which his recent 
death has brought once again to our attention: The structures of society are 
symbolic; individuals, insofar as they are normal, use them in real behaviors; 
insofar as they are mentally ill [psychopathe\ they express them by symbolic 
behaviors. 

But it is obvious that the symbolism thus expressed can only be fragmented; 
at most, one can assert that this symbolism signals the breaking point the indi- 
vidual occupies in the network of social aggregations. Psychopathological man- 
ifestations can reveal the structure of the fault line, but this structure can only 
be viewed as one element in the exploration of the whole. 

This is why we must rigorously distinguish psychoanalytic theory from 
the ever renewed fallacious attempts to base notions such as "modal person- 
ality," "national character," or "collective superego" on analytic theory. One 
can certainly see the appeal that a theory that so palpably reveals human real- 
ity has for pioneers in less clearly objective fields. Have we not heard a well- 
intentioned cleric boast of his plan to apply the data of psychoanalysis to 
Christian symbolism? To cut short such untoward extrapolations, we need 
but continually relate anew the theory to experience. 

This symbolism, which was already recognized in the first order of delin- 
quency that psychoanalysis had isolated as psychopathological, should allow 
us to indicate, in extension as well as in comprehension, the social significa- 
tion of "Oedipalism," and to critique the scope of the notion of the superego 
for all of the human sciences. 

Most, if not all, of the psychopathological effects in which the tensions stem- 
ming from Oedipalism are revealed, along with the historical coordinates that 
imposed these effects on Freud's investigative genius, lead us to believe that 
these effects express a dehiscence of the family unit at the heart of society. This 
133 conception — which is justified by the ever greater reduction of this unit to its 

conjugal form and by the ever more exclusive formative role it consequently 
plays in the child's first identifications and early discipline — explains why the 
family unit's power to captivate the individual has waxed as the family's social 
power has waned. 

To illustrate this, let us simply mention the fact that in a matrilineal soci- 
ety such as that of the Zuni or the Hopi Indians, responsibility for the care of 
an infant from the moment of its birth on falls by law to the father's sister. This 
inscribes the infant from the outset in a double system of parental relations 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology 109 

that are enriched at each stage of its life by a growing complexity of hierar- 
chized relationships. 

The problem of comparing the advantages that a supposed matriarchal fam- 
ily organization might have over the classical triangle of Oedipal structure in 
forming a superego that is bearable to the individual is thus outdated. Experi- 
ence has clearly shown that this triangle is merely the reduction, produced by 
an historical evolution, to the natural group of a formation in which the author- 
ity reserved for the father — the only remaining trait of its original structure — 
proves in effect to be ever more unstable, nay obsolete; the psychopathological 
impact of this situation must be related both to the tenuousness of the group 
relations that it provides the individual with and to the ever greater ambiva- 
lence of this structure. 

This conception is confirmed by the notion of latent delinquency to which 
Aichhorn was led in applying analytic experience to the youth he was in charge 
of owing to special jurisdiction. It is well known that Kate Friedlander devel- 
oped a genetic conception of latent delinquency under the heading of "neu- 
rotic character," and also that the best informed critics, from August Aichhorn 
himself to Edward Glover, seem to have been astonished by the theory's inabil- 
ity to distinguish the structure of this character as "criminogenic" from the 
structure of neurosis in which tensions remain latent in symptoms. 

The perspective we are presenting here allows us to see that "neurotic 
character" is the reflection in individual behavior of the isolation of the fam- 134 

ily unit, the asocial position of which is always found in such cases, whereas 
neurosis expresses instead the family unit's structural anomalies. What 
requires explanation is thus less a criminal acting out by a subject trapped in 
what Daniel Lagache has quite correctly characterized as imaginary behav- 
ior, than the processes by which neurotics partially adapt to reality [reel]: 
these are, as we know, the auto-plastic mutilations that can be recognized at 
the origin of symptoms. 

This sociological reference — "neurotic character" — agrees, moreover, 
with Kate Friedlander's account of its genesis, if it is correct to summarize the 
latter as the repetition, across the subject's biography, of drive frustrations 
that are seemingly arrested by short-circuiting the Oedipal situation, without 
ever again being engaged in a structural development. 

Psychoanalysis, in its understanding of crimes caused by the superego, thus 
has the effect of unrealiiing them. It agrees, in this respect, with a dim recog- 
nition that has long forced itself on the best of those responsible for law 
enforcement. 

The vacillations that were seen throughout the nineteenth century in social 
conscience regarding society's right to punish were thus characteristic. Penol- 



no Ecrits 

ogists, sure of themselves and even implacable as soon as a utilitarian moti- 
vation appeared — so much so that English practice at that time considered 
misdemeanors (even if they only involved petty theft) that occasioned homi- 
cide to be equivalent to the premeditation that defines first degree murder (see 
Alimena's La premeditayone) — hesitated when faced with crimes in which 
instincts surfaced whose nature escaped the utilitarian register within which 
someone like Bentham developed his ideas. 

A first response was provided by Lombroso in the early days of criminol- 
ogy; he viewed these instincts as atavistic and took criminals to be survivors 
of an archaic form of the species that could be biologically isolated. One can 
say of this response that it betrayed, above all, a far realer philosophical regres- 
sion in its author and that its success can only be explained by the satisfactions 
that the euphoria of the dominant class then demanded, both for its intellec- 
tual comfort and its guilty conscience. 
135 The calamities of World War I having invalidated its claims, Lombroso's 

theory was relegated to the slag heap of history, and simple respect for the 
conditions proper to every human science — conditions we thought necessary 
to recall in our introduction — forced itself even on the study of criminals. 

Healy's The Individual Delinquent is an important landmark in the return 
to principles, stating as it does, first of all, the principle that this study must 
be monographic. The concrete results of psychoanalysis constitute another 
landmark, which is as decisive owing to the doctrinal confirmation that they 
bring this principle as by the importance of the facts that are brought out. 

Psychoanalysis simultaneously resolves a dilemma in criminological the- 
ory: in unrealizing crime, it does not dehumanize the criminal. 

Moreover, by means of transference, psychoanalysis grants us access to 
the imaginary world of the criminal, which can open the door to reality [reel] 
for him. 

Let us note here the spontaneous manifestation of transference in the crim- 
inal's behavior, in particular the transference that tends to develop with the 
criminal's judge, proof of which it would be easy to collect. Let us cite, for 
their sheer beauty, the remarks confided by a certain Frank to the psychiatrist 
Gilbert who was charged with the favorable presentation of the defendants at 
the Nuremberg trials. This pathetic Machiavelli, neurotic enough for fascism's 
insane regime to entrust him with its great works, felt remorse stir his soul at 
the dignified appearance of his judges, especially that of the English judge 
who he said was "so elegant." 

The results obtained with "major" criminals by Melitta Schmideberg, while 
their publication is thwarted by the same obstacle we encounter regarding all 
of our cases, would deserve to be followed up in their catamnesis. 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology in 

Be that as it may, the cases that clearly fall under Oedipalism should be 
entrusted to the analyst without any of the limitations that can hinder his action. 

How can we not completely put analysis to the test when penology's claims 
are so poorly justified that the popular mind balks at enforcing them even when 
faced with real crimes? This is seen in the famous case in America that Grot- 
jahn reported on in his article in Searchlights on Delinquency, where, to the 136 

delight of the public, we see the jury acquit the defendants, even though all 
the charges seemed to have overwhelmed them during the probation of first 
degree murder, disguised as an accident at sea, of the parents of one of them. 

Let us complete these considerations by enumerating the theoretical con- 
sequences that follow from this in the use of the notion of the superego. The 
superego must, in our view, be taken as an individual manifestation that is tied 
to the social conditions of Oedipalism. This is why the criminal tensions 
included in the family situation become pathogenic only in societies in which 
the family situation is disintegrating. 

In this sense, the superego reveals tension, just as illness sometimes sheds 
light on a physiological function. 

But analytic experience of the effects of the superego and direct observa- 
tion of children in light of this experience indicate that the superego appears 
at so early a stage that it seems to form contemporaneously with the ego, if 
not before it. 

Melanie Klein asserts that the categories Good and Bad are operative in the 
infant stage of behavior; this view raises a knotty problem — that of retroac- 
tively inserting significations into a stage at which language has yet to appear. 
We know how her method — using, despite all objections, Oedipal tensions in 
her extremely early interpretations of small children's intentions — simply cut 
the knot, provoking passionate debates about her theories in the process. 

The fact remains that the imaginary persistence of good and bad primor- 
dial objects in avoidance behaviors, which can bring adults into conflict with 
their responsibilities, leads us to conceptualize the superego as a psychologi- 
cal agency that has a generic signification in man. There is, nevertheless, noth- 
ing idealist about this notion; it is inscribed in the reality of the physiological 
misery that is characteristic of the first months of man's life, which one of us 
has emphasized, and it expresses man's dependence, which is, in effect, 
generic, on the human milieu. 

The fact that this dependence may seem to be signifying in individuals at 
an incredibly early stage of their development is not something psychoana- 
lysts need back away from. 

If our experience of psychopathology has brought us to the meeting point 137 

of nature and culture, we have discovered an obscure agency there, a blind 



ii2 Ecrits 

and tyrannical agency, which seems to be the antinomy, at the individual's bio- 
logical pole, of the ideal of pure Duty that Kant posited as a counterweight to 
the incorruptible order of the star-spangled heavens. 

Ever ready to emerge from the chaos of social categories to recreate the 
morbid universe of wrongdoing, to borrow Hesnard's lovely expression, this 
agency is nevertheless graspable only in the psychopathological state — that 
is, in the individual. 

Thus no form of the superego can be inferred from the individual to a given 
society And the only form of collective superego that one can conceive of 
would require a complete molecular disintegration of society. It is true that 
the enthusiasm with which an entire generation of young people sacrificed 
itself to the ideals of nothingness allows us to glimpse its possible realization 
on the horizon of mass social phenomena that would then presuppose that it 
occur on a universal scale. 

IV. On Crime in Relation to the Criminal's Reality: If Psychoanalysis 
Provides Its Measure, It [Also] Indicates Its Fundamental Social Mainspring 

Responsibility — that is, punishment — is an essential characteristic of the idea 
of man that prevails in a given society. 

A civilization whose ideals are ever more utilitarian, since it is caught up in 
the accelerated movement of production, can no longer understand anything 
about the expiatory signification of punishment. While it may consider pun- 
ishment useful as a warning to others, it tends to assimilate it into its correc- 
tional goal. And this goal imperceptibly changes objects. The ideals of 
humanism dissolve into the utilitarianism of the group. And since the group 
that lays down the law is, for social reasons, not at all sure that the foundations 
of its power are just, it relies on a humanitarianism in which are expressed both 
the revolt of the exploited and the guilty conscience of the exploiters, to whom 
the notion of punishment has become equally unbearable. An ideological 
antinomy reflects, here as elsewhere, a social malaise. It is now seeking the solu- 
tion to that malaise in a scientific approach to the problem, that is, in a psychi- 
138 atric analysis of the criminal to which — in the final analysis of all the measures 

for preventing crime and guarding against recidivism — what can be called a 
sanitary conception of penology must be related. 

This conception assumes that the relations between law and violence and 
the power of a universal police have been resolved. Indeed, we saw this con- 
ception reigning proudly in Nuremberg, and although the sanitary effect of 
those trials remains doubtful regarding the suppression of the social ills that 
it claimed to repress, psychiatrists had to be included for reasons of "human- 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology 113 

ity," these reasons more closely resembling respect for the human object than 
the notion of our fellowman. 

A parallel evolution in the probation of crime corresponds, in fact, to the 
evolution in the meaning of punishment. 

Beginning in religious societies with the ordeal and the test of sworn oath, 
in which the guilty party is identified by means of belief or offers up his fate 
to God's judgment, probation demands ever more of the individual's involve- 
ment in confession as his juridical personality is progressively specified. This 
is why the entire humanist evolution of Law in Europe — which began with 
the rediscovery of Roman Law at the University of Bologna and extended to 
the entire appropriation [captation] of justice by royal jurists and the univer- 
salization of the notion of the Law of Nations [Droit desgens] — is strictly cor- 
relative, in time and space, to the spread of torture that also began in Bologna 
as a means in the probation of a crime. This is a fact whose import people 
apparently still have not gauged. 

For the contempt for conscience that is manifest in the widespread reap- 
pearance of this practice as a means of oppression hides from us what faith in 
man it presupposes as a means of enforcing justice. 

If the juridical practice of torture was abandoned precisely when our soci- 
ety began promulgating Human Rights, which were ideologically founded in 
the abstraction of man's natural being, it was not because of an improvement 
in mores, which would be difficult to sustain given the historical perspective 
we have on nineteenth century social reality. Rather, it was because this new 
man, abstracted from his social consistency, was no longer believable in either 
sense of the term. That is, since he was no longer subject to sinning [pecca- 
ble], one could lend credence neither to his existence as a criminal nor to his 139 
confession. From then on, it was necessary to know his motivations, along 
with his motives for committing the crime, and these motivations and motives 
had to be comprehensible — comprehensible to everyone. As Tarde, one of 
the best minds among those who tried to solve the crisis in "penal philoso- 
phy," formulated it (with a sociological rectitude for which he deserves to be 
remembered, not forgotten as he is), two conditions are required for the sub- 
ject to be fully responsible: social similarity and personal identity. 

This opened the door of the praetorium to psychologists, and the fact that 
they only rarely appear there in person simply proves the social insolvency of 
their function. 

From that moment on, the "situation of the accused," to borrow Roger Gre- 
nier's expression, could no longer be described as anything but the meeting 
place of irreconcilable truths, as is apparent when listening to the most trivial 
trials in criminal court at which an expert is called on to testify. There is an 



ii4 Ecrits 

obvious incommensurability between the emotions the prosecution and the 
defense refer to in their debate (because they are the emotions understood by 
the jury), on the one hand, and the objective notions that the expert brings, 
on the other hand — notions that he does not manage to get across, poor dialec- 
tician that he is, since he is unable to nail them down in a conclusion of non 
compos mentis [irresponsabilite]. 

This incommensurability can be seen in the minds of the experts themselves, 
for it interferes with their function in the resentment they manifest regardless 
of their duty. Consider the case of the expert called before the Court to testify 
who refused to conduct anything but a physical examination of an indicted man 
who manifestly was mentally healthy. The expert hid behind the Code of Law, 
arguing that he did not have to conclude whether the act imputed to the subject 
by a police investigation had occurred or not, whereas a psychiatric evaluation 
explicitly informed him that a simple psychiatric exam would demonstrate with 
certainty that the act in question merely looked like a crime; since it figured 
in the subject's obsession as a repetitive gesture, it could not constitute a crim- 
inal act of exhibitionism in the enclosed but monitored space where it occurred. 

Expert witnesses are, however, granted almost discretionary power over 
the severity of the sentence [in France], provided they make use of the exten- 
sion added by law for their use in Article 64 of the Code. 
140 But while this sole article cannot help them explain the coercive nature of 

the force that led to the subject's act, it at least allows them to seek to discover 
who suffered its coercion. 

But only psychoanalysts can answer such a question, in that only they have 
a dialectical experience of the subject. 

Let us note that one of the first things to which this experience taught them 
to attribute psychical autonomy — namely, what analysis has progressively the- 
orized as representing the ego as an agency — is also what subjects in the ana- 
lytic dialogue admit to be part of themselves or, more precisely, that part of 
their actions and intentions that they admit to. Freud recognized the form of 
this admission that is most characteristic of the function it represents: Vernei- 
nung, that is, negation. 

We could trace out here a whole semiology of cultural forms through which 
subjectivity is communicated. We could begin with the intellectual restriction 
characteristic of Christian humanism, the codified usage of which the Jesuits, 
those admirable moralists, have so often been reproached for. We could con- 
tinue with the "ketman," a sort of exercise for protecting against truth, which 
Gobineau, in his penetrating account of social life in the Middle East, indi- 
cates is widespread. From there we could move on to Yang, a ceremony of 
refusals that Chinese politeness lays out as steps in the recognition of other 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology 1 15 

people. This would allow us to see that the most characteristic form of expres- 
sion of the subject in Western society is the assertion of one's innocence. We 
could thus posit that sincerity is the first obstacle encountered by the dialec- 
tic in the search for true intentions, the first goal of speech apparently being 
to disguise them. 

But this is merely the tip of a structure that is found anew at every stage in 
the genesis of the ego, and it shows that the dialectic provides the unconscious 
law of even the earliest formations of the system [appareil] of adaptation, thus 
confirming Hegel's gnoseology which formulates the law that generates real- 
ity through the unfolding of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis. It is certainly 
piquant to see Marxists wrestling to discover imperceptible traces of this unfold- 
ing in the progression of the essentially idealist notions that constitute math- 
ematics, and overlooking it precisely where it is most likely to appear: in the 
only psychology that clearly deals with the concrete, even if its theory does 141 

not acknowledge being guided by this unfolding. 

It is all the more significant to recognize the latter in the succession of 
crises — weaning, intrusion, Oedipus, puberty, and adolescence — each of 
which produces a new synthesis of the ego systems [appareils] in a form that 
is ever more alienating for the drives that are frustrated therein, and ever less 
ideal for the drives that are normalized thereby. This form is produced by 
what is perhaps the most fundamental psychical phenomenon that psycho- 
analysis has discovered: identification, whose formative power is confirmed 
even in biology. Each of the periods of so-called drive latency (the corre- 
sponding series of which is completed by the one that Fritz Wittels discov- 
ered in the adolescent ego) is characterized by the domination of a typical 
structure of objects of desire. 

One of us has described the infant's identification with his specular 
image as the most significant model, as well as the earliest moment, of the 
fundamentally alienating relationship in which man's being is dialectically 
constituted. 

He has also demonstrated that each identification gives rise to an aggres- 
siveness which cannot be adequately explained by drive frustration — except 
in the commonsense manner dear to Franz Alexander — but which expresses 
the discordance that is produced by the alienation. This phenomenon can be 
exemplified by the grimacing form of it found in experiments in which ani- 
mals are exposed to an increasingly ambiguous stimulus — for example, one 
that gradually changes from an ellipse to a circle — when the animals have been 
conditioned to respond to the two different stimuli in opposite ways. 

This tension manifests the dialectical negativity inscribed in the very forms 
in which the life forces are taken up in man, and we can say that Freud showed 



n6 Ecrits 

his genius when, with the term "death instinct," he recognized this tension as 
an "ego drive." 

Indeed, every form of the ego embodies this negativity, and we can say that 
if Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos share the wardship of our fate, it is in con- 
cert that they spin the thread of our identity. 

Aggressive tension thus becomes part of the drive, whenever the drive is 
frustrated because the "other's" noncorrespondence [to one 's wishes] aborts 
142 the resolving identification, and this produces a type of object that becomes 

criminogenic by interrupting the dialectical formation of one 's ego. 

One of us has attempted to show the functional role and the correlation 
with delusion of this object's structure in two extreme forms of paranoiac homi- 
cide, the case of "Aimee" and that of the Papin sisters. The latter provides 
proof that only the analyst can demonstrate that a criminal is alienated from 
reality in a case in which popular opinion is deluded into believing that the 
crime was simply a response to its social context. 

These are also the object structures that Anna Freud, Kate Friedlander, and 
John Bowlby found, in their work as analysts, in acts of theft committed by 
juvenile delinquents, structures that differed depending on whether these acts 
manifested the symbolism of a gift of excrement or an Oedipal demand, the 
frustration of nourishing presence or that of phallic masturbation. What these 
analysts call the educative portion of their work with the subject is guided by 
the notion that each object structure corresponds to a type of reality that deter- 
mines his actions. 

This education is, rather, a living dialectic, in accordance with which the 
educators, through their non-action, relegate the aggressions characteristic of 
the ego to becoming bound [se Her] for the subject as he becomes alienated in 
his relations with the other, so that they can then unbind [de'lier] these aggres- 
sions using classical analysis' typical techniques. 

The ingenuity and patience that we admire in the initiatives of a pioneer 
like Aichhorn certainly do not make us forget that the form of these tech- 
niques must always be renewed in order to overcome the resistances that the 
"aggressive group" cannot help but deploy against every recognized form of 
practice. 

Such a conception of the action of "setting straight" is diametrically 
opposed to everything that can be inspired by a psychology that calls itself 
genetic. The latter merely measures children's degressive aptitudes in 
response to questions that are posed to them in the purely abstract register of 
adult mental categories, and it can be overturned by the simple apprehension 
of the primordial fact that children, right from their very first manifestations 
of language, use syntax and particles with a level of sophistication that the pos- 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology ny 

tulates of intellectual "genesis" would allow them to reach only at the height 
of a metaphysician's career. 

And since genetic psychology claims to reach the child 's reality in this idi- 143 

otic manner, let us say that it is the pedants who should be warned that they 
will have to realize their mistake when the words, "Long live death," prof- 
fered by mouths that know not what they say, make the pedants see that the 
burning dialectic circulates in the flesh along with the blood. 

This conception also specifies the sort of expert opinion that analysts can 
give on the reality of a crime in basing themselves on the study of what we 
can call the ego's negativistic techniques — whether they be suffered by a per- 
son who becomes a criminal because of a one-time opportunity or are directed 
by the hardened criminal — namely, the basal inanition [inanisation] of spatial 
and temporal perspectives that are necessitated by the intimidating prediction 
in which the so-called "hedonistic" theory of penology naively trusts; the pro- 
gressive subduction of interests in the field of object temptation; the shrinking 
of the field of consciousness in tandem with a somnambulistic apprehension 
of the immediate situation in carrying out the criminal act; and the structural 
coordination of the act with fantasies from which the author is absent — ideal 
annulment or imaginary creations — to which are attached, according to an 
unconscious spontaneity, the negations, alibis, and simulations by which the 
alienated reality that characterizes the subject is sustained. 

We wish to say here that this entire chain does not ordinarily have the arbi- 
trary organization of a deliberate behavior, and that the structural anomalies 
that analysts can note in it will serve them as so many landmarks on the path 
to truth. Thus analysts will attach more meaning to the often paradoxical 
traces by which the author of the crime identifies himself, which signify less 
errors of imperfect execution of the act than failures of an all too real "every- 
day psychopathology." 

Anal identifications, which analysis has discovered at the origins of the ego, 
give meaning to what forensic medicine designates in police jargon by the name 
of "calling card." The often flagrant "signature" left by the criminal can indi- 
cate at what moment of ego identification the repression [repression] occurred 
thanks to which one can say that the subject cannot answer for his crime, and 
thanks to which he remains attached to that repression in his negation. 

A recently published case by Boutonier shows us the mainspring of a crim- 
inal's awakening to the realization .of what condemned him, which goes as far 
as the mirror phenomenon itself. 

To overcome these repressions, should we resort to one of those narcosis 144 

procedures so oddly brought into the news by the alarms they set off in the 
virtuous defenders of the inviolability of consciousness? 



n8 Ecrits 

No one can find his way along this path better than the psychoanalyst — 
first, because, contrary to the confused mythology in the name of which the 
ignorant expect narcosis to "lift the censorship," the psychoanalyst knows 
the precise meaning of the repressions that define the limits of ego synthesis. 

Therefore, if he already knows that when the analysis restores the 
repressed unconscious to consciousness, it is less the content of its revelation 
than the mainspring of its reconquest that constitutes the efficacy of the treat- 
ment — and this is true a fortiori for the unconscious determinations that prop 
up the very affirmation of the ego — the analyst also knows that reality, 
whether it concerns the subject's motivation or (as is sometimes the case) his 
very action, can appear only through the progress of a dialogue that the nar- 
cotic twilight can but render inconsistent. Here, as elsewhere, truth is not a 
pregiven that one can grasp in its inertia, but rather a dialectic in motion. 

Let us not, then, seek the reality of the crime or of the criminal by means 
of narcosis. The vaticinations that narcosis provokes, which are disconcert- 
ing to the investigator, are dangerous to the subject for whom they can con- 
stitute the "fertile moment" of a delusion if he has even the slightest hint of a 
psychotic structure. 

Narcosis, like torture, has its limits: it cannot make the subject confess to 
something he does not know. 

Zacchias' Quaestiones medico-legales informs us that questions were raised 
about the unity of the personality and the possible breaks in it that illness can 
bring about already in the seventeenth century. In response to these questions, 
psychoanalysis provides the apparatus for examination that still covers a field 
linking nature and culture — namely, that of personal synthesis, in its twofold 
relation of formal identification, which begins with the gaps in neurological 
dissociations (from epileptic fits to organically-based amnesias), and of alien- 
ating assimilation, which begins with the tensions in group relations. 

Here the psychoanalyst can indicate to the sociologist the criminogenic func- 
145 tions characteristic of a society which, requiring an extremely complex and 

extensive vertical integration of social collaboration for the purpose of pro- 
duction, proposes to the subjects it employs for this purpose individual ideals 
that tend to boil down to an ever more horizontal plane of assimilation. 

This formulation designates a process whose dialectical aspect can be sum- 
marized by noting that, in a civilization in which the ideal of individualism has 
been raised to a previously unknown power, individuals find themselves tend- 
ing toward a state in which they will think, feel, act, and love things exactly 
at the same times, and in strictly equivalent portions of space, as everyone else. 

Now, the fundamental notion of an aggressiveness that is correlative to every 
alienating identification allows us to perceive that, in the phenomena of social 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology 1 19 

assimilation, there must be a limit, based on a certain quantitative scale, at which 
standardized aggressive tensions are precipitated at points where the mass 
breaks apart and becomes polarized. 

We know, moreover, that these phenomena have already, from the vantage 
point of output alone, attracted the attention of exploiters of labor power who 
are not all talk and no action, justifying the price paid by the Western Electric 
Company in Hawthorne, Illinois, for a sustained study of the effects of group 
relations on the most desirable psychical attitudes in employees. 

The following are objects of study regarding which analytic theory can 
offer statisticians the correct coordinates on the basis of which to begin meas- 
uring things: a complete separation between the vital group, constituted by 
the subject and his family, and the functional group in which the vital group's 
means of subsistence must be found (a fact that we can sufficiently illustrate 
by saying that it makes Monsieur Verdoux seem plausible); an anarchy of 
desire-eliciting images that is all the greater as they seem to gravitate ever 
more around scopophilic satisfactions that are homogenized in the social 
mass; and an ever greater involvement of the fundamental passions for 
power, possession, and prestige in social ideals. 

Thus even the politician and the philosopher will find something useful 
here. They will note, in a certain democratic society whose mores are extend- 
ing their domination around the globe, (1) the appearance of a form of crim- 146 
inality that so riddles the social body now that it is assuming legalized forms 
in it; (2) the inclusion of the criminal's psychological type into the set of types 
comprising the record-holder, the philanthropist, and the star, and even his 
reduction to the general type of the wage slave; and (3) crime 's social signi- 
fication reduced to its use in advertising. 

These structures — in which an extreme social assimilation of the individ- 
ual is correlated with an aggressive tension whose relative impunity in the State 
is quite palpable to someone from a different culture (as was, for example, the 
young Sun Yat-sen) — seem to be reversed when, according to a formal 
process already described by Plato, tyranny succeeds democracy and carries 
out the cardinal act of addition on individuals, who are reduced to their ordi- 
nal numbers, which is soon followed by the other three fundamental opera- 
tions of arithmetic. 

This is why, in totalitarian societies, while the leaders' "objective guilt" leads 
them to be treated as criminal and responsible, the relative effacement of these 
notions, which is signaled by the sanitary conception of penology, bears fruit 
for everyone else. The concentration camp is opened and, in determining who 
will fill it, rebellious intentions are less decisive qualifications than a certain 
quantitative relationship between the social mass and the banished mass. 



120 Ecrits 

This relationship will no doubt be calculable in terms of the mechanics devel- 
oped by so-called "group psychology," and will allow us to determine the irra- 
tional constant that must correspond to the aggressiveness characteristic of 
the individual's fundamental alienation. 

The progress by which man creates himself in his own image is thus 
revealed in the city's very injustice, which is always incomprehensible to the 
"intellectual" who is subjugated by the "law of the heart." 

V. On the Non-existence of "Criminal Instincts ": Psychoanalysis 

Stops Short at the Ob j edification of the Id and Proclaims the Autonomy 

of an Irreducibly Subjective Experience 

Assuming now that psychoanalysis illuminates, as we have claimed, the psy- 
chological objectification of crime and criminals, doesn't it also have some- 
thing to say about their innate factors? 
147 Let us note first the critique to which it is necessary to submit the confused 

idea that many decent people endorse: that crime involves an eruption of 
"instincts" that breaks down the "barrier" constituted by the moral forces of 
intimidation. This is a difficult illusion to dispel, owing to the satisfaction it 
gives even to the serious-minded by depicting the criminal as well guarded; 
the tutelary policeman, who is characteristic of our society, here takes on a 
reassuring ubiquity. 

But if instinct does, in fact, signify man's indisputable animal nature, it is 
not at all clear why this animal nature should be less docile when it is embod- 
ied in a reasonable being. The form of the adage, homo homini lupus, deceives 
us as to its meaning, and Baltasar Gracian, in a chapter of his Criticon {The 
Critick), constructs a fable in which he shows what the moralist tradition means 
when it says that man's ferocity toward his semblable exceeds everything ani- 
mals are capable of, and that carnivores themselves recoil in horror at the threat 
man poses to nature as a whole. 

But this very cruelty implies humanity. It targets a semblable, even in [cases 
in which the cruelty more directly targets] a being from another species. Noth- 
ing has sounded more deeply than psychoanalysis the equivalence [of self and 
other] in lived experience to which we are alerted by Love 's moving appeal — 
it is yourself that you are striking — and by the Mind's icy deduction: it is in 
the fight to the death for pure prestige that man wins recognition from man. 

If, in another sense, one uses "instincts" to mean atavistic behaviors whose 
violence might have been necessitated by the law of the primitive jungle, which 
some physiopathologic lapse supposedly releases, like morbid impulses, from 
the lower level in which they are bottled up, one can wonder why impulses to 



A Theoretical Introduction to the Functions of Psychoanalysis in Criminology 121 

shovel, plant, cook, and even bury the dead have not surfaced since man has 
been man. 

Psychoanalysis certainly includes a theory of instincts, a highly elaborate 
one at that, which is the first verifiable theory of man that has ever been prof- 
fered. But psychoanalysis shows us the instincts caught up in a metamor- 
phism in which the formulation of their organ, direction, and object is a 
Jeannot knife with infinitely exchangeable parts. The Triebe (drives) that are 
identified in this theory simply constitute a system of energetic equivalences 148 

to which we relate psychical exchanges, not insofar as they become subordi- 
nate to some entirely set behavior, whether natural or learned, but insofar as 
they symbolize, nay dialectically incorporate [integrent], the functions of the 
organs in which these natural exchanges appear — that is, the oral, anal, and 
genito-urinary orifices. 

These drives thus appear to us only through highly complex links; we can- 
not prejudge their original intensity on the basis of their sheer deflection. It is 
meaningless to speak of an excess of libido. 

If there is a notion that can be derived from a great number of individuals 
who — due both to their past history and the "constitutional" impression peo- 
ple receive from contact with them and from their appearance — inspire in us 
the idea of "criminal tendencies," it is rather that of a shortage than of an excess 
of vitality. Their hypogenitality is often clear and their personal climate radi- 
ates libidinal coldness. 

While many subjects seek and find sexual stimulation in their misde- 
meanors, exhibitions, thefts, bill dodging, and anonymous slander, and even 
in their crimes of murderous passion, this stimulation (whatever the status of 
the mechanisms that cause it, whether anxiety, sadism, or its association with 
a particular situation) cannot be viewed as the effect of an overflowing of 
instincts. 

Assuredly, there is a high correlation between many perversions and the 
subjects who are sent for criminological examinations, but this correlation can 
only be evaluated psychoanalytically as a function of fixation on an object, 
developmental stagnation, the impact of ego structure, and neurotic repres- 
sions in each individual case. 

More concrete is the notion with which psychoanalytic experience com- 
pletes the psychical topography of the individual, that of the id, which is also 
much more difficult to grasp than the others. 

To make the id the sum total of the subject's innate dispositions is a purely 
abstract definition devoid of use value. 

A situational constant, which is fundamental in what psychoanalytic the- 
ory calls repetition automatisms, appears to be related to it (after subtracting 



izz Ecrits 

the effects of the repressed and of ego identifications) and can be relevant to 
recidivism. 
149 Of course, the id also refers to the fateful choices evident in marriage, pro- 

fession, and friendship that often appear in a crime as a revelation of the faces 
of destiny. 

The subject's "tendencies" do not fail, moreover, to manifest slippage in 
relation to their level of satisfaction. The question of the effects that a certain 
index of criminal satisfaction can have there should be raised. 

But we are perhaps at the limits of our dialectical action here, and the truth 
that we are able to recognize in it with the subject cannot be reduced to sci- 
entific objectification. 

On the basis of the confession we hear from the neurotic or pervert of the 
ineffable jouissance he finds in losing himself in the fascinating image, we can 
gauge the power of a hedonism that introduces us to the ambiguous relations 
between reality and pleasure. If, in referring to these two grand principles, we 
are tracing out the direction of normative development, how can we not but 
be struck by the importance of fantasmatic functions in the grounds for this 
progression, and by how captive human life remains to the narcissistic illu- 
sion with which it weaves, as we know, life's "realest" coordinates? And, on 
the other hand, isn't everything already weighed out next to the cradle in the 
incommensurable scales of Strife and Love? 

Beyond these antinomies, which lead us to the threshold of wisdom, there 
is no absolute crime; and, despite the police action extended by our civiliza- 
tion to the whole world, there are still religious associations that are bound 
together by a practice of crime — crime in which their members know how to 
find anew the superhuman presences that ensure destruction in order to keep 
the Universe in balance. 

For our part, if we can — within the limits that we have endeavored to 
define as those to which our social ideals reduce the comprehension of crime 
and which condition its criminological objectification — contribute a more 
rigorous truth, let us not forget that we owe it to a privileged function: the 
subject- to-subject practice that inscribes our duties in the order of eternal 
brotherhood. Its rule is also the rule of every action that is permitted to us. 



Presentation on Psychical Causality 151 

This presentation was given on September 28th, 1946, at the psychiatric con- 
ference held in Bonneval that was organized by Henri Ey on the topic of psy- 
chogenesis. A collection of the presentations made at the conference and of the 
discussion that followed them was published by Desclee de Brouwer in a vol- 
ume entitled Le Probleme de la psychogenese des nevroses et des psychoses ("The 
Problem of the Psychogenesis of the Neuroses and Psychoses"). My presenta- 
tion served to open the meeting. 



/. Critique of an Organicist Theory of Madness, 
Henri Ey's Organo-Dynamism 

Having been invited by our host, three years ago already, to explain my views 
on psychical causality to you, my task here will be twofold. I have been asked 
to formulate a radical position concerning this topic — a position that people 
assume to be mine, and indeed it is. In addition, I must do so in the context of 
a debate that has reached a degree of development to which I have by no means 
contributed. I hope to meet your expectations by directly addressing both facets 
of this task, although no one can demand that I do so thoroughly here. 

For several years I avoided all opportunities to express my views. The humil- 
iation of our times, faced with the enemies of humankind, dissuaded me from 
doing so. Like Fontenelle, I gave myself over to the fantasy of having my hand 
filled with truths all the better to hold on to them. I confess that it is a ridicu- 
lous fantasy, marking, as it does, the limitations of a being who is on the verge 
of bearing witness. Must we view it as a failure on my part to live up to what 
the course of the world demands of me, when I was asked anew to speak at 
the very moment when even the least clairvoyant could see that the infatua- 1 52 

tion with power had, once again, merely served the ruse of Reason? I'll let 
you be the judge of how my research may suffer from this. 

At least I do not think I am failing to live up to the requirements of truth 



124 Ecrits 

in rejoicing at the fact that my research can be defended here in the courteous 
forms of verbal debate. 

This is why I will first respectfully bow before the enterprise of thinking 
and teaching that makes for honor in one 's lifetime and is the foundation of 
one 's lifework; if I remind my friend Henri Ey that, by endorsing the same 
initial theoretical positions, we entered the ring together on the same side, it 
is not simply in order to express surprise at the fact that we find ourselves on 
such opposite sides today. 

In fact, ever since Ey published his fine work, "Essai d' application des 
principes de Jackson a une conception dynamique de la neuropsychiatries ("An 
Attempt to Apply Jackson's Principles to a Dynamic Conception of Neuro- 
psychiatry"), written in collaboration with Julien Rouart, in the journal 
Encephale in 1936, 1 noted — and my copy attests to this — everything that linked 
his views, and would link them ever more closely, to a doctrine of mental prob- 
lems that I consider incomplete and false, a doctrine which, in psychiatry, is 
known as "organicism." 

Strictly speaking, Ey's organo-dynamism can legitimately be included in 
this doctrine simply because it cannot relate the genesis of mental problems 
as such — whether functional or lesional in their nature, global or partial in 
their manifestations, and as dynamic as they may be in their mainspring — to 
anything but the play of systems constituted in the material substance [l 9 eten- 
due] located within the body's integument. The crucial point, in my view, is 
that this play, no matter how energetic and integrating one conceives it to be, 
always rests in the final analysis on molecular interaction of the partes-extra- 
partes, material-substance type that classical physics is based on — that is, in a 
way which allows one to express this interaction as a relation between func- 
tion and variable, this relation constituting its determinism. 

Organicism is being enriched with conceptions that range from mechanis- 
tic to dynamistic and even Gestaltist ones. The conception that Ey borrows 
from Jackson certainly lends itself to this enriching, to which his own discus- 
sion of it has contributed — showing that Ey's conception does not exceed the 
limits I have just defined. This is what, from my point of view, makes the dif- 
ference between his position and that of my master, Clerambault, or of 
153 Guiraud negligible — and I should note that the position adopted by the latter 

two authors has proven to be of the least negligible psychiatric value, and we 
shall see in what sense further on. 

In any case, Ey cannot repudiate the frame within which I am confining 
him. Since this frame is based on a Cartesian reference — which he has cer- 
tainly recognized and whose meaning I would ask him to reconsider — it des- 
ignates nothing but recourse to the (self-)evidence of physical reality, which 



Presentation on Psychical Causality i25 

is of importance to him, as it is to all of us, ever since Descartes based it on 
the notion of material substance [I'e'tendue]. "Energetic functions," to adopt 
Ey's terminology, can be integrated into this just as much as "instrumental 
functions" can, 1 for he writes "that it is not only possible but necessary to 
search for the chemical and anatomical conditions" of the "specific cerebral 
process that produces mental illness"; he also mentions "lesions that weaken 
the energetic processes which are necessary for the deployment of the psy- 
chical functions." 

This is self-evident, in any case, and I am merely laying out in an intro- 
ductory manner here the border that I intend to place between our views. 

Having said that, I will first present a critique of Ey's organo-dynamism. 
I will do so, not in order to say that his conception does not stand up, for our 
presence here today provides ample proof of the contrary, but in order to 
demonstrate — in the authentic explanation of it that this conception owes as 
much to the intellectual rigor of its author as to the dialectical quality of your 
debates — that it does not possess the characteristics of a true idea. 

It may perhaps surprise some of you that I am disregarding the philosoph- 
ical taboo that has overhung the notion of truth in scientific epistemology ever 
since the so-called pragmatist speculative theses were disseminated in it. You 
will see that the question of truth conditions the phenomenon of madness in 154 

its very essence, and that by trying to avoid this question, one castrates this 
phenomenon of the signification by virtue of which I think I can show you 
that it is tied to man's very being. 

As for the critical use that I will make of it in a moment, I will stay close 
to Descartes by positing the notion of truth in the famous form Spinoza gave 
it: "Idea vera debet cum suo ideato convenire. A true idea must" (the emphasis 
falls on the word "must," meaning that this is its own necessity) "agree with 
its object." 

Ey's doctrine evinces the exact opposite feature, in that, as it develops, it 
increasingly contradicts its original, permanent problem. 

This problem — and it is to Ey's keen merit that he sensed its import and 
took responsibility for it — is the one found in the titles of his most recent pub- 
lications: the problem of the limits of neurology and psychiatry. This problem 
would certainly have no more importance here than in any other medical spe- 
cialty, if it did not concern the originality of the object of our experience — 
namely, madness. I sincerely praise Ey for obstinately maintaining this term, 
given all the suspicions it can arouse, due to its antiquated stench of the sacred, 
in those who would like to reduce it in some way to the omnitudo realitatis. 

Plainly speaking, is there nothing that distinguishes the insane [laliene] from 
other patients apart from the fact that the first are locked up in asylums, whereas 



126 Ecrits 

the others are hospitalized? Is the originality of our object related to practice, 
social practice? or to reason, scientific reason? 

It was clear that Ey could not but distance himself from such reason once 
he went looking for it in Jackson's conceptions. No matter how remarkable 
they were for their time, owing to their all-encompassing requirements 
regarding the organism's relational functions, their principle and goal were to 
reduce neurological and psychiatric problems to one and the same scale of dis- 
solutions. And, in fact, this is what happened. No matter how subtle the cor- 
rective that Ey brought to this conception, his students, Hecaen, Follin, and 
Bonnafe, easily proved to him that it does not allow us to essentially distin- 
guish aphasia from dementia, functional pain from hypochondria, hallucinosis 
from hallucinations, or even certain forms of agnosia from certain delusions. 

I myself would ask Ey to explain, for example, the famous patient discussed 
155 by Gelb and Goldstein, whose study has been examined from other angles by 

Benary and by Hochheimer. This patient, afflicted with an occipital lesion that 
destroyed both calcarine sulci, presented (1) psychical blindness accompanied 
by selective problems with all categorial symbolism, such as abolishment of 
pointing behavior, in contrast with the preservation of grasping behavior; (2) 
extreme agnostic troubles that must be conceived of as an asymbolia of the 
entire perceptual field; and (3) a deficit in the apprehension of significance as 
such, manifested in (a) an inability to understand analogies directly at the intel- 
lectual level, whereas he was able to refind them in verbal symmetry; (b) an 
odd "blindness to the intuition of number" (as Hochheimer puts it), which did 
not stop him, however, from performing mechanical operations on numbers; 
and (c) an absorption in his present circumstances, which rendered him inca- 
pable of entertaining anything fictional, and thus of any abstract reasoning, a 
fortiori barring all access to speculation. 

This is truly an extreme, across-the-board dissolution, which, let it be noted 
in passing, goes right to the very core of the patient's sexual behavior, where 
the immediacy of the sexual project is reflected in the brevity of the act, and 
even in the fact that its interruption is met by him with indifference. 

Don't we see here a negative dissolution problem that is simultaneously 
global and apical, whereas the gap between the patient's organic condition and 
his clinical picture is seen clearly enough in the contrast between the local- 
ization of the lesion in the zone of visual projection and the extension of the 
symptom to the entire sphere of symbolism? 

Would Ey tell me that what distinguishes this patient with an obviously 
neurological problem from a psychotic is the fact that the remaining person- 
ality fails to react to the negative problem? I would answer that this is not at 
all the case. For this patient, beyond the routine professional activity that he 



Presentation on Psychical Causality 123 

has kept up, expresses, for instance, nostalgia for the religious and political 
speculations that he cannot engage in anymore. In medical tests, he manages 
to reach certain objectives, which he no longer understands, in a roundabout 
manner by mechanically though deliberately getting a "handle" on them via 
behaviors that have remained possible for him. Even more striking than the 
way he manages to limit his agnosia of somatic functions, in order to recover 
some pointing activity, is the way he feels around in his stock of language in 1 56 

order to overcome some of his agnostic deficits. Still more moving is his col- 
laboration with his physician in the analysis of his problems, as when he comes 
up with certain words (for example, Anhaltspunkte, handles) with which to 
name certain of his artifices. 

Here then is what I would ask Ey: How can he distinguish this patient from 
a madman? If he cannot give me an answer in his system, it will be up to me 
to give him one in my own. 

And if he answers with "noetic problems" of "functional dissolutions," I 
will ask him how the latter differ from what he calls "global dissolutions." 

In fact, in Ey's theory it is clearly the personality's reaction that is specific 
to psychosis, regardless of his reservations about it. This is where his theory 
reveals both its contradiction and its weakness, because as he ever more sys- 
tematically misunderstands all forms of psychogenesis — so much so that he 
admits that he can no longer even understand what psychogenesis means 2 — 
we see him increasingly weigh down his exposes with ever more complicated 
"structural" descriptions of psychical activity, in which the same internal con- 
tradiction appears anew in a still more paralyzing form. As I will show by quot- 
ing him. 

In order to criticize psychogenesis, we see Ey reduce it to the forms of an 
idea that can be refuted all the more easily because one addresses only those 
forms provided by the idea's adversaries. Let me enumerate these forms with 
him: emotional shock, conceived of in terms of its physiological effects; reac- 
tional factors, viewed from a constitutionalist perspective; unconscious trau- 
matic effects, insofar as they are abandoned, according to him, by even those 
who support the idea; and, lastly, pathogenic suggestion, insofar "as the 
staunchest organicists and neurologists — no need to mention their names 
here — leave themselves this escape hatch and admit as exceptional evidence 
a psychogenesis that they thoroughly reject from the rest of pathology." 

I have omitted only one term from the series, the theory of regression in 
the unconscious, which is included among the most serious [forms of the idea 
of psychogenesis], no doubt because it can, at least apparently, be reduced "to 
an attack on the ego which, once again, is indistinguishable, in the final analy- 157 

sis, from the notion of functional dissolution." I have cited this phrase, which 



iz8 Ecrits 

is repeated in a hundred different ways in Ey's work, because it will help me 
point out the radical flaw in his conception of psychopathology. 

The forms I have just enumerated sum up, Ey tells us, the "facts that are 
invoked" (his words exactly) to demonstrate the existence of psychogenesis. 
It is just as easy for Ey to remark that these facts "demonstrate anything but 
that" as it is for me to note that adopting such a facile position allows him to 
avoid running any risks. 

Why is it that, in inquiring into the doctrinal tendencies to which, in the 
absence of facts, we would have to attribute "a [notion of] psychogenesis that 
is hardly compatible with the psychopathological facts," he immediately 
thinks he has to show they derive from Descartes, by attributing to the latter 
an absolute dualism between the organic realm and the psychical realm? I 
myself have always thought — and, in the talks we had in our younger days, 
Ey seemed to realize this too — that Descartes' dualism is, rather, that of exten- 
sion \l 9 etendue\ and thought. One is surprised, on the contrary, that Ey seeks 
no support from an author for whom thought can err only insofar as confused 
ideas, which are determined by the body's passions, have found admittance 
into it. 

Perhaps, indeed, it is better for Ey not to base anything on such an ally, in 
whom I seem to have such confidence. But, for God's sake, after having trot- 
ted out for us Cartesian psychogeneticists of the caliber of Babinski, Andre- 
Thomas, and Lhermitte, he should at least avoid identifying "the fundamental 
Cartesian intuition" with a psychophysiological parallelism that is worthier 
of Taine than of Spinoza. Such a straying from the sources might make us 
think that Jackson's influence is still more pernicious than it at first seemed. 

Having vilified the dualism he imputes to Descartes, Ey introduces us 
directly — through a "theory of psychical life that is incompatible with the idea 
that there can be a psychogenesis of mental problems" — to his own dualism, 
which finds complete expression in this final sentence, the tone of which is 
quite singularly passionate: "mental illnesses are insults and obstacles to free- 
dom; they are not caused by free, that is, purely psychogenic, activity." 

Ey's dualism seems all the more serious to me in that it points to an unten- 

158 able equivocation in his thinking. Indeed, I suspect that his entire analysis of 

psychical activity hinges on a play on words: that between his free play and 

his freedom [son librejeu et sa liberte\ Let us add to it the key provided by the 

word "deployment." 

Like Goldstein, Ey posits that "integration is being." Hence he must 
include in this integration not only the psychical realm, but the entire move- 
ment of the mind; he in fact incorporates everything down to existential prob- 
lems into it, running the gamut from syntheses to structures and from forms 



Presentation on Psychical Causality 129 

to phenomena. I even thought, God forgive me, I noticed that he used the 
expression "dialectical hierarchism"; the conceptual coupling of these two 
terms would, I believe, have made even the late Pichon himself wonder — 
Pichon, whose reputation will not be besmirched if I say that, to him, Hegel's 
very alphabet remained a dead letter. 

Ey 's moves are certainly spry, but we cannot follow them for long because 
we realize that the reality of psychical life is crushed in the noose — which is 
always similar and in fact always the same — that tightens all the more surely 
around our friend's thought the more he tries to free himself from it, denying 
him access to both the truth of the psyche and that of madness by a telling 
necessity. 

Indeed, when Ey begins to define this oh so marvelous psychical activity 
as "our personal adaptation to reality, " I start to feel that I have such sure views 
about the world that all my undertakings must be those of a clairvoyant prince. 
What could I possibly be incapable of accomplishing in the lofty realms where 
I reign? Nothing is impossible for man, says the Vaudois peasant with his inim- 
itable accent: if ever there is something he cannot do, he drops it. Should Ey 
carry me with his art of "psychical trajectory" into the "psychical field," and 
invite me to pause for a moment to consider with him "the trajectory in the 
field," I will persist in my happiness, because of my satisfaction at recogniz- 
ing formulations that are akin to ones I myself once provided — in the 
exordium to my doctoral thesis on the paranoiac psychoses, when I tried to 
define the phenomenon of personality — momentarily overlooking the fact that 
we are not aiming at the same ends. 

Of course, I wince a tad when I read that "for dualism" (still Cartesian, I 
presume) "the mind is a mind without existence," remembering as I do that 
the first judgment of certainty that Descartes bases on the consciousness that 
thinking has of itself is a pure judgment of existence: cogito ergo sum. I also get 
concerned when I come across the assertion that "according to materialism, 159 

the mind is an epiphenomenon," recalling as I do that form of materialism in 
which the mind immanent in matter is realized by the latter's very movement. 

But when, moving on to Ey's lecture on the notion of nervous disorders, 3 
I come upon "this level characterized by the creation of a properly psychical 
causality," and I learn that "the reality of the ego is concentrated there" and 
that through it, 

the structural duality of psychical life is consummated, a life of relations 
between the world and the ego, which is animated by the whole dialec- 
tical movement of the mind that is always striving — both in the order 
of action and in the theoretical order — to reduce this antinomy without 



i jo Ecrits 

ever managing to do so, or at the very least trying to reconcile and har- 
monize the demands made by objects, other people, the body, the 
Unconscious, and the conscious Subject, 

then I wake up and protest: the free play of my psychical activity by no means 
implies that I strive with such difficulty. For there is no antinomy whatsoever 
between the objects I perceive and my body, whose perception is constituted by 
a quite natural harmony with those objects. My unconscious leads me quite 
blithely to annoyances that I would hardly dream of attributing to it, at least not 
until I begin to concern myself with it through the refined means of psycho- 
analysis. And none of this stops me from behaving toward other people with 
irrefragable egoism, in the most sublime unconsciousness of my conscious Sub- 
ject. For as long as I do not try to reach the intoxicating sphere of oblativity that 
is so dear to French psychoanalysts, my naive experience does not set me the 
task of dealing with what La Rochefoucauld, in his perverse genius, detected in 
the fabric of all human sentiments, even that of love: pride [amour-propre]. 

All this "psychical activity" thus truly seems like a dream to me. Can this 
be the dream of a physician who has heard that hybrid chain unfurl in his ears 
thousands of times — that chain which is made of fate and inertia, throws of 
the dice and astonishment, false successes and missed encounters, and which 
makes up the usual script of a human life? 

No, it is rather the dream of an automaton maker, the likes of whom Ey and 
1 60 I used to make fun of in the past, Ey nicely quipping that hidden in every organi- 

cist conception of the psyche one always finds "the little man within the man" 
who is busy ensuring that the machine responds. 

What, dear Ey, are drops in the level of consciousness, hypnoid states, and 
physiological dissolutions, if not the fact that the little man within the man has 
a headache — that is, an ache in the other little man that he himself, no doubt, 
has in his head, and so on ad infinitum} Polyxena's age-old argument still holds, 
no matter how one takes man's being to be given, whether in its essence as an 
Idea, or in its existence as an organism. 

I am no longer dreaming now, but what I read next is that, 

projected into a still more mental reality, the world of ideal values — that 
are no longer integrated, but infinitely integrating — is constituted: 
beliefs, ideals, vital programs, and the values of logical judgment and 
moral conscience. 

I see quite clearly here that there are, indeed, beliefs and ideals that become 
linked in the same psyche to vital programs, which are just as repugnant to 



Presentation on Psychical Causality 131 

logical judgment as they are to moral conscience, in order to produce a fas- 
cist, or more simply an imbecile or a rascal. I conclude that the integrated form 
of these ideals implies no psychical culmination for them and that their inte- 
grating action bears no relation to their value — and thus that there must be a 
mistake here too. 

I certainly do not intend, gentlemen, to belittle the scope of your debates 
or the results you have reached. I would soon embarrass myself were I to under- 
estimate the difficulty of the issues involved. By mobilizing Gestalt theory, 
behaviorism, and structural and phenomenological terms in order to put 
organo-dynamism to the test, you have relied on scientific resources that I 
seem to neglect in resorting to principles that are perhaps a bit too certain and 
to an irony that is no doubt a bit risque. This is because it seemed to me that 
I could better help you untie the noose that I mentioned earlier by reducing 
the number of terms in the scales. But for this to be completely successful in 
the minds of those whom the noose holds fast, perhaps it should have been 
Socrates himself who came to speak to you here, or rather perhaps I should 
simply listen to you in silence. 

For the authentic dialectic in which you situate your terms and which gives 161 

your young Academy its style suffices to guarantee the rigor of your progress. 
I rely on this dialectic myself and feel far more at ease in it than in the idola- 
trous reverence for words seen to reign elsewhere, especially in psychoana- 
lysts' inner circles. But beware the echo your words may have outside the 
confines of the realm for which you intended them. 

The use of speech requires far more vigilance in human science than any- 
where else, because speech engages the very being of its object there. 

Every uncertain attitude toward truth inevitably ends up diverting our terms 
from their meaning and such abuse is never innocent. 

You publish — I apologize for bringing up a personal experience — an arti- 
cle entitled "Beyond the Reality Principle," in which you take on nothing less 
than the status of the psychological object, trying first to lay out a phenome- 
nology of the psychoanalytic relationship as it is experienced between doctor 
and patient. But what you hear back from your colleagues is considerations 
about the "relativity of reality," which make you rue the day you ever chose 
such a title. 

It was, as I know, with such misgivings that Politzer, the great thinker, 
decided not to provide the theoretical expression with which he would have 
left his indelible mark, in order to devote himself to an activity that was to take 
him away from us definitively. When, following in his footsteps, we demand 
that concrete psychology be established as a science, let us not lose sight of 
the fact that we are still only at the stage of formal pleas. I mean that we have 



132 Ecrits 

not yet been able to posit even the slightest law that accounts for the efficacy 
of our actions. 

This is so true that, when we begin to glimpse the operative meaning of the 
traces left by prehistoric man on the walls of his caves, the idea may occur to 
us that we really know less than him about what I will very intentionally call 
psychical matter. Since we cannot, like Deucalion, make men from stones, let 
us be careful not to transform words into stones. 

It would already be very nice if by a simple mental ploy we were able to 
see the concept of the object taking form, on which a scientific psychology 
162 could be based. It is the definition of such a concept that I have always declared 

to be necessary, that I have announced as forthcoming, and that — thanks to 
the problem you have presented me — I will try to pursue today, exposing 
myself in turn to your criticism. 

2. The Essential Causality of Madness 

What could be more suited to this end than to start out from the situation in 
which we find ourselves, gathered together, as we are here, to discuss the causal- 
ity of madness? Now, why this privilege? Is a madman more interesting to us 
than Gelb and Goldstein's case whom I mentioned earlier in broad strokes? 
The latter reveals — not only to the neurologist but also to the philosopher, 
and no doubt to the philosopher more so than to the neurologist — a structure 
that is constitutive of human knowledge, namely, the support that thought's 
symbolism finds in visual perception, and that I will call, following Husserl, 
a Fundierung, a foundational relationship. 

What other human value could lie in madness? 

When I defended my thesis on Paranoiac Psychosis as Related to Personal- 
ity, one of my professors asked me to indicate what, in a nutshell, I had pro- 
posed to do in it: "In short, sir," I began, "we cannot forget that madness is a 
phenomenon of thought ..." I am not suggesting that this sufficed to sum- 
marize my perspective, but the firm gesture with which he interrupted me was 
tantamount to a call for modesty: "Yeah! So what?" it meant, "Let's be seri- 
ous. Are you going to thumb your nose at us? Let us not dishonor this solemn 
moment. Num dignus eris intrare in nostro docto corpore cum isto voce: pensaref" 
I was nevertheless granted my Ph.D. and offered the kind of encouragement 
that it is appropriate to give to impulsive minds. 

Now, fourteen years later, I have the opportunity to summarize my per- 
spective for you. As you can see, at this rate the definition of the object of 
psychology will not get very far between now and the time I part company 
with the enlightened intellects [lumieres] that illuminate our world — unless 



Presentation on Psychical Causality ijj 

you take the torch from my hands, so please take it! At least I hope that, by 

now, the course of things has given these enlightened intellects themselves a 163 

hard enough time that none of them can still find in Bergson's work the 

expanding synthesis that satisfied the "intellectual needs" of a generation, or 

anything other than a rather curious collection of exercises in metaphysical 

ventriloquism. 

Before we try to extract anything from the facts, we would do well, indeed, 
to recognize the very conditions of meaning that make them into facts for us. 
This is why I think that it would not be superfluous to call for a return to 
Descartes. 

While Descartes does not look deeply into the phenomenon of madness in 
his Meditations^ I at least consider it telling that he encounters it in his very 
first steps, taken with unforgettable jubilance, on the pathway to truth. 

But on what grounds could one deny that these hands and this entire 
body are mine? Unless perhaps I were to liken myself to the insane, whose 
brains are impaired by such an unrelenting vapor of black bile that they 
steadfastly insist that they are kings when they are utter paupers, or that 
they are arrayed in purple robes when they are naked, or that they have 
heads made of clay, or that they are gourds, or that they are made of 
glass. But such people are mad, and I would appear no less mad, were I 
to take their behavior as an example for myself. 

He then moves on, whereas we will see that he could have delved more 
deeply into the phenomenon of madness, and it might well have been fruitful 
for him to do so. 

Let us then reconsider together this phenomenon according to Descartes' 
method. Not in the fashion of the revered professor who cut short the 
explanatory effusions not only of his students — but who even considered 
those of hallucinating patients to be so scandalous that he would interrupt 
them by saying: "What are you telling me, my friend? None of that is true. 
Come now!" From such an intervention we can at least draw a spark of mean- 
ing: truth is "involved." But at what point? Regarding the meaning of the 
word, we assuredly cannot trust any more in the mind of the doctor than in 
that of the patient. 

Instead, let us follow Ey who, like Descartes in his simple sentence, and at 
the time that probably was not accidental, highlights the essential mainspring 
of belief in his early works. 

Ey admirably realized that belief, with its ambiguity in human beings and 
its excess and inadequacy for knowledge [connaissance] — since it is less than 164 



iS4 Ecrits 

knowing [javozr], but perhaps more, for to assert is to make a commitment, 
but it is not the same as being sure — cannot be eliminated from the phenom- 
enon of hallucination and of delusion. 

However, phenomenological analysis demands that we not skip any steps, 
and precipitation is fatal to it. I will maintain that the figure only appears if 
we appropriately focus our thinking. Here Ey — in order to avoid the mistake, 
for which he reproaches mechanists, of becoming delusional along with the 
patient — makes the opposite mistake by all too quickly including a value judg- 
ment in the phenomenon; the abovementioned comic example, appropriately 
savored by him, should have warned him that this would simultaneously 
destroy any chance of understanding it. With some kind of dizzying mental 
move, he reduces the notion of belief, which he had right before his eyes, to 
that of error, which absorbs it like one drop of water absorbing another drop 
that is made to abut it. Hence, the whole operation backfires. Once the phe- 
nomenon is fixed in place, it becomes an object of judgment and, soon there- 
after, an object tout court. 

As he asks himself in his book, Hallucinations et Delire ("Hallucinations 
and Delusion"), 4 "Where would error, and delusion too, lie if patients did not 
make mistakes! Everything in their assertions and their judgment reveals their 
errors (interpretations, illusions, etc.) to us" (170). And further on, while set- 
ting out the two "attitudes that are possible" toward hallucination, he defines 
his own: 

Hallucination should be viewed as a mistake that must be admitted and 
explained as such without letting oneself be carried away by its mirage. 
And yet its mirage necessarily leads one, if one is not careful, to ground 
it in actual phenomena and thus to construct neurological hypotheses 
that are useless, at best, because they do not reach what lies at the heart 
of the symptom itself: error and delusion (176). 

How then could we be anything but astonished when, despite the fact that 
he is well aware of the temptation to base the "mirage of hallucination con- 
ceived of as an abnormal sensation" on a neurological hypothesis, he hurriedly 
bases what he calls "the fundamental error" of delusion on a similar hypoth- 
esis? Or when — although he is rightly loath (page 168) to make of hallucina- 
tion, qua abnormal sensation, "an object situated in the sulci of the brain" — he 
1 6 5 does not hesitate to locate the phenomenon of delusional belief, considered as 

a deficit phenomenon, in the brain himself? 

No matter how lofty the tradition within which his work is situated, it is 
nonetheless here then that he took the wrong path. He might have avoided 



Presentation on Psychical Causality ijS 

this by pausing before taking the leap that the very notion of truth ordained 
him to take. For while there can be no progress possible in knowledge unless 
this notion is behind it, it is part of the human condition, as we shall see, to 
ever risk going astray in following our best impulses. 

We could say that error is a deficit, in the sense this word has on a balance 
sheet, but the same does not go for belief, even if it deceives us. For belief can 
go awry even at the height of our intellectual powers, as Ey himself proves 
here. 

What then is (the phenomenon of) delusional belief? I say that it is mis- 
recognition, with everything this term brings with it by way of an essential 
antinomy. For to misrecognize presupposes recognition, as is seen in system- 
atic misrecognition, in which case we must certainly admit that what is denied 
is in some way recognized. 

Regarding the relationship between the phenomenon and the subject, Ey 
stresses — and one can never stress enough what is self-evident — that an 
hallucination is an error that is "kneaded from the dough of the subject's 
personality and shaped by his own activity." Aside from the reservations I 
have about the use of the words "dough" and "activity," it seems clear to 
me that the subject does not recognize his productions as his own when he 
has ideas of influence or feels that an automatism is at work. This is why 
we all agree that a madman is a madman. But isn't the remarkable thing, 
rather, that he should know anything about them at all? And isn't the point 
to figure out what he knows about himself here without recognizing him- 
self in it? 

Regarding the reality that the subject attributes to these phenomena, what 
is far more decisive than the sensorial quality he experiences in them, or the 
belief he attaches to them, is the fact that all of them — no matter which ones 
(whether hallucinations, interpretations, or intuitions) and no matter how for- 
eignly and strangely he experiences them — target him personally: they split 
him, talk back to him, echo him, and read in him, just as he identifies them, 
questions them, provokes them, and deciphers them. And when all means of 
expressing them fail him, his perplexity still manifests to us a questioning gap 
in him: which is to say that madness is experienced entirely within the regis- 166 

ter of meaning. 

The interest that madness thus kindles in us owing to its pathos provides a 
first answer to the question I raised about the human value of the phenome- 
non of madness. And its metaphysical import is revealed in the fact that it is 
inseparable from the problem of signification for being in general — that is, 
the problem of language for man. 

Indeed, no linguist or philosopher could any longer defend a theory of Ian- 



ij6 Ecrits 

guage as a system of signs that would double the system of realities, realities 
defined by the common assent of healthy minds in healthy bodies. I cannot 
think of anyone other than Charles Blondel who seems to believe this — see 
his book, La conscience morbide ("Morbid Consciousness"), which is certainly 
the most narrow-minded lucubration ever produced on either madness or lan- 
guage. He runs up against the problem of the ineffable, as if language did not 
posit this without the help of madness. 

Man's language, the instrument of his lies, is thoroughly ridden with the 
problem of truth: 

• whether it betrays the truth insofar as it is an expression of (a) his organic 
heredity in the phonology of the flatus vocis; (b) the "passions of his body" 
in the Cartesian sense, that is, of his soul, in the changes in his emotions; 
(c) and the culture and history that constitute his humanity, in the seman- 
tic system that formed him as a child; 

• or it manifests this truth as an intention, by eternally asking how what 
expresses the lie of his particularity can manage to formulate the univer- 
sality of his truth. 

The whole history of philosophy is inscribed in this question, from Plato's 
aporias of essence to Pascal's abysses of existence, and on to the radical ambi- 
guity Heidegger points to in it, insofar as truth signifies revelation. 

The word is not a sign, but a nodal point [noeud] of signification. When I 
say the word "curtain" [rideau], for example, it is not merely to designate by 
convention an object whose use can be varied in a thousand ways depending 
on the intentions of the artisan, shopkeeper, painter, or Gestalt psychologist — 
whether as labor, exchange value, colorful physiognomy, or spatial structure. 
Metaphorically, it is a curtain of rain [rideau d'arbres]; forging plays on words, 
167 it is when I am being curt and sweet or can curr tangentially with the best of 

them [les rides et les ris de Feau\ and my friend Curt Ans off [Leiris dominant] 
these glossological games better than I do. By decree, it is the limit of my domain 
or, on occasion, a screen for my meditation in a room I share with someone 
else. Miraculously, it is the space that opens onto infinity, the unknown at the 
threshold, or the solitary walker's morning departure. Apprehensively, it is 
the flutter that betrays Agrippina's presence at the Roman Empire 's Council, 
or Madame de Chasteller's gaze out the window as Lucien Leuwen passes by. 
Mistakenly, it is Polonius that I stab, shouting, "How now! a rat?" As an inter- 
jection, during the tragedy's intermission, it is my cry of impatience or the 
sign of my boredom: "Curtain!" It is, finally, an image of meaning qua mean- 
ing, which must be unveiled if it is to reveal itself. 



Presentation on Psychical Causality zj7 

In this sense, being's attitudes are justified and exposed in language, and 
among those attitudes "common sense" clearly manifests "the most commonly 
seen thing in the world," but not to the extent that it is recognized by those 
for whom Descartes is too easy on this point. 

This is why, in an anthropology that takes the register of culture in man 
to include, as is fitting, the register of nature, one could concretely define 
psychology as the domain of nonsense [I'insense], in other words, of every- 
thing that forms a knot in discourse — as is clearly indicated by the "words" 
of passion. 

Let us follow this path in order to study the significations of madness, as 
we are certainly invited to by the original forms that language takes on in it: 
all the verbal allusions, cabalistic relationships, homonymic play, and puns 
that captivated the likes of Guiraud. 5 And, I might add, by the singular accent 
whose resonance we must know how to hear in a word so as to detect a delu- 
sion; the transfiguration of a term in an ineffable intention; the fixation [fige- 
ment] of an idea in a semanteme (which tends to degenerate into a sign here 
specifically); the lexical hybrids; the verbal cancer constituted by neolo- 
gisms; the bogging down of syntax; the duplicity of enunciation; but also the 
coherence that amounts to a logic, the characteristic, running from the unity 
of a style to repetitive terms, that marks each form of delusion — the madman 1 68 

communicates with us through all of this, whether in speech or writing. 

It is here that the structures of the madman's knowledge must reveal 
themselves to us. And it is odd, though probably not coincidental, that it was 
mechanists like Clerambault and Guiraud who outlined them best. As false as 
the theory in which these authors included them may be, it made them 
remarkably attuned to an essential phenomenon of such structures: the kind 
of "anatomy" that manifests itself in them. Clerambault 's constant reference 
in his analysis to what he calls, with a slightly Diafoirus-like term, "the 
ideogenic," is nothing but a search for the limits of signification. Employing 
a method involving nothing but comprehension, he paradoxically manages 
to display the magnificent range of structures that runs the gamut from the 
so-called "postulates " of the delusions of passion to the so-called basal phe- 
nomena of mental automatism. 

This is why I think that he has done more than anyone else to support the 
hypothesis of the psychogenesis of madness; in any case, you will see what I 
mean by this shortly. 

Clerambault was my only master in the observation of patients, after the 
very subtle and delectable Trenel, whom I made the mistake of abandoning 
too soon, in order to seek a position in the consecrated spheres of professo- 
rial ignorance. 



ijS Ecrits 

I claim to have followed his method in the analysis of the case of paranoiac 
psychosis discussed in my thesis; I demonstrated the psychogenic structure of 
the case and designated its clinical entity with the more or less valid term of 
"self-punishing paranoia." 

This patient had caught my interest because of the impassioned significa- 
tion of her written productions, whose literary value struck many writers, from 
Fargue and dear Crevel, both of whom read them before anyone else, to Joe 
Bousquet, who immediately and admirably commented on them, 6 to Eluard, 
who more recently published some of them in a collection of "involuntary" 
poetry. 7 It is now well known that the name, Aimee, with which I disguised 
her identity, is that of the central figure in her fictional creation. 

If I assemble here the results of the analysis I did of her case, it is because 
I believe that a phenomenology of madness, which is complete in its terms, 
can already be seen to emerge from it. 
169 The structural points that prove to be essential in this analysis can be for- 

mulated as follows: 

(a) The succession of female persecutors in her history repeated almost 
without variation the personification of a maleficent ideal, and her need to 
aggressively strike out at this ideal kept growing. 

However, not only did she constantly seek to curry both favor and abuse 
from the people to whom she had access in reality who incarnated this stereo- 
type, but in her behavior she tended to carry out, without recognizing it, the 
very evildoing she denounced in them: vanity, coldness, and abandonment of 
one 's natural duties. 

(b) She presented herself, on the contrary, as upholding the completely 
opposite ideal of purity and devotion, which made her a victim of the schemes 
of the being she detested. 

(c) We also note a neutralization of the sexual category with which she 
identified. This neutralization — which was confessed in her writings and taken 
at least as far as sexual ambiguity, and perhaps as far as imagined homosexu- 
ality — is coherent with the Platonic nature of the classical erotomania she 
manifested toward several male personifications, and with the prevalence of 
female friends in her real life. 

(d) The latter was characterized by an indecisive struggle to achieve an 
ordinary existence, all the while maintaining ideals that I will call Bovary- 
like, without intending anything disparaging by the term. 

Her older sister's progressive intervention in her life then little by little 
enucleated her completely from her place as wife and mother. 

(e) This intervention effectively released her from her familial duties. 
But as this "liberated" her, her delusional phenomena were triggered and 



Presentation on Psychical Causality 139 

took shape, reaching their apex when, with the help of their very impact, she 
found herself completely independent. 

(f ) These phenomena appeared in a series of spurts that I designated as 
fertile moments of the delusion, a term that some researchers have been will- 
ing to adopt. 

Part of the resistance I encountered to people understanding the "elemen- 170 

tary" nature of these moments in a thesis on the psychogenesis [of paranoia] 
would, it seems to me, be mitigated now due to the more profound work on 
the subject that I did subsequently — as I will show shortly, to the extent to 
which I can do so while providing a balanced presentation. 

(g) It should be noted that, although the patient seemed to suffer from the 
fact that her child was taken away from her by her sister — who even struck 
me as bad news in the one meeting I had with her — she refused to consider 
her sister as hostile or even harmful to herself, on this account or any other. 

Instead, with a murderous intent she stabbed the person with whom she 
had most recently identified her female persecutors. The effect of this act — 
once she realized the high price she would have to pay for it in prison — was 
the implosion of the beliefs and fantasies involved in her delusion. 

I tried thus to delineate the psychosis in relation to all of her earlier life 
events, her intentions, whether admitted or not, and, lastly, the motives, 
whether perceived by her or not, that emerged from the situation contempo- 
raneous with her delusion — in other words, in relation to her personality (as 
the title of my thesis indicates). 

This seems to me to bring out the general structure of misrecognition, right 
from the outset. Still, this must be understood correctly. 

Assuredly, one can say that the madman believes he is different [autre] than 
he is. Descartes said as much in his sentence about those who believe "that they 
are arrayed in gold and purple robes," where he conformed to the most anec- 
dotal of all stories about madmen; this also seemed to satisfy the authority on 
the matter who wrote that the phenomenon olbovarism, adapted to the degree 
of his sympathy for his patients, was the key to understanding paranoia. 

However, apart from the fact that Jules de Gaultier's theory concerns one 
of most normal relations of human personality — namely, its ideals — it should 
be noted that if a man who thinks he is a king is mad, a king who thinks he is 
a king is no less so. 

This is proven by the example of Louis II of Bavaria and a few other royal 
personages, as well as by everyone's "common sense," in the name of which 
we justifiably demand that people put in such situations "play their parts well," 171 

but are uncomfortable with the idea that they really "believe in them," even 
if this involves a lofty view of their duty to incarnate a function in the world 



140 Ecrits 

order, through which they assume rather well the figure of chosen victims. 

The turning point here lies in the mediacy or immediacy of the identifica- 
tion and, to be quite explicit, in the subject's infatuation. 

To make myself clear, I will evoke the likable figure of the young dandy, 
born to a well-to-do family, who, as they say, "hasn't a clue," especially about 
what he owes to this good fortune. Common sense is in the habit of charac- 
terizing him as either a "happy fool" or as a "little moron," depending on the 
case. // "se emit" as we say in French (he "thinks he 's really something"): the 
genius of the language puts the emphasis here where it should go, that is, not 
on the inapplicability of an attribute, but on a verbal mode. For, all in all, the 
subject thinks he is [se croit] what he is — a lucky little devil — but common 
sense secretly wishes him a hitch that will show him that he is not one as much 
as he thinks he is. Don't think that I am being witty, certainly not with the 
quality of wit that shows in the saying that Napoleon was someone who thought 
he was Napoleon. Because Napoleon did not think he was Napoleon at all, 
since he knew full well by what means Bonaparte had produced Napoleon and 
how Napoleon, like Malebranche 's God, sustained his existence at every 
moment. If he ever thought he was Napoleon, it was at the moment that Jupiter 
had decided to bring him down; once fallen, he spent his spare time lying to 
Las Cases in as many pages as you could want, so that posterity would think 
that he had thought he was Napoleon — a necessary condition for convincing 
posterity that he had truly been Napoleon. 

Do not think that I am getting off on a tangent here in a talk designed to 
go right to the heart of the dialectic of being — because the essential mis- 
recognition involved in madness is situated at just such a point, as my patient 
made perfectly clear. 

This misrecognition can be seen in the revolt through which the madman 
seeks to impose the law of his heart onto what seems to him to be the havoc 
[desordre] of the world. This is an "insane" enterprise — but not because it sug- 
gests a failure to adapt to life, which is the kind of thing people often say in 
172 our circles, whereas the slightest reflection on our experience proves the dis- 

honorable inanity of such a viewpoint. It is an insane enterprise, rather, in that 
the subject does not recognize in this havoc the very manifestation of his actual 
being, or that what he experiences as the law of his heart is but the inverted 
and virtual image of that same being. He thus doubly misrecognizes it, pre- 
cisely so as to split its actuality from its virtuality. Now, he can escape this actu- 
ality only via this virtuality. His being is thus caught in a circle, unless he breaks 
it through some form of violence by which, in lashing out at what he takes to 
be the havoc, he ends up harming himself because of the social repercussions 
of his actions. 



Presentation on Psychical Causality 141 

This is the general formulation of madness as we find it in Hegel's work 8 — 
just because I felt it necessary to illustrate it for you does not mean that I am 
innovating here. It is the general formulation of madness in the sense that it 
can be seen to apply in particular to any one of the phases in which the dialec- 
tical development of human beings more or less occurs in each person's des- 
tiny; and in the sense that it always appears in this development as a moment 
of stasis, for being succumbs to stasis in an ideal identification that character- 
izes this moment in a particular person's destiny. 

This identification, the unmediated and "infatuated" nature of which I tried 
to convey a moment ago, turns out to be the relation of being to the very best 
in it, since this ideal represents that being's freedom. 

To put this more gallantly, I could demonstrate it to you with the example 
Hegel recalled to mind in presenting this analysis in his Phenomenology of 
Spirit* — that is, if I recall correctly, in 1806, while he was awaiting (let this be 
noted in passing to be added to a file I just opened) the approach of the Welt- 
seele, the World Soul, which he saw in Napoleon — with the precise aim of 
revealing to Napoleon what Napoleon had the honor of thus incarnating, even 1 73 

though he seemed profoundly unaware of it. The example I am talking about 
is the character Karl Moor, the hero in Schiller's Robbers, who is well known 
to every German. 

More familiar to us and, also, more amusing in my book, is Moliere 's Alceste 
[from The Misanthrope], But before using it as an example, I must mention 
that the very fact that he has never ceased to be a problem for our highbrow 
literati nourished in the "classics," since his first appearance, proves that the 
things I talk about are not nearly as useless as these highbrow literati would 
have us believe when they call them pedantic — less, no doubt, to spare them- 
selves the effort of understanding them than to spare themselves the painful 
conclusions they would have to draw from them for themselves about their 
society, once they understood them. 

It all stems from the fact that Alceste 's "beautiful soul" exerts a fascination 
on the highbrow literati that the latter, "steeped in the classics," cannot resist. 
Does Moliere thus approve of Philinte 's high society indulgence? "That's just 
not possible!" some cry, while others must acknowledge, in the disabused 
strains of wisdom, that it surely must be the case at the rate things are going. 

I believe that the question does not concern Philinte 's wisdom, and the solu- 
tion would perhaps shock these gentlemen, for the fact is that Alceste is mad 
and that Moliere demonstrates that he is — precisely insofar as Alceste, in his 
beautiful soul, does not recognize that he himself contributes to the havoc he 
revolts against. 

I specify that he is mad, not because he loves a woman who is flirtatious 



142 Ecrits 

and betrays him — which is something the learned analysts I mentioned ear- 
lier would no doubt attribute to his failure to adapt to life — but because he is 
caught, under Love's banner, by the very feeling that directs this art of 
mirages at which the beautiful Celimene excels: namely, the narcissism of the 
idle rich that defines the psychological structure of "high society" [ "monde "] 
in all eras, which is doubled here by the other narcissism that is especially man- 
ifest in certain eras in the collective idealization of the feeling of being in love. 
Celimene, at the mirror's focal point, and her admirers, forming a radiat- 
ing circumference around her, indulge in the play of these passions [feux], 
Alceste does too, no less than the others, for if he does not tolerate its lies, it 
174 is simply because his narcissism is more demanding. Of course, he expresses 

it to himself in the form of the law of the heart: 

I'd have them be sincere, and never part 
With any word that isn 'tfrom the heart. 

Yes, but when his heart speaks, it makes some strange exclamations. For 
example, when Philinte asks him, "You think then that she loves you?," 
Alceste replies, "Heavens, yes! I wouldn't love her did I not think so." 

I suspect that Clerambault would have recognized this reply as having more 
to do with a delusion of passion than with love. 

And no matter how widespread the fantasy may be in such passions of the 
test of the loved object's fall from grace, I find that it has an odd accent in 
Alceste 's case: 

/ love you more than can be said or thought; 
Indeed, I wish you were in such distress 
That I might show to all my devotedness. 
Yes, I could wish that you were wretchedly poor, 
Unloved, uncherished, utterly obscure; 
That fate had set you down upon the earth 
Without possessions, rank, or gentle birth . . . 

With this lovely wish and the taste he has for the song "J'aime mieux ma 
mie," why doesn't he court a salesgirl at his local flower shop? He would not 
be able to "show to all" his love for such a girl, and this is the true key to the 
feeling he expresses here: it is the passion to demonstrate his unicity to every- 
one, even if only in the form of the isolation of a victim, an isolation in which 
he finds bitter, jubilatory satisfaction in the final act of the play. 

As for the mainspring of his twists and turns, it lies in a mechanism that I 



Presentation on Psychical Causality 143 

would relate not to the self-punishment but rather to the suicidal aggression of 
narcissism. 

For what infuriates Alceste upon hearing Oronte 's sonnet is that he recog- 
nizes his own situation in it, depicted all too precisely in its ridiculousness, and 175 
the imbecile who is his rival appears to him as his own mirror image. The words 
of mad fury to which he then gives vent blatantly betray the fact that he seeks 
to lash out at himself. And whenever one of the repercussions of his words 
shows him that he has managed to do so, he delights in suffering its effect. 

Here we can note an odd defect in Ey's conception: it diverts him from the 
signification of the delusional act, leaving him to take it as the contingent effect 
of a lack of control, whereas the problem of this act's signification is constantly 
brought to our attention by the medical and legal exigencies that are essential 
to the phenomenology of our experience. 

Someone like Guiraud, who is a mechanist, again goes much farther in his 
article, "Meurtres immotives" ("Unexplained Murders"), 10 when he attempts 
to show that it is precisely the kakon of his own being that the madman tries 
to get at in the object he strikes. 

Let us take one last look at Alceste who has victimized no one but himself 
and let us hope he finds what he is looking for, namely: 

. . . some spot unpeopled and apart 
Where I'll be free to have an honest heart. 

I want to examine the word "free" here. For it is not simply by way of deri- 
sion that the impeccable rigor of classical comedy makes it appear here. 

The import of the drama that classical comedy expresses cannot, in effect, 
be measured by the narrowness of the action in which it takes shape, and — 
like Descartes' lofty march in the "Secret Note" in which he declares himself 
to be on the verge of becoming a player on the world scene — it "advances 
behind a mask." 

Instead of Alceste, I could have looked for the play of the law of the heart 
in the fate that put the old revolutionary of 1917 in the dock at the Moscow 
trials. But what is demonstrated in the poet's imaginary space is metaphysi- 
cally comparable to the world's bloodiest events, since it is what causes blood 
to be spilled in the world. 

I am not thus avoiding the social tragedy that dominates our era, but my 
marionette's acting will show each of us more clearly the risk he is tempted 176 

to run whenever freedom is at stake. 

For the risk of madness is gauged by the very appeal of the identifications 
on which man stakes both his truth and his being. 



144 Ecrits 

Thus rather than resulting from a contingent fact — the frailties of his organ- 
ism — madness is the permanent virtuality of a gap opened up in his essence. 

And far from being an "insult" 11 to freedom, madness is freedom's most 
faithful companion, following its every move like a shadow. 

Not only can man's being not be understood without madness, but it would 
not be man's being if it did not bear madness within itself as the limit of his 
freedom. 

It is certainly true — to interrupt this serious talk with something humor- 
ous from my youth, which I wrote in a pithy form on the wall in the hospital 
staff room — that "Not just anyone can go mad" [ "Ne devientpasfou quiveut"]. 

But it is also true that not just anyone who wants to can run the risks that 
enshroud madness. 

A weak organism, a deranged imagination, and conflicts beyond one's 
capacities do not suffice to cause madness. It may well be that a rock-solid 
body, powerful identifications, and the indulgence of fate, as written in the 
stars, lead one more surely to find madness seductive. 

This conception at least has the immediate benefit of dispelling the prob- 
lematic emphasis placed in the nineteenth century on the madness of superior 
individuals — and of putting a stop to the low blows Homais and Bournisien 
exchanged regarding the madness of saints and freedom fighters. 

For while Pinel's work has — thank God! — made us act more humanely 
toward ordinary madmen, it must be acknowledged that it has not increased 
our respect for the madness involved in taking supreme risks. 

In any case, Homais and Bournisien represent one and the same manifes- 
tation of being. Isn't it striking that we laugh only at the first? I defy you to 
explain this fact otherwise than with the significant distinction I pointed out 
earlier. Because Homais "believes in it" ["y croit"] whereas Bournisien, who 
1 77 is equally stupid but not mad, justifies his belief and, being backed by his hier- 

archy, maintains a distance between himself and his truth in which he can come 
to an agreement with Homais, assuming the latter "becomes reasonable" by 
recognizing the reality of "spiritual needs." 

Having thus disarmed both him and his adversary thanks to my under- 
standing of madness, I recover the right to evoke the hallucinatory voices heard 
by Joan of Arc and what took place on the road to Damascus, without anyone 
being able to summon me to change the tone of my real voice, or to go into 
an altered state of consciousness [etat second] to exercise my judgment. 

Having arrived at this point in my talk on the causality of madness, mustn't 
I be careful so that heaven may keep me from going awry? Mustn't I realize 
that, after having argued that Henry Ey misrecognizes the causality of mad- 



Presentation on Psychical Causality 145 

ness, and that he is not Napoleon, I am falling into the trap of proposing as 
ultimate proof thereof that I am the one who understands this causality, in 
other words, that I am Napoleon? 

I don't think, however, that this is my point, because it seems to me that, 
by being careful to maintain the right human distances that constitute our expe- 
rience of madness, I have obeyed the law which literally brings the apparent 
facts of madness into existence. Without this, the physician — like the one I 
mentioned who replied to the madman that what he said was not true — would 
rave no less than the madman himself. 

And when, for this occasion, I reread the case write-up on which I have 
relied here, it seemed to me that it bore witness to the fact that, no matter how 
one judges its results, I maintained for my object the respect she deserved as 
a human being, as a patient, and as a case. 

Lastly, I believe that in relegating the causality of madness to the unsound- 
able decision of being in which human beings understand or fail to recognize 
their liberation, in the snare of fate that deceives them about a freedom they 
have not in the least conquered, I am merely formulating the law of our becom- 
ing as it is expressed in Antiquity's formulation: Tevoi, oioc; eaai. 

In order to define psychical causality in this law, I will now try to grasp the 
mode of form and action that establishes the determinations of this drama, 
since I think it can be identified scientifically with the concept of "imagos." 

3. The Psychical Effects of the Imaginary Mode 178 

A subject's history develops in a more or less typical series of ideal identifica- 
tions that represent the purest of psychical phenomena in that they essentially 
reveal the function of imagos. I do not conceptualize the ego otherwise than 
as a central system of these formations, a system that one must understand, 
like these formations, in its imaginary structure and libidinal value. 

Thus, without dwelling on those who, even in the sciences, blithely con- 
fuse the ego with the subject's being, you can see where I diverge from the 
most common conception that identifies the ego with the synthesis of the organ- 
ism's relational functions, a conception which must certainly be called hybrid 
in that a subjective synthesis is defined in it in objective terms. 

One recognizes Ey's position here, as it is expressed in the passage I men- 
tioned earlier where he posits "an attack on the ego which, once again, is indis- 
tinguishable, in the final analysis, from the notion of functional dissolution." 

Can one reproach him for this conception when the bias of parallelism is 
so strong that Freud himself remained its prisoner, even though it ran counter 



146 Ecrits 

to the entire tendency of his research? To have attacked this bias in Freud's 
time might, moreover, have amounted to preventing oneself from communi- 
cating one 's ideas to the scientific community. 

It is well known that Freud identified the ego with the "perception-con- 
sciousness system," which comprises all of the systems by which an organism 
is adapted to the "reality principle." 12 

If we think about the role played by the notion of error in Ey's conception, 
we can see the bond that ties the organicist illusion to a realist metapsychol- 
ogy. This does not, however, bring us any closer to a concrete psychology. 

Moreover, although the best minds in psychoanalysis avidly demand, if we 

179 are to believe them, a theory of the ego, there is little chance that its place will 

be marked by anything other than a gaping hole as long as they do not resolve 

to consider obsolete what is clearly obsolete in the work of a peerless master. 

For Merleau-Ponty's work 13 decisively demonstrates that any healthy 
phenomenology, that of perception, for instance, requires us to consider lived 
experience prior to any objectification and even prior to any reflexive analy- 
sis that interweaves objectification and experience. Let me explain what I 
mean: the slightest visual illusion proves to force itself upon us experientially 
before detailed, piecemeal observation of the figure corrects it; it is the lat- 
ter that allows us to objectify the so-called real form. Reflection makes us rec- 
ognize in this form the a priori category of extension \L 9 etendue\ the property 
of which is precisely to present itself "partes extra partes" but it is still the 
illusion in itself that gives us the gestalt action that is psychology's true object 
here. 

This is why no considerations about ego synthesis can excuse us from con- 
sidering the phenomenon of synthesis in the subject — namely, everything the 
subject includes under this term, which is not exactly synthetic, nor even exempt 
from contradiction, as we learned from Montaigne, and learned even better 
when Freud designated it as the very locus of Verneinung. The latter is the 
phenomenon by which the subject reveals one of his impulses in his very denial 
[denegation] of it and at the very moment at which he denies it. Let me empha- 
size that it is not a disavowal of membership that is at stake here, but a formal 
negation — in other words, a typical phenomenon of misrecognition, and in 
the inverted form I have stressed. The most common expression of this form, 
"Don't think that . . . ," already points to the profound relationship with the 
other as such that I will bring out in the ego. 

Doesn't experience thus show us, upon the slightest inspection, that noth- 
ing separates the ego from its ideal forms {Ich Ideal, a term with which Freud 
recovers his rights) and that everything limits it on the side of the being it rep- 



Presentation on Psychical Causality 14J 

resents, since almost the entire life of the organism escapes it, not merely inso- 180 

far as that life is most often ignored, but insofar as the ego need know noth- 
ing about it for the most part. 

As for the genetic psychology of the ego, the results that it has obtained 
seem all the more valid to me since they are stripped of any postulate of func- 
tional integration. 

I myself have given proof of this in my study of the phenomena typical of 
what I call the fertile moments of delusion. Carried out according to the phe- 
nomenological method that I am promoting here, this study led me to analy- 
ses from which my conception of the ego has progressively emerged; this 
progressive emergence was visible to my audiences at the lectures and classes 
I gave over the years at conferences organized by the Evolution Psychiatrique 
group, at the Medical School Clinic, and at the Institute of Psychoanalysis. 
Although for my own reasons those lectures and classes have remained 
unpublished, they nevertheless publicized my term "paranoiac knowledge," 
which was designed to hit home. 

By including under this heading one of the fundamental structures of these 
phenomena, I intended to indicate that, if it is not equivalent, it is at least akin 
to a form of relation to the world that has a very specific import: the reaction 
recognized by psychiatrists that has been psychologically generalized with the 
term "transitivism." Now, this reaction — which is never completely eliminated 
from man's world, in its most idealized forms (for example, in relations of 
rivalry) — first manifests itself as the matrix of the ego's Urbild. 

This reaction significantly dominates the primordial phase in which the child 
becomes aware of his individuality; his language translates this, as you know, 
into the third person prior to translating it into the first person. Charlotte Biih- 
ler, 14 to mention only her, in observing the behavior of a child with its play- 
mate, has recognized this transitivism in the striking form of a child being truly 
captured by another child's image. 

A child can thus, in a complete trance-like state, share in his friend's tum- 
ble or attribute to him, without lying, the punch he himself has given his friend. 
I will skip the series of these phenomena, which run the gamut from spectac- 181 

ular identification to mimetic suggestion and on to the seduction of bearing. 
All of them are understood by Biihler in the dialectic that goes from jealousy 
(the jealousy whose instructive value Saint Augustine already glimpsed in a 
flash) to the first forms of sympathy. They are inscribed in a primordial ambiva- 
lence that seems to me, as I am already indicating, to be mirrored, in the sense 
that the subject identifies, in his feeling of Self, with the other's image and that 
the other's image captivates this feeling in him. 



148 Ecrits 

Now this reaction occurs only under one condition: the difference in age 
between the two children must remain below a certain limit, a limit that can- 
not exceed one year at the beginning of the phase studied. 

We already see here an essential feature of an imago/ the observable effects 
of a form, in the broadest sense of the term, that can only be defined in terms 
of generic resemblance, thus implying that a certain recognition occurred prior 
to that. 

We know that these effects manifest themselves in relation to the human 
face right from the tenth day after birth, that is, right from the appearance of 
the first visual reactions and prior to any other experience than that of blind 
sucking. 

Thus, and this is an essential point, the first effect of the imago that appears 
in human beings is that of the subject's alienation. It is in the other that the 
subject first identifies himself and even experiences himself. This phenome- 
non will seem less surprising if we recall the fundamental social conditions of 
the human Umwelt and if we evoke the intuition that dominates all of Hegel's 
speculations. 

Man's very desire is constituted, he tells us, under the sign of mediation: it 
is the desire to have one 's desire recognized. Its object is a desire, that of other 
people, in the sense that man has no object that is constituted for his desire 
without some mediation. This is clear from his earliest needs, in that, for exam- 
ple, his very food must be prepared; and we find this anew in the whole devel- 
opment of his satisfaction, beginning with the conflict between master and 
slave, through the entire dialectic of labor. 

This dialectic, which is that of man's very being, must bring about, through 
182 a series of crises, the synthesis of his particularity and his universality, going 

so far as to universalize this very particularity. 

This means that, in the movement that leads man to an ever more adequate 
consciousness of himself, his freedom becomes bound up with the develop- 
ment of his servitude. 

Does the imago then serve to instate a fundamental relationship in being 
between his reality and his organism? Does man's psychical life show us a sim- 
ilar phenomenon in any other forms? 

No experience has contributed more than psychoanalysis to revealing this 
phenomenon. And the necessity of repetition that psychoanalysis points to as 
the effect of the [Oedipus] complex — even though analytic doctrine expresses 
this with the inert and unthinkable notion of the unconscious — is sufficiently 
eloquent here. 

Habit and forgetting are signs of the integration of a psychical relation into 
the organism; an entire situation, having become both unknown to the sub- 



Presentation on Psychical Causality z^9 

ject and as essential as his body to him, is normally manifested in effects that 
are consistent with the sense he has of his body. 

The Oedipus complex turns out, in analytic experience, to be capable not 
only of provoking, by its atypical impact, all the somatic effects of hysteria, 
but also of normally constituting the sense of reality. 

The father represents a function of both power and temperament simulta- 
neously; an imperative that is no longer blind but "categorical"; and a person 
who dominates and arbitrates the avid wrenching and jealous ambivalence 
that were at the core of the child's first relations with its mother and its sib- 
ling rival. And he seems all the more to represent this the more he is "on the 
sidelines" of the first affective apprehensions. The effects of his appearance 
are expressed in various manners in analytic doctrine, but they obviously 
appear skewed there by their traumatizing impact, for it was the latter that 
first allowed these effects to be perceived by analysis. It seems to me that they 
can be most generally expressed as follows: The new image makes a world of 
persons "flocculate" in the subject; insofar as they represent centers of auton- 
omy, they completely change the structure of reality for him. 

I would not hesitate to say that one could demonstrate that the Oedipal 
crisis has physiological echoes, and that, however purely psychological its 183 

mainspring may be, a certain "dose of Oedipus" can be considered to have 
the same humoral efficacy as the absorption of a desensitizing medication. 

Furthermore, the decisive role of an affective experience of this kind for 
the constitution of the world of reality as regards the categories of time and 
space is so obvious that even someone like Bertrand Russell, in his essay The 
Analysis of Mind ^ with its radically mechanistic inspiration, cannot avoid 
admitting, in his genetic theory of perception, the function of "feelings of dis- 
tance" which, with the sense of the concrete that is characteristic of Anglo- 
Saxons, he relates to the "feeling of respect." 

I stressed this significant feature in my doctoral thesis, when I attempted 
to account for the structure of the "elementary phenomena" of paranoiac 
psychosis. 

Suffice it to say that my examination of these phenomena led me to com- 
plete the catalogue of the structures — symbolism, condensation, and others — 
that Freud had explained as those of the imaginary mode, to use my own 
terminology. I sincerely hope that people will soon stop using the word 
"unconscious" to designate what manifests itself in consciousness. 

I realized (and why don't I ask you to look at my chapter, 16 since it bears 
witness to the authentic groping involved in my research), in considering the 
case history of my patient, that it is impossible to situate, through the anam- 
nesis, the exact time and place at which certain intuitions, memory illusions, 



i5o Ecrits 

convictive resentments, and imaginary objectifications occurred that could 
only be attributed to the fertile moment of the delusion taken as a whole. I will 
illustrate this by mentioning the column and photograph that my patient 
remembered, during one of these periods, having been struck by some months 
before in a certain newspaper, but which she was unable to find when she went 
through the complete collection of months of its daily papers. I supposed that 
these phenomena were originally experienced as reminiscences, iterations, 
184 series, and mirror games — it being impossible for the subject to situate their 

very occurrence in objective time and space with any more precision than she 
could situate her dreams in them. 

We are thus nearing a structural analysis of an imaginary space and time 
as well as the connections between them. 

Returning to my notion of paranoiac knowledge, I tried to conceptualize 
the network structure, the relations of participation, the aligned perspectives, 
and the palace of mirages that reign in the limbo regions of the world that the 
Oedipus complex causes to fade into forgetting. 

I have often taken a stand against the hazardous manner in which Freud 
sociologically interpreted the Oedipus complex — that very important dis- 
covery about the human mind that we owe to him. I think that the Oedipus 
complex did not appear with the origin of man (assuming it is not altogether 
senseless to try to write the history of this complex), but at the threshold of 
history, of "historical" history, at the limit of "ethnographic" cultures. It can 
obviously appear only in the patriarchal form of the family as an institution, 
but it nevertheless has an indisputably liminary value. I am convinced that its 
function had to be served by initiatory experiences in cultures that excluded 
it, as ethnology allows us to see even today. And its value in bringing a psy- 
chical cycle to a close stems from the fact that it represents the family situa- 
tion, insofar as the latter, by its institution, marks the intersection of the 
biological and the social in the cultural. 

However, the structure that is characteristic of the human world — insofar 
as it involves the existence of objects that are independent of the actual field 
of the tendencies and that can be used both symbolically and instrumentally — 
appears in man from the very first phases of development. How can we con- 
ceive of its psychological genesis? 

My construction known as "the mirror stage" — or, as it would be better to 
say, "the mirror phase" — addresses such a problem. 

I duly presented it at the Marienbad Congress in 1936, at least up to the 
point, coinciding exactly with the fourth stroke of the ten-minute mark, at 
which I was interrupted by Ernest Jones who was presiding over the congress. 
He was doing so as president of the London Psycho-Analytical Society, a posi- 



Presentation on Psychical Causality i5i 

tion for which he was no doubt qualified by the fact that I have never encoun- 
tered a single English colleague of his who didn't have something unpleasant 185 
to say about his character. Nevertheless, the members of the Viennese group 
who were gathered there, like birds right before their impending migration, 
gave my expose a rather warm reception. I did not submit my paper for inclu- 
sion in the proceedings of the congress; you can find the gist of it in a few lines 
in my article about the family published in 1938 in the Encyclopedic Frangaise, 
in the volume on "The Life of the Mind." 17 

My aim there was to indicate the connection between a number of funda- 
mental imaginary relations in an exemplary behavior characteristic of a cer- 
tain phase of development. 

This behavior is none other than that of the human infant before its image 
in the mirror starting at the age of six months, which is so strikingly different 
from the behavior of a chimpanzee, whose development in the instrumental 
application of intelligence the infant is far from having reached. 

What I have called the triumphant assumption [assomption] of the image 
with the jubilatory mimicry that accompanies it and the playful indulgence in 
controlling the specular identification, after the briefest experimental verifi- 
cation of the nonexistence of the image behind the mirror, in contrast with the 
opposite phenomena in the monkey — these seemed to me to manifest one of 
the facts of identificatory capture by the imago that I was seeking to isolate. 

It was very directly related to the image of the human being that I had already 
encountered in the earliest organization of human knowledge. 

This idea has gained ground and has been corroborated by other 
researchers, among whom I will cite Lhermitte, whose 1939 book published 
the findings of the work he had devoted for many years to the singularity and 
autonomy in the psyche of the image of one's own body. 

An enormous series of subjective phenomena revolve around this image, 
running the gamut from the amputee 's illusion to the hallucination of one 's 
double, including the latter's appearance in dreams and the delusional objec- 
tifications that go with it. But what is most important is still its autonomy as 
the imaginary locus of reference for proprioceptive sensations, that can be 186 

found in all kinds of phenomena, of which Aristotle 's illusion is only one 
example. 

Gestalt theory and phenomenology also contribute to the file of data 
related to this image. And all sorts of imaginary mirages of concrete psy- 
chology, which are familiar to psychoanalysts, ranging from sexual games to 
moral ambiguities, remind one of my mirror stage by virtue of the image and 
the magical power of language. "Hey," one says to oneself, "that reminds me 
of Lacan's thing, the mirror stage. What exactly did he say about it?" 



i52 Ecrits 

I have, in fact, taken my conception of the existential meaning of the phe- 
nomenon a bit further by understanding it in relation to what I have called 
man 3 s prematurity at birth, in other words, the incompleteness and "delay" in 
the development of the central nervous system during the first six months of 
life. These phenomena are well known to anatomists and have, moreover, been 
obvious, since man's first appearance, in the nursling's lack of motor coor- 
dination and balance; the latter is probably not unrelated to the process of 
"fetalization," which Bolk considered to be the mainspring of the higher devel- 
opment of the encephalic vesicles in man. 

It is owing to this delay in development that the early maturation of visual 
perception takes on the role of functional anticipation. This results, on the one 
hand, in the marked prevalence of visual structure in recognition of the human 
form, which begins so early, as I mentioned before. On the other hand, the 
odds of identifying with this form, if I may say so, receive decisive support 
from this, which comes to constitute the absolutely essential imaginary knot 
in man that psychoanalysis — obscurely and despite inextricable doctrinal 
contradictions — has admirably designated as "narcissism." 

Indeed, the relation of the image to the suicidal tendency essentially 
expressed in the myth of Narcissus lies in this knot. This suicidal tendency — 
which represents in my opinion what Freud sought to situate in his metapsy- 
chology with the terms "death instinct" and "primary masochism" — depends, 
in my view, on the fact that man's death, long before it is reflected (in a way 
that is, moreover, always so ambiguous) in his thinking, is experienced by him 
187 in the earliest phase of misery that he goes through from the trauma of birth 

until the end of the first six months of physiological prematurity, and that echoes 
later in the trauma of weaning. 

It is one of the most brilliant features of Freud's intuition regarding the 
order of the psychical world that he grasped the revelatory value of conceal- 
ment games that are children's first games. 18 Everyone can see them and yet 
no one before him had grasped in their iterative character the liberating rep- 
etition of all separation and weaning as such that the child assumes [assume] 
in these games. 

Thanks to Freud we can think of them as expressing the first vibration of 
the stationary wave of renunciations that scand the history of psychical 
development. 

At the beginning of this development we see the primordial ego, as essen- 
tially alienated, linked to the first sacrifice as essentially suicidal. 

In other words, we see here the fundamental structure of madness. 

Thus, the earliest dissonance between the ego and being would seem to 
be the fundamental note that resounds in a whole harmonic scale across the 



Presentation on Psychical Causality i5s 

phases of psychical history, the function of which is to resolve it by devel- 
oping it. 

Any resolution of this dissonance through an illusory coincidence of real- 
ity with the ideal would resonate all the way to the depths of the imaginary 
knot of narcissistic, suicidal aggression. 

Yet this mirage of appearances, in which the organic conditions of intoxi- 
cation, for instance, can play their role, requires the ungraspable consent of 
freedom, as can be seen in the fact that madness is found only in man and only 
after he reaches "the age of reason" — Pascal's intuition that "a child is not a 
man" is thus borne out here. 

Indeed, the child's first identificatory choices, which are "innocent" 
choices, determine nothing, apart from the affective [patketiques] "fixations" 
of neurosis, but the madness by which man thinks he is a man. 

This paradoxical formulation nevertheless takes on its full value when we 
consider that man is far more than his body, even though he can know 
[savoir] nothing more about his being. 

Here we see the fundamental illusion to which man is a slave, much more 
so than to all the "passions of the body" in the Cartesian sense: the passion of 
being a man. It is, I would say, the passion of the soul par excellence^ narcis- 
sism, that imposes its structure on all his desires, even the loftiest ones. 

In the encounter between body and mind, the soul appears as what it tra- 
ditionally is, that is, as the limit of the monad. 

When man, seeking to empty himself of all thoughts, advances in the 
shadowless gleam of imaginary space, abstaining from even awaiting what 
will emerge from it, a dull mirror shows him a surface in which nothing is 
reflected. 

I think, therefore, that I can designate the imago as the true object of psy- 
chology, to the exact same extent that Galileo's notion of the inert mass point 
served as the foundation of physics. 

However, we cannot yet fully grasp the notion, and my entire expose has 
had no other goal than to guide you toward its obscure self-evidence. 

It seems to me to be correlated with a kind of unextended space — that is, 
indivisible space, our intuition of which should be clarified by progress in the 
notion of gestalts — and with a kind of time that is caught between expecta- 
tion and release, a time of phases and repetition. 

A form of causality grounds this notion, which is psychical causality itself: 
identification. The latter is an irreducible phenomenon, and the imago is the 
form, which is definable in the imaginary spatiotemporal complex, whose func- 
tion is to bring about the identification that resolves a psychical phase — in other 



i54 Ecrits 

words, a metamorphosis in the individual's relationships with his semblables. 

Those who do not wish to understand me might object that I am begging 
the question and that I am gratuitously positing that the phenomenon is irre- 
ducible merely in order to foster a thoroughly metaphysical conception of man. 

I will thus address the deaf by offering them facts which will, I think, pique 

189 their sense of the visible, since these facts should not appear to be contami- 
nated, in their eyes at least, by either the mind or being: for I will seek them 
out in the animal kingdom. 

It is clear that psychical phenomena must manifest themselves in that king- 
dom if they have an independent existence, and that what I call the imago must 
be found there — at least in those animals whose Umwelt involves, if not soci- 
ety, at least an aggregation of their fellow creatures, that is, those animals who 
present, among their specific characteristics, the trait known as "gregarious- 
ness." In any case, ten years ago, when I referred to the imago as a "psychical 
object" and stated that the appearance of Freud's Oedipus complex marked a 
conceptual watershed, insofar as it contained the promise of a true psychol- 
ogy, I simultaneously indicated in several of my writings that, with the imago, 
psychology had given us a concept which could be at least as fruitful in biol- 
ogy as many other concepts that are far more uncertain but that have never- 
theless gained currency there. 

This indication was borne out starting in 1939, and as proof I will simply 
present two "facts" among others that have by now become quite numerous. 

The first is found in a paper by L. Harrison Matthews published in the Pro- 
ceedings of the Royal Society in 1939. 19 

It had long been known that a female pigeon does not ovulate when iso- 
lated from other members of its species. 

Matthews' experiments demonstrated that ovulation is triggered by a 
female pigeon's sight of the specific form of a member of its own species, to 
the exclusion of any other sensory form of perception, and without that mem- 
ber having to be male. 

Placed in the same room with individuals of both sexes, but in cages that are 
fabricated in such a way that the pigeons cannot see each other, although they 
can easily perceive each other's calls and smells, the females do not ovulate. 
Conversely, if we allow two pigeons to view each other — even if it is through 
a glass barrier that suffices to thwart the onset of the mating game, and even 
when both pigeons are female — ovulation is triggered within a period of time 
that varies from twelve days (when the separated pigeons include a male and 

190 a female) to two months (when the separated pigeons are both female). 

But what is more remarkable still is that the mere sight by the animal of its 
own image in a mirror suffices to trigger ovulation within two and a half months. 



Presentation on Psychical Causality i55 

Another researcher has noted that the secretion of milk in the male pigeon's 
crops, which normally occurs when the eggs hatch, does not occur when he 
cannot see the female brooding the eggs. 

A second group of facts is found in a paper by Chauvin, which was pub- 
lished in 1941 in the A nnales de la Societe entomologique de France. 1 ® 

Chauvin's work concerns an insect species with two very different vari- 
eties of individuals: a so-called "solitary" type and a so-called "gregarious" 
one. Chauvin studied the migratory locust, that is, one of the species com- 
monly referred to as grasshoppers, in which the phenomenon of swarming is 
linked to the appearance of the gregarious type. In this locust, also called Schis- 
tocerca, the two varieties show profound differences (as in Locusta and other 
similar species) in both their instincts — sexual cycle, voracity, and motor agi- 
tation — and their morphology, as can be seen from biometric measures and 
from the pigmentation that produces their differing characteristic outward 
appearances. 

Limiting ourselves to this last feature, I will indicate that in Schistocerca, 
the solitary type is solid green throughout its development, which includes 
five larval stages, whereas the gregarious type changes colors depending on 
its stage and has certain black striations on different parts of its body, one of 
the most permanent striations being on its hind femur. But I am not exagger- 
ating when I say that, in addition to these highly visible features, the insects 
differ biologically in every respect. 

We find that the appearance of the gregarious type is triggered, in this 
insect, by perception of the characteristic form of the species during the first 
larval periods. Two solitary individuals placed together will thus evolve 
toward the gregarious type. Through a series of experiments — raising them 
in darkness and isolated sectioning of the palpus, the antennae, and so on — it 
was possible to locate this perception very precisely in the senses of sight and 
touch, to the exclusion of smell, hearing, and shared movement. It is not nee- 191 

essary for the two individuals that are put together to be in the same larval 
stage, and they react in the same way to the presence of an adult. The presence 
of an adult from a similar species, such as Locusta^ also determines gregari- 
ousness, but not the presence of an adult Gryllus, which is from a more distant 
species. 

After an in-depth discussion, Chauvin is led to bring in the notion of a spe- 
cific form and a specific movement, characterized by a certain "style," a for- 
mulation that is all the less questionable in his case in that he does not seem to 
even dream of tying it to the notion of gestalts. I will let him conclude in his own 
words, which will show how little he is inclined to wax metaphysical: "There 
clearly must be some sort of recognition here, however rudimentary one 



i56 Ecrits 

assumes it to be. Yet how can we speak of recognition without presupposing a 
psychophysiological mechanism?" 21 Such is the discretion of the physiologist. 

But that is not the whole story: gregarious individuals are born from the 
coupling of two solitary individuals in a proportion that depends on the 
amount of time they are allowed to spend together. Furthermore, these exci- 
tations are such that the proportion of gregarious births rises as the number 
of couplings after certain intervals rises. 

Inversely, suppression of the image 's morphogenic action leads to progres- 
sive reduction of the number of gregarious individuals among the offspring. 

Although the sexual characteristics of gregarious adults depend on condi- 
tions that still better manifest the originality of the role of the specific imago 
in the phenomenon that I have just described, I would do better not to elabo- 
rate any further on this topic in a presentation on psychical causality in cases 
of madness. 

I would simply like to highlight here the equally significant fact that, con- 
trary to what Ey allows himself to be led to propose somewhere, there is no 
parallelism between the anatomical differentiation of the nervous system and 
the wealth of psychical manifestations, even of intelligence. This is demon- 
192 strated by a huge amount of data regarding the behavior of lower animals; 

consider the crab, for example, whose skill in using mechanical impact to deal 
with a mussel I have repeatedly praised in my lectures. 

In concluding, I hope that this brief discourse on the imago will strike you, 
not as an ironic challenge, but as a genuine threat to man. For, while our abil- 
ity to realize that the imago's unquantifiable distance and freedom's minute 
blade are decisive in madness does not yet allow us to cure it, the time is per- 
haps not far off when such knowledge will allow us to induce it. While noth- 
ing can guarantee that we will not get lost in a free movement toward truth, a 
little nudge will suffice to ensure that we change truth into madness. Then we 
will have moved from the domain of metaphysical causality, which one can 
deride, to that of scientific technique, which is no laughing matter. 

Here and there we have seen the beginnings of such an enterprise. The art 
of the image will soon be able to play off the values of the imago, and some 
day we will see serial orders of "ideals" that withstand criticism: that is when 
the label "true guarantee" will take on its full meaning. 

Neither the intention nor the enterprise will be new, but their systematic 
form will be. 

In the meantime, I propose to equate the various delusional structures with 
the therapeutic methods applied to the psychoses, as a function of the princi- 
ples I have developed here: 



Presentation on Psychical Causality i5y 

• running from the ridiculous attachment to the object demanded, to the cruel 
tension of hypochondriacal fixation, and on to the suicidal backdrop of the 
delusion of negation; and 

• running from the sedative value of medical explanations, to the disruptive 
act of inducing epilepsy, and on to analysis' narcissistic catharsis. 

It sufficed to reflect upon a few "optical illusions" to lay the groundwork 
for a Gestalt theory that produces results that might seem to be minor mira- 
cles. For instance, predicting the following phenomenon: when an arrange- 
ment composed of blue-colored sectors is made to spin in front of a screen 193 
that is half black and half yellow, the colors remain isolated or combine and 
you either see the two colors of the screen through a blue swirling or else you 
see a blue-black and a grey blend together, according to whether you see the 
arrangement or not, thus depending solely on a thought adjustment. 

Judge for yourself, then, what our combinatory faculties could wrest from 
a theory that refers to the very relationship between being and the world, if 
this theory became somewhat precise. It should be clear to you that the visual 
perception of a man raised in a cultural context completely different from our 
own is a perception that is completely different from our own. 

The aspects of the imago — which are more invisible to our eyes (made, as 
they are, for the signs of the money changer) than what the desert hunter knows 
how to see the imperceptible trace of, namely, the gazelle's footprint on the 
rock — will someday be revealed to us. 

You have heard me lovingly refer to Descartes and Hegel in order to situ- 
ate the place of the imago in our research. It is rather fashionable these days 
to "go beyond" the classical philosophers. I could just as easily have started 
with the admirable dialogue in the Parmenides. For neither Socrates nor 
Descartes, nor Marx, nor Freud, can be "gone beyond," insofar as they car- 
ried out their research with the passion to unveil that has an object: truth. 

As one such prince of words wrote — I mean Max Jacob, poet, saint, and 
novelist, through whose fingers the threads of the ego's* mask seem to slip of 
their own accord — in Cornet a des ("The Dice Cup"), if I am not mistaken: 
the truth is always new. 



Notes 

1. One can read the most recent exposition conference just before this one). Ey added an 

available of Henri Ey's viewpoints in the introduction and a long response of his own to 

brochure that contains the presentation made their presentation, which included a critique of 

by J. de Ajuriaguerra and H. Hecaen at the con- his doctrine. See Rapports de la Neurologic et 

ference held in Bonneval in 1943 (that is, the de la Psychiatrie, H. Ey, J. de Ajuriaguerra, and 



i58 



Ecrits 



H. Hecaen (Paris: Hermann, 1947), issue num- 
ber 1018 of the well-known collection "Actu- 
alites scientifiques et industrielles" ("Current 
Scientific and Industrial Developments"). 
Some of the quotations that follow are bor- 
rowed from them; others are found only in 
typewritten texts thanks to which a highly 
productive discussion took place that paved the 
way for the Bonneval conference in 1946. 

2. Henri Ey, Rapports de la Neurologie, 14. 

3. Henri Ey, Rapports de la Neurologie, 122. 
(Cf. Ey 's article published in Evolution Psychi- 
atrique XII, 1(1947): 71-104. 

4. Henri Ey, Hallucinations et Delire (Paris: 
Alcan, 1934). 

5. P. Guiraud, "Les formes verbales de 
^interpretation delirante," Annales medico- 
psychologiques LXXIX, 5 (1921): 395-412. 

6. In the first issue of the journal entitled 14, 
rue du Dragon (Paris: Cahiers d'Art). 

7. Paul Eluard, Poesie involontaire etpoesie 
intentionnelle (Villeneuve-les- Avignon: Seghers, 
1942). 

8. See La Philosophie de V esprit, trans. Vera 
(Paris: Germer Bailliere, 1867), and the excel- 
lent French translation in two volumes by Jean 
Hyppolite, La Phenomenologie de Vesprit (Paris: 
Aubier, 1939), which I will return to further on. 

9. French readers can no longer ignore this 
work now that Jean Hyppolite has made it 
accessible to them, in a way that will satisfy 
even the most exacting of readers, in his thesis 
which has just been published (Paris: Aubier, 
1946), and once the Nouvelle Revue Francaise 
publishes the notes from the course that 
Alexandre Kojeve devoted to Hegel's text for 
five years at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes. 

10. In Evolution psychiatrique, 2 (March 



1931): 25-34. See also P. Guiraud and B. 
Cailleux, "Le meurtre immotive, reaction 
liberatrice de la maladie chez les hebephrenes," 
Annales Medico-psychiatriques 2 (November 
1928): 352-60. 

11. See Antf 1966,157. 

1 2. See Freud 's Das Ich unddas Es [ The Ego 
and the Id, SE XIX, especially chapter 2]. 

13. Phenomenologie de la perception (Paris: 
Gallimard, 1945). [The Phenomenology of 
Perception, trans. Colin Smith (New York: 
Humanities Press, 1962).] 

14. Charlotte Biihler, So^iologische undpsy- 
chologische Studien iiber das erste Lebensjahr 
(Jena: Fischer, 1927). See also Elsa Kohler, Die 
Personlichkeit des dreijahrigen Kindes (Leipzig: 
1926). 

1 5. Bertrand Russell, The Analysis of Mind 
(New York: Macmillan, 1921). 

16. De la psychose paranoiaque dans ses rap- 
ports avec la personnalite (Paris: Le Francois, 

1932), Part II, Chap. II, 202-15 and also Chap. 
IV, Section III, b, 300-306. 

17. Encyclopedie Francaise, founded by A. de 
Monzie, vol. VIII, edited by Henri Wallon; see 
Part 2, Section A, "La famille," especially pages 
840-6 to 8*40-11. 

18. In Jense its des Lustprinpps [Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle, £EXVIII, 14-17]. 

19. See [L. Harrison Matthews, "Visual 
Stimulation and Ovulation in Pigeons" in] Pro- 
ceedings of the Royal Society, Series B (Biolog- 
ical Sciences), 126 (February 3, 1939): 557-60. 

20. R. Chauvin, Annales de la Societe ento- 
mologique de France (1941, third quarter): 133 — 
272. 

21. R. Chauvin, Annales de la Societe 
entomologique de France, 251 (my italics). 



Logical Time and the Assertion i 97 

of Anticipated Certainty 

A New Sophism 

In March 1945, Christian Zervos asked me to contribute, along with a certain 
number of writers, to the recommencement issue of his journal, Les Cahiers 
d'Art, conceived with the intent of filling the space between the figures on its 
cover, 1940-1944, dates significant to many people, with the illustrious 
names in its table of contents. 

I submitted this article, knowing full well that this would immediately 
make it unavailable to most readers. 

May it resound with the right note here where I am placing it, between the 
before and the after, even if it demonstrates that the after was kept waiting 
[faisait antichambre\ so that the before could assume its own place [put prendre 
rang]. 

A Logical Problem 

A prison warden summons three choice prisoners and announces to them the 
following: 

For reasons I need not make known to you now, gentlemen, I must free 
one of you. In order to decide which, I will entrust the outcome to a test 
that you will, I hope, agree to undergo. 

There are three of you present. I have here five disks differing only 
in color: three white and two black. Without letting you know which I 
will have chosen, I will fasten one of them to each of you between the 
shoulders, outside, that is, your direct visual field — indirect ways of get- 
ting a look at the disk also being excluded by the absence here of any 
means by which to see your own reflection. 

You will then be left at your leisure to consider your companions and 
their respective disks, without being allowed, of course, to communi- 
cate among yourselves the results of your inspection. Your own inter- 198 
est would, in any case, proscribe such communication, for the first to be 
able to deduce his own color will be the one to benefit from the dis- 
charging measure at my disposal. 

But his conclusion must be founded upon logical and not simply prob- 
abilistic grounds. Keeping this in mind, it is agreed that as soon as one 



1 62 Ecrits 

of you is ready to formulate such a conclusion, he will pass through this 
door so that he may be judged individually on the basis of his response. 

This having been agreed to, each of our three subjects is adorned with a 
white disk, no use being made of the black ones, of which there were, let us 
recall, but two. 

How can the subjects solve the problem? 

The Perfect Solution 

After having contemplated one another for a certain time, the three subjects 
take a few steps together, passing side by side through the doorway. Each of 
them then separately furnishes a similar response which can be expressed as 
follows: 

I am a white, and here is how I know it. Since my companions were whites, 
I thought that, had I been a black, each of them would have been able to 
infer the following: "If I too were a black, the other would have neces- 
sarily realized straight away that he was a white and would have left 
immediately; therefore I am not a black." And both would have left 
together, convinced they were whites. As they did nothing of the kind, 
I must be a white like them. At that, I made for the door to make my con- 
clusion known. 

All three thus exited simultaneously, armed with the same reasons for con- 
cluding. 

Sophistic Value of this Solution 

Can this solution, which presents itself as the most perfect of which the prob- 
lem allows, be obtained experimentally? I leave to the initiative of each the 
task of deciding. 
199 Not that I would go so far as to recommend putting it to the test in real 

life — even though our era's antinomic progress has, it seems, for some time 
now, been putting such conditions within the reach of an ever greater num- 
ber. Indeed, I am afraid that although only winners are foreseen here, prac- 
tice may well diverge considerably from theory. Moreover, I am not one of 
those recent philosophers for whom confinement within four walls merely 
helps us attain the ultimate in human freedom. 



Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty 163 

But when carried out under the innocent conditions of fiction, the experi- 
ment will not disappoint those who have not lost all taste for surprise — I guar- 
antee it. It will perhaps turn out to be of some scientific value to the 
psychologist, at least if we can trust what seemed to me to result from having 
tried it with various groups of appropriately chosen, qualified intellectuals: a 
very peculiar misrecognition on the part of these subjects of the reality of other 
people. 

My only interest is in the logical value of the solution presented. I consider 
it, in effect, to be a remarkable sophism, in the classical sense of the term — 
that is, a significant example for the resolution of the forms of a logical func- 
tion at the historical moment at which the problem these forms raise presents 
itself to philosophical examination. The story's sinister images will certainly 
prove to be contingent. But to whatever degree my sophism may seem not 
irrelevant to our times, its bearing their sign in such images is in no way super- 
fluous — which is why I have preserved here the trappings with which it was 
brought to my attention one evening by an ingenious host. 

I will now place myself under the auspices of he who sometimes dons the 
philosopher's garb, who — ambiguous — is more often to be sought in the 
comedian's banter, but who is always encountered in the politician's secretive 
action: the good logician, odious to the world. 

Discussion of the Sophism 

Every sophism initially presents itself as a logical error, and a first objection 
to this sophism can be easily formulated. Let us call "A" the real subject who 
concludes for himself, and "B" and "C" those reflected subjects upon whose 200 

conduct A founds his deduction. One might object that since B's conviction 
is based on C's expectative, the strength of his conviction must logically dis- 
sipate when C stops hesitating; and reciprocally for C with respect to B; both 
must thus remain indecisive. Nothing therefore necessitates their departure in 
the case that A is a black. Consequently, A cannot deduce that he is a white. 

To this it must first be replied that B and C's whole cogitation is falsely 
imputed to them, for the only situation which could motivate it — the fact of 
seeing a black — is not, in effect, the true situation. What must be discerned 
here is whether, supposing this situation were the case, it would be wrong to 
impute this logical thought process to them. Now it would be nothing of the 
kind, for, according to my hypothesis, it is the fact that neither of them left 
first which allows each to believe he is a white, and their hesitating for but 
one instant would clearly suffice to reconvince each of them beyond the 



z 64 Ecrits 

shadow of a doubt that he is a white. For hesitation is logically excluded for 
whomever sees two blacks. But it is also excluded in reality in this first step 
of the deduction for, since no one finds himself in the presence of a black and 
a white, there is no way for anyone to leave on the basis of what can be deduced 
therefrom. 

But the objection presents itself more forcibly at the second stage of A's 
deduction. For if he has legitimately concluded that he is a white — positing 
that, had he been a black, the others would not have been long in realizing 
they were whites and leaving — he must nevertheless abandon his conclusion 
as soon as he comes to it; for at the very moment at which he is stirred into 
action by his conclusion, he sees the others setting off with him. 

Before responding to this objection, let me carefully lay out anew the log- 
ical terms of the problem. "A" designates each of the subjects insofar as he 
himself is in the hot seat and resolves or fails to resolve to conclude about his 
own case. "B" and "C" are the two others insofar as they are objects of A's 
reasoning. But while A can correctly impute to the others a thought process 
which is in fact false (as I have just shown), he can, nevertheless, only take 
into account their real behavior. 

If A, seeing B and C set off with him, wonders again whether they have 
not in fact seen that he is black, it suffices for him to stop and newly pose 
the question in order to answer it. For he sees that they too stop: since each 
20 1 of them is really in the same situation as him, or more aptly stated, is A inso- 

far as [he is] real — that is, insofar as he resolves or fails to resolve to con- 
clude about himself — each encounters the same doubt at the same moment 
as him. Regardless of the reasoning A now imputes to B and C, he will legit- 
imately conclude again that he is a white. For he posits anew that, had he 
been a black, B and C would have had to continue; or at the very least, 
acknowledging their hesitation — which concurs with the preceding argu- 
ment (here supported by the facts) that makes them wonder whether they 
are not blacks themselves — he posits that they would have had to set off again 
before him (it is the fact that he is black that gives their very hesitation its def- 
inite import, allowing them to conclude that they are whites). It is because 
they, seeing that he is in fact white, do nothing of the kind, that he himself 
takes the initiative; which is to say that they all head for the door together 
to declare that they are whites. 

But one can still object that, having removed in this way the obstacle, we 
have not for all that refuted the logical objection — for the same objection turns 
up with the reiteration of the movement, reproducing in each of the subjects 
the very same doubt and arrest. 



Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty i65 

Assuredly, but logical progress must have been made in the interim. For this 
time A can draw but one unequivocal conclusion from the common cessation 
of movement: had he been a black, B and C absolutely should not have stopped. 
Their hesitating a second time in concluding that they are whites would be ruled 
out at this point: Indeed, a single hesitation suffices for them to demonstrate to 
each other that certainly neither of them is a black. Thus, if B and C have halted 
again, A can only be a white. Which is to say that this time the three subjects 
are confirmed in a certainty permitting of no further doubt or objection. 

Withstanding the test of critical discussion, the sophism thus maintains all 
the constraining rigor of a logical process, on condition that one integrates 
therein the value of the two suspensive scansions. This test exposes the process 
of verification in the very act in which each of the subjects manifests that it 
has led him to his conclusion. 

Value of the Suspended Motions in the Process 202 

Is it justifiable to integrate into the sophism the two suspended motions which 
have thus made their appearance? In order to decide, we must examine their 
role in the solution of the logical problem. 

In fact, they take on this role only after the conclusion of the logical 
process, since the act they suspend evinces this very conclusion. One thus can- 
not object on that basis that they bring into the solution an element external 
to the logical process itself. 

Their role, while crucial to the carrying-out [pratique] of the logical 
process, is not that of experience in the verification of an hypothesis, but rather 
that of something intrinsic to logical ambiguity. 

For at first sight the givens of the problem would seem to break down as 
follows: 

(1) Three combinations of the subjects' characteristic attributes are logically 
possible: two blacks, one white; one black, two whites; or three whites. 
Once the first combination is ruled out by what all three subjects see, the 
question as to which of the other two is the case remains open. Its answer 
derives from: 

(2) the experiential data provided by the suspended motions, which amount 
to signals by which the subjects communicate to each other — in a mode 
determined by the conditions of the test — what they are forbidden to 
exchange in an intentional mode, namely, what each sees of the others' 
attributes. 



i66 Ecrits 

But this is not at all the case, as it would give the logical process a spatial- 
ized conception — the same spatialized conception that turns up every time the 
logical process appears to be erroneous, and that constitutes the only objec- 
tion to the solubility of the problem. 

It is precisely because my sophism will not tolerate a spatialized concep- 
tion that it presents itself as an aporia for the forms of classical logic, whose 
"eternal" prestige reflects an infirmity which is nonetheless recognized as their 
own 1 — namely, that these forms never give us anything which cannot already 
be seen all at once. 

203 In complete opposition to this, the coming into play as signifiers of the phe- 
nomena here contested makes the temporal, not spatial, structure of the log- 
ical process prevail. What the suspended motions disclose is not what the 
subjects see, but rather what they have found out positively about what they 
do not see-, the appearance of the black disks. What constitutes these suspended 
motions as signifying is not their direction, but rather their interruption [temps 
d'arret]. Their crucial value is not that of a binary choice between two inertly 2 
juxtaposed combinations — rendered incomplete by the visual exclusion of the 
third combination — but rather of a verificatory movement instituted by a log- 
ical process in which a subject transforms the three possible combinations into 
three times of possibility. 

This is also why, while a single signal should suffice for the sole choice 
imposed by the first erroneous interpretation, two scansions are necessary to 
verify the two lapses implied by the second, and only valid, interpretation. 

Far from being experiential data external to the logical process, the sus- 
pended motions are so necessary to it that only experience can make the logi- 
cal process lack here the synchronicity implied by the suspended motions as 
produced by a purely logical subject; only experience can make their function 
in the verification process founder. 

The suspended motions represent nothing, in effect, but levels of degrada- 

204 tion whose necessity brings out the increasing order of temporal instances that 
are registered within the logical process so as to be integrated into its conclusion. 

This can be seen in the logical determination of the interruptions they con- 
stitute, this determination — whether logician's objection or subject's doubt — 
revealing itself at each moment as the subjective unfolding of a temporal 
instance, or more aptly stated, as the slipping away [fuite] of the subject within 
a formal exigency. 

These temporal instances, which are constitutive of the process of the 
sophism, permit us to recognize a true logical movement in it. This process 
calls for an examination of the quality of its times. 



Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty i6y 

The Modulation of Time in the Sophism's Movement: The Instant of the 
Glance, the Time for Comprehending, and the Moment of Concluding 

One can isolate in the sophism three evidential moments whose logical values 
prove to be different and of increasing order. To lay out the chronological 
succession of the three moments would amount once again to spatializing them 
through a formalism which tends to reduce discourse to an alignment of signs. 
To show that the instance of time presents itself in a different mode in each of 
these moments would be to preserve their hierarchy, revealing therein a tonal 
discontinuity that is essential to their value. But to discern in the temporal mod- 
ulation the very function by which each of these moments, in its passage to the 
next, is resorbed therein, the last moment which absorbs them alone remain- 
ing, would be to reconstruct their real succession and truly understand their 
genesis in the logical movement. That is what I will attempt, starting from as 
rigorous a formulation as possible of these evidential moments. 

(I) Being opposite two blacks, one knows that one is a white. 

We have here a logical exclusion which gives the movement its basis. The fact 
that this logical exclusion is anterior to the movement, that is, that we can 
assume it to be clear to the subjects with the givens of the problem — givens 
which forbid a combination involving three blacks — is independent of the 
dramatic contingency isolating the preambular statement of these givens. 
Expressing it in the form two blacks : one white, we see the instantaneousness of 
its evidence — its fulguration time, so to speak, being equal to zero. 

But its formulation at the outset is already modulated by the subjectiviza- 205 

tion, albeit impersonal, which takes form here in the "one knows that . . . ," and 
by die conjunction of propositions which constitutes less a formal hypothesis 
than a still indeterminate matrix of such a hypothesis; we can put it in the fol- 
lowing consequential form designated by linguists with the terms "protasis" 
and "apodosis": "Being . . . , only then does one know that one is . . ." 

An instance of time widens the interval so that the pregiven [le donne] of 
the protasis, "opposite two blacks," changes into the given [la donnee] of the 
apodosis, "one is a white," the instant of the glance being necessary for this to 
occur. Into the logical equivalence between the two terms, "two blacks : one 
white," temporal modulation introduces a form which, in the second 
moment, crystallizes into an authentic hypothesis; for it aims now at the real 
unknown of the problem, namely, the attribute of which the subject himself 
is unaware. In this step, the subject encounters the next logical combination, 



i68 Ecrits 

and — being the only one to whom the attribute "black" can be assigned — is 
able, in the first phase of the logical movement, to formulate thus the fol- 
lowing evidence: 

(II) Were I a black, the two whites that I see would waste no time realizing 
that they are whites. 

We have here an intuition by which the subject objectifies something more than 
the factual givens offered him by the sight of the two whites. A certain time is 
defined (in the two senses of taking on meaning and finding its limit) by its 
end, an end that is at once goal and term. For the two whites in the situation 
of seeing a white and a black, this time is the time for comprehending, each of 
the whites finding the key to his own problem in the inertia of his semblable. 
The evidence of this moment presupposes the duration of a time of meditation 
that each of the two whites must ascertain in the other, and that the subject 
manifests in the terms he attributes to their lips, as though they were written 
on a banderole: "Had I been a black, he would have left without waiting an 
instant. If he stays to meditate, it is because I am a white." 

But how can we measure the limit of this time whose meaning has been thus 
objectified? The time for comprehending can be reduced to the instant of the 
glance, but this glance can include in its instant all the time needed for com- 
prehending. The objectivity of this time thus vacillates with its limit. Its mean- 
206 ing alone subsists, along with the form it engenders of subjects who are 

undefined except by their reciprocity, and whose action is suspended by mutual 
causality in a time which gives way due to [sous] the very return of the intu- 
ition that it has objectified. It is through this temporal modulation that, with 
the second phase of the logical movement, a path is blazed which leads to the 
following evidence: 

(III) I hasten to declare myself a white, so that these whites, whom I consider 
in this way, do not precede me in recognizing themselves for what they are. 

We have here the assertion about oneself through which the subject concludes 
the logical movement in the making of a judgment. The very return of the move- 
ment of comprehending, before [sous] which the temporal instance that objec- 
tively sustains it has vacillated, continues on in the subject in reflection. This 
instance reemerges for him therein in the subjective mode of a time of lagging 
behind the others in that very movement, logically presenting itself as the 
urgency of the moment of concluding. More strictly speaking, its evidence is 
revealed in a subjective penumbra as the growing illumination of a fringe at 



Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty 169 

the edge of the eclipse that the objectivity of the time for comprehending under- 
goes due to [sous] reflection. 

It seems to the subject that the time required for the two whites to under- 
stand the situation in which they are faced with a white and a black does not 
logically differ from the time it took him to understand it himself, since this 
situation is merely his own hypothesis. But if his hypothesis is correct — if, 
that is, the two whites actually see a black — they do not have to make an 
assumption about it, and will thus precede him by the beat [temps de battement] 
he misses in having to formulate this very hypothesis. It is thus the moment for 
concluding that he is a white; should he allow himself to be beaten to this con- 
clusion by his semblables, he will no longer be able to determine whether he is a 
black or not. Having surpassed the time for comprehending the moment of con- 
cluding , it is the moment of concluding the time for comprehending. Otherwise 
this time would lose its meaning. It is thus not because of some dramatic con- 
tingency, the seriousness of the stakes, or the competitiveness of the game, 
that time presses; it is owing to [sous] the urgency of the logical movement that 
the subject precipitates both his judgment and his departure ("precipitates" in 
the etymological sense of the verb: headlong), establishing the modulation in 
which temporal tension is reversed in a move to action [tendance a Facte] man- 
ifesting to the others that the subject has concluded. But let us stop at this point 207 
at which the subject arrives in his assertion at a truth that will be submitted to 
the test of doubt, but that he will be incapable of verifying unless he first attains 
it as a certainty. Temporal tension culminates here since, as we already know, 
it is the sequential steps of its release that will scand the test of its logical neces- 
sity. What is the logical value of this conclusive assertion? That is what I shall 
now try to bring out in the logical movement in which this conclusive asser- 
tion is verified. 

Temporal Tension in the Subjective Assertion and Its Value 
Manifested in the Demonstration of the Sophism 

The logical value of the third evidential moment, that is formulated in the 
assertion by which the subject concludes his logical movement, seems to me 
to deserve deeper exploration. It reveals, in effect, a form proper to an assertive 
logic, and we must indicate to which original relations this assertive logic can 
be applied. 

Building on the propositional relations of the first two moments, apodosis 
and hypothesis, the conjunction manifested here builds up to a motivation of 
the conclusion "so that there will not be" (a lagging behind that engenders error), 
in which the ontological form of anxiety, curiously reflected in the grammat- 



ijo Ecrits 

ically equivalent expression "for fear that" (the lagging behind might engen- 
der error), seems to emerge. 

This form is undoubtedly related to the logical originality of the subject of 
the assertion; that is why I characterize it as subjective assertion, the logical sub- 
ject here being but the personal form of the knowing subject who can only be 
expressed by "/." Otherwise stated, the judgment which concludes the 
sophism can only be borne by a subject who has formulated the assertion about 
himself, and cannot be imputed to him unreservedly by anyone else — unlike 
the relations of the impersonal and undefined reciprocal subjects of the first two 
moments that are essentially transitive, since the personal subject of the log- 
ical movement assumes {assume] them at each of these moments. 

The reference to these two subjects highlights the logical value of the sub- 
ject of the assertion. The former, expressed in the "one" of the "one knows 
208 that . . . y " provides only the general form of the noetic subject: he can as eas- 

ily be god, table, or washbasin. The latter, expressed in "the two whites" who 
must recognize "one another" introduces the form of the other as such — that 
is, as pure reciprocity — since the one can only recognize himself in the other 
and only discover his own attribute in the equivalence of their characteristic 
time. The "I" subject of the conclusive assertion, is isolated from the other — 
that is, from the relation of reciprocity — by a logical beat [battement de temps]. 
This movement of the logical genesis of the 7" through a decanting of its 
own logical time largely parallels its psychological birth. Just as, let us recall, 
the psychological "/" emerges from an indeterminate specular transitivism, 
assisted by an awakened jealous tendency, the "I" in question here defines 
itself through a subjectification of competition with the other, in the function 
of logical time. As such, it seems to me to provide the essential logical form 
(rather than the so-called existential form) of the psychological "7." 3 

The essentially subjective ("assertive" in my terminology) value of the 
sophism's conclusion is attested to by how uncertain an observer (for exam- 
ple, the prison warden overseeing the game) would be, faced with the three 
subjects' simultaneous departure, in trying to decide whether any of them has 
correctly deduced the attribute he bears. For the subject has seized the moment 
of concluding that he is a white due to [sous] the subjective evidence of a lag- 
time which presses him on towards the exit, but even if he has not seized it, 
the objective evidence constituted by the others' departure leads him to act no 
differently: he leaves in step with them, convinced, however, that he is a black. 
All the observer can foresee is that if one of the three declares upon questioning 
that he is a black, having hastened to follow the other two, he will be the only 
one to do so in these terms. 

The assertive judgment finally manifests itself here in an act. Modern 



Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty iji 

thought has shown that every judgment is essentially an act, and the dramatic 
contingencies here merely isolate this act in the subjects' departing movement. 209 

One could imagine other means of expression for this act of concluding. What 
makes this act so remarkable in the subjective assertion demonstrated by the 
sophism is that it anticipates its own certainty owing to the temporal tension 
with which it is subjectively charged; and that, based on this very anticipation, 
its certainty is verified in a logical precipitation that is determined by the dis- 
charge of this tension — so that in the end the conclusion is no longer grounded 
on anything but completely objectified temporal instances, and the assertion 
is desubjectified to the utmost. As is demonstrated by what follows. 

First of all, we witness the reappearance of the objective time of the initial 
intuition of the movement which, as though sucked up between the instant of 
its beginning and the haste of its end, had seemed to burst like a bubble. Owing 
to the force of doubt, which exfoliates the subjective certainty of the moment 
of concluding, objective time condenses here like a nucleus in the interval of 
the first suspended motion, and manifests to the subject its limit in the time for 
comprehending that, for the two others, the instant of the glance has passed and 
that the moment of concluding has returned. 

While doubt has, since Descartes' time, been integrated into the value of 
judgment, it should certainly be noted that — for the form of assertion studied 
here — the latter's value depends less upon the doubt which suspends the asser- 
tion than on the anticipated certainty which first introduced it. 

But in order to understand the function of this doubt for the subject of the 
assertion, let us consider the objective value of the first suspension for the 
observer whose attention we have already drawn to the subjects' overall 
motion. Although it may have been impossible up until this point to judge 
what any of them had concluded, we find that each of them manifests uncer- 
tainty about his conclusion, but will have it confirmed without fail if it was 
correct, rectified — perhaps — if it was erroneous. 

Indeed, if any one of them is subjectively able to make the first move, but 
then stops, it is because he begins to doubt whether he has really grasped the 
moment of concluding that he is a white — but he will immediately grasp it anew 
since he has already experienced it subjectively. If, on the contrary, he let the 
others precede him and, in so doing, convince him that he is a black, he can- 
not doubt whether he has grasped the moment of concluding precisely 
because he has not subjectively appropriated it (and in effect he can even find 
in the others' new initiative logical confirmation of his belief that he differs 210 

from them). If he stops, it is because he subordinates his own conclusion so 
thoroughly to that which manifests the others' conclusion that he immediately 
suspends his own when they seem to suspend theirs; thus he doubts whether 



iyi Ecrits 

he is a black until they again show him the way, or he himself discovers it, con- 
cluding this time that he is a black or that he is a white — perhaps incorrectly, 
perhaps correctly — the point remaining impenetrable to everyone other than 
himself. 

But the logical descent continues on towards the second temporal suspen- 
sion. Each of the subjects, having reappropriated the subjective certainty of 
the moment of concluding, can once again call it into question. It is now sus- 
tained, however, by the already accomplished objectification of the time for 
comprehending, and its being called into question lasts but the instant of the 
glance; for the mere fact that this hesitation is not the others' first but rather 
their second, suffices to put an end to his own hesitation as soon as he per- 
ceives theirs, immediately indicating to him as it does that he is certainly not 
a black. 

The subjective time of the moment of concluding is at last objectified here. 
This is proven by the fact that, even if any one of the subjects had not yet 
grasped it, it would nevertheless force itself upon him now; for this subject 
who would have concluded the first scansion by following the two others, con- 
vinced thereby that he was a black, would now — because of the present sec- 
ond scansion — be constrained to reverse his judgment. 

With the termination of the logical assembling of the two suspended 
motions in the act in which they reach completion, the sophism's assertion of 
certainty is desubjectified to the utmost. As is shown by the fact that according 
to our observer, assuming he finds the suspended motions to be synchronous 
for the three subjects, all three of them will indubitably declare themselves 
white upon questioning. 

Lastly, one can point out that at this same moment, if each subject can, when 
questioned, express, in the subjective assertion which has given him a certainty 
as the sophism's conclusion, the certainty he has finally verified — stating it in 
these terms:. 

I hastened to conclude that I was a white, because otherwise they would 
have preceded me in reciprocally recognizing themselves to be whites 
(and had I given them the time to do so, they would have led me astray, 
211 which would have been my undoing) 

— he can also express this certainty, in its verification which has been desub- 
jectified to the utmost in the logical movement, in the following terms: 

One must know that one is a white when the others have hesitated twice 
in leaving. 



Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty ijs 

In its first form, this conclusion can be advanced as veritable by a subject once 
he has constituted the sophism's logical movement, but can as such only be 
assumed [assume] personally by him; whereas in its second form, it requires 
the logical descent verifying the sophism to be consummated by all the sub- 
jects, although it remains applicable by any one of them to each of the others. 
It is not even ruled out that one, but only one, of the subjects might reach this 
second form without having constituted the sophism's logical movement, hav- 
ing simply followed its verification as manifested by the other two. 

The Truth of the Sophism as Temporali^ed Reference of Oneself 

to Another: Anticipating Subjective Assertion as the Fundamental Form 

of a Collective Logic 

The truth of the sophism thus only comes to be verified through its presump- 
tion^ so to speak, in the assertion it constitutes. Its truth thus turns out to depend 
upon a tendency that aims at the truth — a notion that would be a logical par- 
adox were it not reducible to the temporal tension that determines the moment 
of concluding. 

Truth manifests itself in this form as preceding error and advancing solely 
in the act that engenders its certainty; error, conversely, manifests itself as being 
confirmed by its inertia and correcting itself only with difficulty by following 
truth's conquering initiative. 

But to what sort of relation does such a logical form correspond? To a form 
of objectification engendered by the logical form in its movement — namely, 
the reference of an "/"to the common measure of the reciprocal subject, or 
otherwise stated, of others as such, that is, insofar as they are others for one 
another. This common measure is provided by a certain time for comprehend- 
ing^ which proves to be an essential function of the logical relationship of rec- 
iprocity. This reference of the "I" to others as such must, in each critical 
moment, be temporalized in order to dialectically reduce the moment of con- 212 

eluding the time for comprehending to last but the instant of the glance. 

Only the slightest disparity need appear in the logical term "others" for it 
to become clear how much the truth for all depends upon the rigor of each; 
that truth — if reached by only some — can engender, if not confirm, error in 
the others; and, moreover, that if in this race to the truth one is but alone, 
although not all may get to the truth, still no one can get there but by means 
of the others. 

These forms assuredly find easy application in bridge table and diplomatic 
strategy, not to mention in the handling of the "complex" in psychoanalytic 
practice. 



174 



Ecrits 



213 



Here, however, I would like to indicate their contribution to the logical 
notion of collectivity. 

Tresfaciunt collegium, as the adage goes, and the collectivity is already inte- 
grally represented in the form of the sophism, since the collectivity is defined 
as a group formed by the reciprocal relations of a definite number of individ- 
uals — unlike the generality, which is defined as a class abstractly including an 
indefinite number of individuals. 

But it suffices to extend the sophism's proof by recurrence to see that it can 
be logically applied to an unlimited number of subjects, 4 it being stipulated 
that the "negative" attribute can only appear in a number equal to the num- 
ber of subjects minus one. 5 But temporal objectification is more difficult to 
conceptualize as the collectivity grows, seeming to pose an obstacle to a col- 
lective logic with which one could complete classical logic. 

I will nevertheless show what such a logic would have to furnish, faced with 
the inadequacy one senses in an assertion such as "I am a man," couched in 
whatever form of classical logic and derived as the conclusion from whatever 
premises one likes (for example, "man is a rational animal," etc.). 

This assertion assuredly appears closer to its true value when presented 
as the conclusion of the form here demonstrated of anticipating subjective 
assertion: 



(1) A man knows what is not a man; 

(2) Men recognize themselves among themselves as men; 

(3) I declare myself to be a man for fear of being convinced by men that I am 
not a man. 

This movement provides the logical form of all "human" assimilation, pre- 
cisely insofar as it posits itself as assimilative of a barbarism, but it nonethe- 
less reserves the essential determination of the "I" . . . 6 



Notes 



1 . This infirmity applies no less to the minds 
formed by this tradition, as is evinced by the 
following note I received from an intellect — 
who is nevertheless adventurous in other 
fields — after a soiree at which the discussion 
of my fruitful sophism had provoked a verita- 
ble confusional panic amongst the select intel- 
lects of an intimate circle. Despite its opening 
words, the note bears the traces of a laborious 
restatement of the problem. 



My dear Lacan, a hasty note to direct 
your attention to a new difficulty: the 
reasoning admitted yesterday is not truly 
conclusive, for none of the three possible 
states — 000, 00 1 , or •• — is reducible to 
any of the others (appearances notwith- 
standing); only the last is decisive. 

Consequence: when A assumes he is 
black, neither B nor C can leave, for they 
cannot deduce from their behavior 



Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty iy5 



whether they are black or white. For if 
one of them is black, the other leaves; and 
if, instead, the first is white, the other 
leaves anyway, because the first does not 
do so (and vice versa). If A assumes he 
is white, B and C cannot leave in this case 
either. The upshot being that, here too, 
A cannot deduce the color of his disk 
from the others' behavior. 

My contradictor, in seeing the case too 
clearly, thus remained blind to the fact that it is 
not the others' departure, but rather their wait- 
ing, which determines the subject's judgment. 
And in order to hastily refute me, he allowed 
himself to overlook what I am trying to demon- 
strate here: the function of haste in logic. 

2. "Irreducibles," as my contradictor in the 
previous footnote put it. 

3. Thus the "/," third form of the subject of 
enunciation in logic, is here still the "first per- 
son," but also the only and last. For the gram- 
matical second person is related to another 
function of language. As for the grammatical 
third person, it is only alleged: it is a demon- 
strative, which is equally applicable to the field 
of the enunciated and to everything distin- 
guishable therein. 

4. Here is the example for four subjects, four 
white disks, and three black ones: 

A thinks that, if he were a black, any one of 
the others — B, C, or D — could surmise con- 
cerning the two others that, if he himself were 
black, they would waste no time realizing they 
are whites. Thus one of the others — B, C, or 
D — would quickly have to conclude that he 
himself is white, which does not happen. When 
A realizes that, if they — B, C, and D — see that 
he is a black, they have the advantage over him 
of not having to make a supposition about it, 
he hurries to conclude that he is a white. 

But don't they all leave at the same time as 
him? A, in doubt, stops; and the others do too. 
But what does it mean if they all stop too? 



Either they stop because they fall prey to the 
same doubt as A, and A can thus race off again 
without worry. Or it is that A is black, and that 
one of the others (B, C, or D) has been led to 
wonder whether the departure of the other two 
does not in fact signify that he is a black, and 
to surmise that their stopping does not neces- 
sarily imply he is white — since either can still 
wonder for an instant whether he is not a black. 
Still this allows him [B, C, or D] to posit that 
they [reading Us (they) for // (he)] should both 
start up again before him if he is a black, and to 
start up again himself from this waiting in vain, 
assured of being what he is, that is, white. Why 
do B, C, and D not do it? Well if they do not, 
then I will, says A. So they all start up again. 

Second stop. Assuming I am black, A says 
to himself, it must now dawn upon one of the 
others — B, C, or D — that, if he were a black, 
he could not impute to the other two this fur- 
ther hesitation; therefore he is white. B, C, and 
D should thus start up again before him [A]. 
Failing which, A starts up again, and all the oth- 
ers along with him. 

Third stop. But all of them should know by 
now that they are whites if I am truly black, A 
says to himself. If they stop, then . . . 

And the certainty is verified in three sus- 
pensive scansions. 

5. [Added in 1966:] Compare the condition 
of this minus one in the attribute with the psy- 
choanalytic function of the One-extra \VUn-en- 
plus\ in the subject of psychoanalysis {Ecrits 

1966,480). 

6. [Added in 1966:] The reader who contin- 
ues on in this collection is advised to return to 
this reference to the collective, which consti- 
tutes the end of the present article, in order to 
situate what Freud produced in the field of 
collective psychology {Massenpsychologie und 
Ich-Analyse, 1920 [Group Psychology and the 
Analysis of the -Ego]): the collective is nothing 
but the subject of the individual. 



n5 Presentation on Transference 

Given at the 1951 Congress of 
"Romance Language— Speaking Psychoanalysts " 

My goal here again was to accustom people's ears to the term "subject." The 
person who provided me with this opportunity shall remain anonymous, 
which will spare me the task of mentioning all the passages in which I refer to 
him in what follows. 

Were the question of the part Freud played in the case of Dora to be con- 
sidered settled here, it would be the net profit of my efforts to reinitiate the 
study of transference when Daniel Lagache 's paper by that name came out, 
his originality being to account for it by means of the Zeigarnik effect. 1 It was 
an idea that was designed to please at a time when psychoanalysis seemed to 
be running out of alibis. 

When our colleague, who shall remain nameless, discretely retorted to 
Lagache that one could equally well find evidence of transference in this 
effect, I considered the time ripe to speak of psychoanalysis. 

I have had to temper my expectations, since I also suggested a good deal 
here that I articulated later on the subject of transference. (1966) 

By commenting that the Zeigarnik effect seems to depend on transference more 
than it determines it, my colleague, B., introduced what might be called 
aspects of resistance into this psychotechnical experiment. Their import is to 
highlight the primacy of the subject-to-subject relationship in all of an indi- 
vidual's reactions, inasmuch as they are human, and the dominance of this rela- 
21 6 tionship in any test of individual dispositions, whether this test be defined by 

the conditions of a task or a situation. 

What must be understood about psychoanalytic experience is that it pro- 
ceeds entirely in this subject-to-subject relationship, which means that it pre- 
serves a dimension that is irreducible to any psychology considered to be the 
objectification of certain of an individual's properties. 

Indeed, what happens in an analysis is that the subject, strictly speaking, is 
constituted through a discourse to which the mere presence of the psychoan- 
alyst, prior to any intervention he may make, brings the dimension of dialogue. 

Whatever irresponsibility, not to say incoherence, the conventions of the 
fundamental rule of psychoanalysis impose on the principle of this discourse, 
it is clear that they are merely a hydraulic engineer's artifices (see the case of 
Dora, p. 15), 2 intended to ensure the crossing of certain dams, and that the 



Presentation on Transference ijy 

course must proceed according to the laws of a kind of gravitation that is pecu- 
liar to it, which is called truth. For "truth" is the name of the ideal movement 
that this discourse introduces into reality. In short, psychoanalysis is a dialec- 
tical experience, and this notion should prevail when raising the question of the 
nature of transference. 

My sole design here will be to show, by means of an example, the kind of 
propositions to which this line of argument might lead. But first I will allow 
myself a few remarks that strike me as urgent for the present guidance of our 
work of theoretical elaboration, relating, as they do, to the responsibilities thrust 
upon us by our historical times and the tradition entrusted to our keeping. 

Doesn't the fact that a dialectical conception of psychoanalysis has to be 
presented as an orientation peculiar to my way of thinking indicate misrecog- 
nition of an immediate given, and even of the commonsensical fact that psy- 
choanalysis relies solely upon words? Must we not recognize, in the privileged 
attention paid to the function of the nonverbal aspects of behavior in the psy- 
chological maneuver, a preference on the part of the analyst for a vantage point 
from which the subject is no longer anything but an object? If, indeed, such 
misrecognition is occurring here, we must investigate it according to the meth- 217 

ods we would apply in any other such case. 

It is well known that I am inclined to think that, at the very moment when 
psychology, and with it all the human sciences, underwent a profound 
revamping of perspectives due to conceptions stemming from psychoanaly- 
sis (even if it was without their consent or even their knowledge), the oppo- 
site movement took place among analysts that I would describe in the 
following terms: 

Whereas Freud assumed responsibility for showing us that there are ill- 
nesses that speak (unlike Hesiod, for whom the illnesses sent by Zeus come 
over men in silence) and for making us hear the truth of what they say, it 
seems that this truth inspires more fear in the practitioners who perpetuate 
this technique as its relation to a historical moment and an institutional cri- 
sis becomes clearer. 

Thus, in any number of forms, ranging from pietism to ideals of the crud- 
est efficiency, running the whole gamut of naturalist propaedeutics, they can 
be seen seeking refuge under the wing of a psychologism which, in reifying 
human beings, could lead to crimes next to which those of the physicist's sci- 
entism would pale. 

For due to the very power of the forces exposed by analysis, nothing less 
than a new type of alienation of man will come into being, as much through 
the efforts of a collective belief as through the activity of selecting techniques 



iy8 Ecrits 

with all the formative scope of rituals: in short, a homo psychologies , the dan- 
ger of which I am warning you against. 

Will we allow ourselves to be fascinated by the fabrication of homo psy- 
chologicus? Or can we, by rethinking Freud's work, find anew the authentic 
meaning of his initiative and the means by which to maintain its salutary value? 

Let me stress here, should there be any need to do so, that these questions 
are in no sense directed at the work of someone like my friend Lagache; the 
prudence of his method, the scrupulousness of his procedure, and the open- 
ness of his conclusions are all exemplary of the distance between our praxis 
and psychology. I will base my demonstration on the case of Dora, because of 

21 8 what it stood for in the still new experience of transference, being the first case 
in which Freud recognized that the analyst plays a part. 3 

It is striking that heretofore no one has stressed that the case of Dora is laid 
out by Freud in the form of a series of dialectical reversals. This is not a mere 
contrivance for presenting material whose emergence is left up to the patient, 
as Freud clearly states here. What is involved is a scansion of structures in 
which truth is transmuted for the subject, structures that affect not only her 
comprehension of things, but her very position as a subject, her "objects" being 
a function of that position. This means that the conception of the case history 
is identical to the progress of the subject, that is, to the reality of the treatment. 

Now, this is the first time Freud uses the term "transference" as the con- 
cept of the obstacle owing to which the analysis broke down. This alone gives 
the examination I will conduct here of the dialectical relations that constituted 
the moment of failure its value, at the very least, as a return to the source. I 
will attempt hereby to define in terms of pure dialectic the transference that is said 
to be negative on the part of the subject as the doing [operation] of the analyst 
who interprets it. 

We shall, however, have to review all the phases that led up to this moment, 
and examine it in terms of the problematic anticipations which, in the facts of 
the case, indicate where it might have found a successful outcome. Thus we find: 

A first development, which is exemplary in that it takes us straight to the level 
of the assertion of truth. For Dora, having tested Freud to see if he would 
prove to be as hypocritical as her father, begins her indictment by opening up 
a file full of memories whose rigor contrasts with the lack of biographical pre- 
cision characteristic of neurosis: Frau K and her father have been lovers for 
so many years, and have been hiding it with what are at times ridiculous fic- 
tions; but what takes the cake is that Dora is thus offered up defenseless to 
Herr K's attentions, to which her father turns a blind eye, thus making her the 
object of an odious exchange. 

219 Freud is far too wise to the constancy of the social lie to have been duped 



Presentation on Transference ijg 

by it, even from the mouth of a man he believes owes him the whole story. He 
therefore has no difficulty in removing from the patient's mind any imputa- 
tion of complicity regarding this lie. But at the end of this development he 
finds himself faced with a question, which is classic in the first stages of treat- 
ment: "All of this is factual, being based on reality and not on my own will. 
What's to be done about it?" To which Freud replies with: 

A first dialectical reversal, which in no wise pales next to Hegel's analysis 
of the claim made by the "beautiful soul" who rises up against the world in 
the name of the law of the heart: "Look at your own involvement," he tells 
her, "in the mess [desordre] you complain of" (p. 32). 4 What then appears is: 

A second development of truth, namely, that it was not on the basis of Dora's 
mere silence, but of her complicity and even vigilant protection, that the fic- 
tion had been able to last which allowed the relationship between the two lovers 
to continue. 

What can be seen here is not simply Dora's participation in Herr K's 
courtship of which she is the object; new light is shed on her relationship with 
the other partners of the quadrille by the fact that it is caught up in a subtle 
circulation of precious gifts, which serves to make up for a deficiency in sex- 
ual services. This circulation starts with her father in relation to Frau K, and 
then comes back to the patient through Herr K's consequent availability, in no 
way diminishing the lavish generosity which comes to her directly from the 
first source, by way of parallel gifts — this being the classic manner of mak- 
ing amends by which the bourgeois male manages to combine reparation due 
his lawful wedded wife with his concern for passing on an inheritance (note 
that the presence of the figure of the wife is reduced here to this lateral link in 
the chain of exchanges). 

At the same time Dora's Oedipal relation turns out to be grounded in an 
identification with her father, which is fostered by his sexual impotence and 
is, moreover, experienced by Dora as identical to his supervalent status as rich; 
this is betrayed by the unconscious allusion Dora is allowed by the semantics 
of the word "rich" [fortune] in German: Vermogen. Indeed, this identification 220 

was apparent in all the conversion symptoms presented by Dora, a large num- 
ber of which were removed by this discovery. 

The following question then arises: In light of this, what is the meaning 
of the jealousy Dora suddenly shows toward her father's love affair? The fact 
that this jealousy presents itself in such a supervalent form calls for an expla- 
nation which goes beyond her [apparent] motives (p. 50). 5 Here takes place: 

The second dialectical reversal, which Freud brings about by commenting 
that, far from the alleged object of jealousy providing her true motive, it con- 
ceals an interest in the rival-subject herself, an interest whose nature, since it 



180 Ecrits 

is quite foreign to ordinary discourse, can only be expressed in it in this inverted 
form. This gives rise to: 

A third development of truth. Dora's fascinated attachment to Frau K ("her 
adorable white body"), the confessions Dora received — how far they went 
shall remain unsounded — on the state of Frau K's relations with her husband, 
and the blatant fact of their exchanges of useful techniques as mutual ambas- 
sadors of their desires regarding Dora's father. 

Freud glimpsed the question to which this new development was leading. 

["]If, therefore, it is being dispossessed by this woman that makes you so 
bitter, how come you do not resent her for betraying you further by accusing 
you of intrigue and perversity, imputations which they all now believe when 
they accuse you of lying? What is the motive for this loyalty which makes you 
keep for her the deepest secret of your relations? ["] (in other words, the sex- 
ual initiation, readily discernible in the very accusations made by Frau K). It 
is this very secret which brings us to: 

The third dialectical reversal, the one that would reveal to us the real value 
of the object that Frau K is for Dora. Frau K is not an individual, but a mys- 
tery, the mystery of Dora's own femininity, by which I mean her bodily fem- 
ininity — as it appears undisguised in the second of the two dreams whose study 
221 makes up the second part of the case history, dreams I suggest you reread in 

order to see how greatly their interpretation is simplified by my commentary. 

The boundary post we must go around in order to reverse course one last 
time already appears within reach. It is the most distant image that Dora 
retrieves from her early childhood (didn't all the keys always fall into 
Freud's hands, even in those cases that were broken off like this one?): that 
of Dora, probably still an infant, sucking her left thumb, while with her right 
hand she tugs at the ear of her brother, who is her elder by a year and a half 
(pp. 20 and 47). 6 

What we seem to have here is the imaginary mold in which all the situa- 
tions orchestrated by Dora during her life came to be cast — a perfect illus- 
tration of the theory, yet to appear in Freud 's work, of repetition automatisms. 
We can gauge in it what woman and man signify to her now. 

Woman is the object which cannot be dissociated from a primitive oral 
desire, in which she must nevertheless learn to recognize her own genital nature. 
(It is surprising that Freud fails to see here that Dora's aphonia during Herr 
K's absences [p. 36] 7 expressed the violent call of the oral erotic drive when 
Dora was left alone with Frau K, there being no need for him to assume she 
had seen her father receiving fellatio [p. 44] , 8 when everyone knows that cun- 
nilingus is the artifice most commonly adopted by "rich men" [messieurs for- 
tunes] when their powers begin to fail them.) In order for her to gain access to 



Presentation on Transference 181 

this recognition of her femininity, she would have to assume [assumer] her own 
body, failing which she remains open to the functional fragmentation (to refer 
to the theoretical contribution of the mirror stage) that constitutes conversion 
symptoms. 

Now, her only means for gaining this access was via her earliest imago, which 
shows us that the only path open to her to the object was via the masculine 
partner, with whom, because of their difference in age, she was able to iden- 
tify, in that primordial identification through which the subject recognizes 
herself as/. . . 

Hence Dora identified with Herr K, just as she was in the process of iden- 222 

tifying with Freud himself (the fact that it was upon waking from her "trans- 
ference" dream that Dora noticed the smell of smoke associated with the two 
men is not indicative, as Freud says [p. 67], 9 of some more deeply repressed 
identification, but rather of the fact that this hallucination corresponded to the 
twilight stage of the return to the ego). And all her dealings with the two men 
manifest the aggressiveness in which we see the dimension characteristic of 
narcissistic alienation. 

Thus it is true, as Freud thinks, that the return to a passionate complaint 
about the father represents a regression when compared with the relations that 
had begun to develop with Herr K. 

But this homage, whose beneficial value for Dora was glimpsed by Freud, 
could be received by her as a manifestation of desire only if she could accept 
herself as an object of desire — that is, only once she had exhausted the mean- 
ing of what she was looking for in Frau K. 

As is true for all women, and for reasons that are at the very crux of the 
most elementary social exchanges (the very exchanges Dora names as the 
grounds for her revolt), the problem of her condition is fundamentally that of 
accepting herself as a man's object of desire, and this is the mystery that moti- 
vates Dora's idolization of Frau K. In her long meditation before the Madonna 
and in her recourse to the role of distant worshipper, this mystery drives Dora 
toward the solution Christianity has offered for this subjective impasse by mak- 
ing woman the object of a divine desire or a transcendent object of desire, 
which amounts to the same thing. 

If, therefore, in a third dialectical reversal, Freud had directed Dora 
towards a recognition of what Frau K was for her, by getting her to confess 
the deepest secrets of their relationship, wouldn't that have contributed to his 
prestige (I am merely touching on the question of the meaning of positive trans- 
ference here), opening up the path to her recognition of the virile object? This 
is not my opinion, but rather Freud's (p. 107). 10 

But the fact that his failure to do so was fatal to the treatment is attributed 



182 Ecrits 

by Freud to the action of the transference (pp. 103-7), 1 1 to his error that makes 
him put off the interpretation thereof (p. 106), 12 when, as he was able to ascer- 

223 tain after the fact, he had only two hours left to sidestep its effects (p. 106). 13 

But each time he proffers this explanation — whose subsequent develop- 
ment in analytic doctrine is well known — a footnote provides recourse to 
another explanation: his inadequate appreciation of the homosexual tie bind- 
ing Dora to Frau K. 

What does this mean if not that the second reason only struck him truly as 
the most crucial in 1923, whereas the first bore fruit in his thinking beginning 
in 1905, the year the Dora case study was published? 

Which side should we choose? Surely that of believing both accounts and 
attempting to grasp what can be deduced from their synthesis. 

What we then find is this: Freud admits that for a long time he was unable 
to face this homosexual tendency (which he nonetheless tells us is so constant 
in hysterics that its subjective role cannot be overestimated) without falling 
into a state of distress (p. 107, note) 14 that rendered him incapable of dealing 
with it satisfactorily. 

I would say that this has to be ascribed to a bias, the very same bias that fal- 
sifies the conception of the Oedipus complex right from the outset, making 
him consider the predominance of the paternal figure to be natural, rather 
than normative — the same bias that is expressed simply in the well-known 
refrain, "Thread is to needle as girl is to boy." 

Freud has felt kindly toward Herr K for a long time, since it was Herr K 
who brought Dora's father to Freud (p. 18), 15 and this comes out in numer- 
ous comments he makes (p. 27, note). 16 After the treatment founders, Freud 
persists in dreaming of a "victory of love" (p. 99). 17 

Freud admits to his personal investment in Dora, interesting him as she does, 
at many points in the account. The truth of the matter is that she brings the 
whole case alive in a way which, vaulting the theoretical digressions, elevates 
this text, among the psychopathological monographs that constitute a genre in 
our literature, to the tone of a Princesse de Cleves bound by an infernal gag. 

224 It is because he put himself rather too much in Herr K's shoes that Freud 
did not succeed in moving the Infernal Regions this time around. 

Due to his countertransference, Freud harps too often on the love Herr K 
supposedly inspired in Dora, and it is odd to see how he always interprets 
Dora's very varied retorts as though they were confessions. The session when 
he thinks he has reduced her to "no longer contradicting him" (p. 93) 18 and at 
the end of which he believes he can express his satisfaction to her, Dora in fact 
concludes on a very different note. "Why, has anything so very remarkable 



Presentation on Transference 183 

come out?" she says, and it is at the beginning of the next session that she 
[announces that she is going to] take leave of him. 

What thus happened during the scene of the lakeside declaration, the catas- 
trophe which drove Dora to illness, leading everyone to recognize her as ill — 
this, ironically, being their response to her refusal to continue to serve as a 
prop for their common infirmity (not all the "gains" of a neurosis work solely 
to the advantage of the neurotic)? 

As in any valid interpretation, we need but stick to the text in order to under- 
stand it. Herr K could only get in a few words, decisive though they were: 
"My wife is nothing to me." His reward for this feat was instantaneous — a 
hard slap (whose burning after-effects Dora felt long after the treatment had 
ended in the form of a transitory neuralgia) quipped back to the blunderer, 
"If she is nothing to you, then what are you to me?" 

What then would he be to her, this puppet who had nonetheless just bro- 
ken the spell she had been living under for years? 

The latent pregnancy fantasy that followed this scene does not invalidate 
my interpretation, since it is well known that it occurs in hysterics precisely 
as a function of their identification with men. 

It is through the very same trap door that Freud disappears, with a still more 
insidious sliding. Dora leaves with a Mona Lisa smile and even when she reap- 
pears, Freud is not so naive as to believe she intends to resume her analysis. 

By that time, she has gotten everyone to recognize the truth which, as truth- 
ful as it may be, she nevertheless knows does not constitute the final truth; and 
she has managed through the mere mana of her presence to precipitate the 225 

unfortunate Herr K under the wheels of a carriage. The subsidence of her symp- 
toms, which had been brought about during the second phase of the treatment, 
did last, nevertheless. Thus the arrest of the dialectical process resulted in an 
apparent retreat, but the positions recaptured could only be held by an affir- 
mation of the ego, which can be considered progress. 

What then is this transference whose work, Freud states somewhere, goes 
on invisibly behind the progress of the treatment and whose effects, further- 
more, are "not susceptible of definite proof " (p. 67)? 19 Can it not be consid- 
ered here to be an entity altogether related to countertransference, defined as 
the sum total of the analyst's biases, passions, and difficulties, or even of his 
inadequate information, at any given moment in the dialectical process? 
Doesn't Freud himself tell us (p. 105) 20 that Dora might have transferred the 
paternal figure onto him, had he been foolish enough to believe the version 
of things her father had presented to him? 

In other words, transference is nothing real in the subject if not the appear- 



1 84 Ecrits 

ance, at a moment of stagnation in the analytic dialectic, of the permanent 
modes according to which she constitutes her objects. 

What then does it mean to interpret transference? Nothing but to fill the 
emptiness of this standstill with a lure. But even though it is deceptive, this 
lure serves a purpose by setting the whole process in motion anew. 

The denial [denegation] with which Dora would have greeted any sugges- 
tion by Freud that she was imputing to him the same intentions as those that 
Herr K had displayed, would not in any way have changed the scope of the 
suggestion's effects. The very opposition to which it would have given rise 
would probably, despite Freud, have set Dora off in the right direction: the 
one that would have led her to the object of her real interest. 

And to have set himself up personally as a substitute for Herr K would have 
spared Freud from overemphasizing the value of Herr K's marriage proposals. 

Thus transference does not fall under any mysterious property of affec- 
tivity and, even when it reveals itself in an emotional [e'moi] guise, this guise 
has a meaning only as a function of the dialectical moment at which it occurs. 

But this moment is of no great significance since it normally signals an error 
226 on the analyst's part, if only that of wanting what is good for the patient to 

too great an extent, a danger Freud warned against on many occasions. 

Thus analytic neutrality derives its authentic meaning from the position of 
the pure dialectician who, knowing that all that is real is rational (and vice 
versa), knows that all that exists, including the evil against which he struggles, 
is and shall always be equivalent to the level of its particularity, and that the 
subject only progresses through the integration he arrives at of his position 
into the universal: technically speaking, through the projection of his past into 
a discourse in the process of becoming. 

The case of Dora is especially relevant for demonstrating this in that, since 
it involves an hysteric, the screen of the ego is transparent enough for there 
never to be, as Freud said, a lower threshold between the unconscious and 
the conscious, or better, between analytic discourse and the key [mot] to the 
symptom. 

I believe, however, that transference always has the same meaning of indi- 
cating the moments where the analyst goes astray and takes anew his bearings, 
and the same value of reminding us of our role: that of a positive nonaction 
aiming at the ortho-dramatization of the patient's subjectivity. 

Notes 

1 . In short, this consists of the psychologi- that of the generally felt need to resolve a 
cal effect produced by an unfinished task when musical phrase, 
it leaves a gestalt in abeyance — for instance, 2. PUF, 8; SE VII, 1 6 [Lacan explains his ref- 



Presentation on Transference 



i85 



erence format in the next footnote]. 

3. So that the reader can verify the verba- 
tim character of my commentary, wherever I 
refer to Freud 's case study I provide references 
to the Denoel edition [Cinq psychanafyses, 
translated by Marie Bonaparte and Rudolf 
Loewenstein (Paris: Denoel & Steele, 1935)] 
in the text and to the 1954 Presses Universi- 
taires de France edition [Cinq psychanalyses, 
revised by Anne Berman (Paris: PUF, 1 954)] 
in the footnotes. [The translator has added the 
corresponding references to volume VII of the 
Standard Edition.] 

4. PUF, 23-24; SE VII, 34-36. 

5. PUF, 39; SE VII, 54. 

6. PUF, 12 and 37; SE VII, 21 and 51. 

7. PUF, 27; SE VII, 39^0. 



8. PUF, 33; SE VII, 47^8. 

9. PUF, 54; SE VII, 73-74. 

10. PUF, 90 [footnote 1]; SE VII, 120, foot- 
note 1. 

11. PUF, 86-90; SE VII, 1 15-20. 

12. PUF, 89; SE VII, 118-19. 

13. PUF, 89; SE VII, 118-19. 

14. PUF, 90 [footnote 1]; SE VII, 120, foot- 
note 1. 

15. PUF, \\;SEVll, 19. 

16. PUF, 19 [footnote 1]; SE VII, 29, foot- 
note 3. 

17. PUF, 82; SE VII, 109-10. 

18. PUF, 77-78; SE VII, 103-5. 

19. PUF, 54; SE VII, 74. 

20. PUF, 88;^ VII, 118-19. 



On the Subject Who Is Finally in Question 229 



Including a whiff of enthusiasm in a written text utterly ensures that it will 
become dated, in the regrettable sense of the term. Let us regret this as 
regards my Rome discourse ["Function and Field of Speech and Language"], 
which immediately became dated, the circumstances I mentioned in it lead- 
ing to nothing that attenuated the problem. 

In publishing it, I assumed it would be of interest to read, misunder- 
standing and all. 

Even in wishing to be cautious, I will not redouble its original address 
(to the Congress) with an "address to the reader," when the constant fea- 
ture — which I mentioned at the outset — of my address to psychoanalysts 
culminated here in being adapted to a group that called upon me for help. 

Instead, my parry [parade] will be to redouble its interest, assuming 
that unveiling what commands it, whether the subject is conscious of this 
or not, does not divide that interest. 

I wish to speak of the subject called into question by this discourse, 
when putting him back into his place here — from the point where I, for 
my part, have not failed him — is simply to honor the place where he asked 
us to meet him. 

I will no longer do anything for the reader henceforth — apart from 
pointing out, a little further on, the aim of my Seminar — but trust in his 
tete-a-tete with texts that are certainly no easier, but that are intrinsically 
situable. 



igo Ecrits 

M eta, the post that marks the turning point to be approached as closely 
as possible in a race, is the metaphor I will give him as a viaticum in remind- 
ing him of the new [inedit] discourse I have been pronouncing every 
Wednesday of the academic year since that time, whose circulation else- 
where he may possibly attend to (if he does not attend in person). 

Regarding the subject who is called into question, training analysis will 
be my point of departure. As we know, this is the name for a psychoanalysis 
230 that one proposes to undertake for the purpose of training — especially as 

an element in qualifying to practice psychoanalysis. 

When a psychoanalysis is specified by such a request [demande] [made 
by a potential analysand to an analyst], the supposedly ordinary parame- 
ters of analysis are considered to be modified, and the analyst thinks that 
he must deal with that. 

Accepting to conduct an analysis under such conditions brings with it 
a responsibility. It is curious to note how that responsibility is displaced 
onto the guarantees that one derives from it. 

For the unexpected baptism received by that which proposes to under- 
take training, in the form of a "personal psychoanalysis" 1 (as if there were 
any other form of analysis) — assuming that in it things are brought back 
to the uninviting point desired — does not seem to me to in any way con- 
cern what the proposal leads to in the subject whom we welcome in this 
way, in sum, neglecting that "personal analysis." 

Perhaps we will see more clearly if we purify the said subject of his pre- 
occupations, which can be summarized with the term "propaganda": the 
ranks of analysts which must be swelled, the faith which must be propa- 
gated, and the standard which must be protected. 

Let us extract from this the subject who is implied by the request 
[demande] in which he presents himself. The reader will take a step for- 
ward if he notes here that the unconscious gives him a poor basis upon 
which to reduce this subject to what the realm of precision instrumenta- 
tion designates as "subjective error" — assuming he is prepared to add that 
psychoanalysis does not have the privilege of a more consistent subject, 
but must rather allow us to shed light on him in the avenues of other dis- 
ciplines as well. 

This ambitious approach would unduly distract us from acknowledg- 
ing what we in fact argue on the basis of: namely, the subject whom we 
qualify (and significantly so) as a patient, which is not the subject as strictly 
implied by his request [demande], but rather the product that we would 
like to see determined by it. 



On the Subject Who Is Finally in Question 191 

In other words, we obscure the picture in the very process of painting 
it. In the name of this patient, our listening too will be patient. It is for his 
own good that techniques are elaborated so we will know how to meas- 
ure the aid we provide. The point is to make the psychoanalyst capable of 
this patience and measurement. But, after all, the uncertainty that remains 
regarding the very end of analysis has the effect of leaving between the 
patient and the subject that we append to him only the difference, prom- 
ised to the second, of repeating the experience [with patients of his own], 
it even being legitimated that their theoretical equivalence is fully main- 231 

tained in the countertransference. How then could training analysis con- 
stitute a problem? 

I have no negative intention in preparing this balance sheet. I am simply 
pointing out the way things are — a situation in which we find many oppor- 
tune remarks, a permanent calling into question of technique, and often 
odd glows in the enthusiasm of avowing — in short, a richness which can 
certainly be understood as the fruit of the relativism that is characteristic 
of our discipline and that provides it with its guarantee. 

Even the objection that stems from the total absence of discussion of 
the end of training analysis can go unheeded given the unquestionable 
nature of the usual routine. 

Only the never broached question of the threshold that must be 
reached in order for a psychoanalyst to be promoted to the rank of "train- 
ing analyst" (where the criterion of seniority is derisory) reminds us that 
it is the subject in question in training analysis who poses a problem and 
who remains an intact subject there. 

Shouldn't we, rather, conceptualize training analysis as the perfect form 
which sheds light on analysis itself, since it provides a restriction to it? 

Such is the reversal that never occurred to anyone before I mentioned 
it. It seems to force itself upon us, nevertheless. For while psychoanalysis 
has a specific field, the concern with therapeutic results justifies short-cir- 
cuits and even tempering modifications within it; but if there is one case 
in which all such reductions are prohibited, it must be training analysis. 

Should someone claim that I am maintaining that the training of 
analysts is what psychoanalysis is most justified in doing, he would be 
barking up the wrong tree. For such insolence, were it such, would not 
implicate psychoanalysts. Rather, it would point to a certain gap in civi- 
lization that must be filled, but which is not yet clearly enough discerned 
for anyone to boast that he has taken it upon himself to do so. 

Only a theory that is capable of grounding psychoanalysis in a way 
that preserves its relationship to science can pave the way for this. 



i$)2 Ecrits 

It is obvious that psychoanalysis was born from science. It is incon- 
ceivable that it could have arisen from another field. 

It is no accident but rather a consequence that in those circles where 
psychoanalysis distinguishes itself by remaining Freudian, it is considered 
self-evident that psychoanalysis has no other support than that of science 
and that there is no possible transition to psychoanalysis from the realm 
232 of the esoteric, by which practices that seem to be similar to psychoanalysis 

are structured. 

How then can we account for the obvious misunderstandings that 
abound in the conceptualizations in vogue in established circles? Regard- 
less of how their creations are slapped together — from the supposed feel- 
ings of unity, where, at the height of the treatment the bliss that we are led 
to believe inaugurates libidinal development is found anew, to the much- 
ballyhooed miracles obtained by reaching genital maturity, with its sub- 
lime ability to join in all regressions — we can recognize in them the mirage 
which is not even debated: the completeness of the subject. People even 
formally take such completeness as a goal which should in theory be reach- 
able, even if in practice infirmity — attributable to the technique or to the 
aftermath of the patient's history — requires that it remain an overly dis- 
tant ideal. 

Such is the crux of the theoretical extravagance, in the strict sense of the 
term, into which we see that anyone can fall, from the most authentic explorer 
of the analyst's therapeutic responsibility to the most rigorous examiner of 
analytic concepts. This can be confirmed regarding the paragon I mentioned 
first, Ferenczi, in his biological delusion about amphimixis-, and in the sec- 
ond case, where I was thinking of Jones, it can be gauged in the latter's phe- 
nomenologicalya«*/?cw, the aphanisis of desire, to which he was led by his 
need to ensure the equal rights of the sexes with respect to castration — that 
scandalous fact that can only be accepted by giving up on [the idea of] the 
subject's completeness. 

Next to these illustrious examples, we are less surprised by the profu- 
sion of economic recenterings to which each theorist gives himself over, 
extrapolating from the treatment to development, and even to human his- 
tory — for example, transferring the fantasy of castration back onto the 
anal phase, or basing everything on a universal oral neurosis . . . without 
any assignable limit to his . . . etc. At best it can be taken as evidence of 
what I will call the naivete of personal perversion, the thing being under- 
stood to give way to some illumination. 

I am not referring here to the inanity of the term "personal analysis," 
about which one can say that all too often what it designates is as inane as 



On the Subject Who Is Finally in Question 193 

the term itself, being sanctioned only by highly practical rearrangements. 
Whence rearises the question of the benefit this curious fabrication offers. 

The practitioner who is not inveterate is probably not insensitive to a 233 

reality that has been rendered more nostalgic by rising up to meet him, 
and he responds in this case to the essential relationship between the veil 
and his experience with myth-like sketches. 

A fact prevents us from qualifying these sketches as myths, for what 
we see in psychoanalysis are not authentic myths (by which I simply mean 
those that are found in the field), which never fail to leave visible the sub- 
ject's decompletion, but folklore-like fragments of these myths, and pre- 
cisely those that have been used by propaganda religions in their themes 
of salvation. This fact will be contested by those whose truth is hidden by 
these themes, who are all too happy to find in them corroboration for their 
truth on the basis of what they call "her meneu tics." 

(A healthy reform of spelling would allow us to give their exploita- 
tion of this term the import of a famillionaire practice: that of the faux- 
filosopher, for example, or of fuzzyosophy, without adding any more dots 
or i's.) 

Their radical vice can be seen in [their approach to] the transmission 
of knowledge. At best this transmission could be defended by comparing 
psychoanalysis to those trades in which, for centuries, transmission 
occurred only in a veiled manner, maintained by the institution of appren- 
ticeship and guild [compagnonnage]. A master's in the art and different ranks 
protect therein the secret of a substantial knowledge. (It is, nevertheless, 
the liberal arts, which do not practice the arcane, that I will refer to later 
in evoking the youth of psychoanalysis.) 

The comparison does not hold up, no matter how slight it may be. This 
is so clear that one might say that reality itself is designed in such a way 
as to reject this comparison, since what it requires is an entirely different 
position of the subject. 

The theory — or rather the hackneyed views that go by this name, the 
formulations of which are so variable that it sometimes seems that the only 
thing they have in common is their insipid character — is merely the fill- 
ing of a locus in which a deficiency can be demonstrated without our even 
knowing how to formulate it. 

I propose an algebra that tries to correspond, in the place thus defined, 
to what the sort of logic that is known as symbolic does when it establishes 
the rights of mathematical practice. 

I realize full well how much prudence and care are required to do so. 

All I can say here is that it is important to preserve the availability of 



194 Ecrits 

the experience acquired by the subject — in the characteristic structure of 

234 displacement and splitting in which that experience had to be constituted — 
referring the reader to my actual discussions of this topic. 

What I must stress here is that I claim to pave the way for the scientific 
position of psychoanalysis by analyzing in what way it is already implied 
at the very heart of the psychoanalytic discovery. 

The reform of the subject that is inaugural in psychoanalysis must be 
related to the reform that occurs at the core of science, the latter involv- 
ing a certain reprieve from ambiguous questions that one might call ques- 
tions of truth. 

It is difficult not to see that, even before the advent of psychoanalysis, 
a dimension that might be called that of the symptom was introduced, 
which was articulated on the basis of the fact that it represents the return 
of truth as such into the gap of a certain knowledge. 

I am not referring to the classical problem of error, but rather to a con- 
crete manifestation that must be appreciated "clinically," in which we find 
not a failure of representation but a truth of another reference than the one, 
whether representation or not, whose fine order it manages to disturb . . . 

In this sense, one can say that this dimension is highly differentiated in 
Marx's critique, even if it is not made explicit there. And one can say that 
a part of the reversal of Hegel that he carries out is constituted by the return 
(which is a materialist return, precisely insofar as it gives it figure and 
body) of the question of truth. The latter actually forces itself upon us, I 
would go so far as to say, not by taking up the thread of the ruse of rea- 
son, a subtle form with which Hegel sends it packing, but by upsetting 
these ruses (read Marx's political writings) which are merely dressed up 
with reason . . . 

I am aware of the precision with which it is fitting to accompany this 
theme of truth and its detour [biais] in knowledge — which is nevertheless 
the crux, it seems to me, of philosophy as such. 

I am only mentioning it in order to point out the leap made by Freud 
therein. 

Freud sets himself apart from the rest by clearly linking the status of 
the symptom to the status of his own operation, for the Freudian opera- 
tion is the symptom's proper operation, in the two senses of the term. 

Unlike a sign — or smoke which is never found in the absence of fire, 
a fire that smoke indicates with the possible call to put it out — a symptom 
can only be interpreted in the signifying order. A signifier has meaning 

235 only through its relation to another signifier. The truth of symptoms 



On the Subject Who Is Finally in Question i<)5 

resides in this articulation. Symptoms remained somewhat vague when 
they were understood as representing some irruption of truth. In fact they 
are truth, being made of the same wood from which truth is made, if we 
posit materialistically that truth is what is instated on the basis of the sig- 
nifying chain. 

I would like to distinguish myself from the level of joking around at 
which certain theoretical debates ordinarily occur. 

I will do so by asking how we are supposed to take what smoke, since 
that is the classical paradigm, proposes to our gaze when it billows out of 
crematorium furnaces. 

I do not doubt that people will agree that we can take it only in terms 
of its signifying value; and that even if we were to refuse to be dumbfounded 
by the criterion here, this smoke would remain for the materialist reduc- 
tion an element that is less metaphorical than all the smoke that could be 
stirred up in debating whether what it represents should be broached from 
a biological or a social standpoint. 

By taking one's bearings from the joint between the consequences of 
language and the desire for knowledge — a joint that the subject is — per- 
haps the paths will become more passable regarding what has always been 
known about the distance that separates the subject from his existence as 
a sexed being, not to mention as a living being. 

And, indeed, the construction that I provide of the subject in follow- 
ing the thread of Freudian experience removes none of the personal 
poignancy from the several displacements and splits he may have to 
undergo in the course of his training analysis. 

If his training analysis registers the resistances he has overcome, it is 
insofar as they fill the space of defense in which the subject is organized; 
it is only on the basis of certain structural reference points that one can 
pinpoint the trajectory he is following, in order to outline its exhaustion. 

Similarly, a certain order of construction can be required regarding what 
must be attained by way of what fundamentally screens the real in the 
unconscious fantasy. 

All of these verification values will not stop castration — which is the 
key to the subject's radical dodge \biais\ by which the symptom comes 
into being — from remaining, even in a training analysis, the enigma that 
the subject resolves only by avoiding it. 

At least if some order — being established in what he has experi- 
enced — later gave him responsibility for his statements, he would not try 
to reduce to the anal phase that aspect of castration that he grasped in the 
[fundamental] fantasy. 



196 Ecrits 

In other words, analytic experience would be protected from sanc- 
236 tioning theoretical orientations that are likely to lead to the derailing of 

its transmission. 

The status of training analysis and of the teaching of psychoanalysis 
must be understood anew to be identical in their scientific openness. 

The latter involves, like any other teaching, minimal conditions: a 
defined relationship to the instrument as an instrument and a certain idea 
of the question raised by the material. The fact that the two converge here 
in a question, which is not thereby simplified, nevertheless, will perhaps 
close this other question with which psychoanalysis redoubles the first, in 
the form of a question posed to science, by constituting a science by itself 
which is raised to the second power [au second degre]. 

Should the reader be surprised that I am raising this question so late in 
the game — and with the same temperament which is such that it required 
two of the most improbable echoes of my teaching to receive from two col- 
lege students in the United States the careful (and successful) translation 
that two of my articles (including "Function and Field") deserved — he 
should realize that my top priority was that there first be psychoanalysts. 

At least I can now be happy that as long as there is still some trace of 
what I have instituted, there will be some psychoanalyst \du psychanafyste] 
who responds to certain subjective emergencies, should qualifying them 
with the definite article be saying too much, or else still desiring too much. 

1966 



Note 

1 . A means by which people avoid having to decide at first whether a psychoanaly- 
sis will or will not be a training analysis. 



The Function and Field of Speech 237 

and Language in Psychoanalysis 

Paper delivered at the Rome Congress held at the Institute of 
Psychology at the University of Rome on September 26 and 27, 1953 



Preface 

In particular, it should not be forgotten that the division into embryology, 
anatomy, physiology, psychology, sociology, and clinical work does not exist 
in nature and that there is only one discipline: a neurobiology to which obser- 
vation obliges us to add the epithet human when it concerns us. 
— Quotation chosen as an inscription for a psychoanalytic institute in 1952 

The talk included here warrants an introduction that provides some context, 
since it was marked by its context. 

The theme of this talk was proposed to me and my contribution was 
intended to constitute the customary theoretical paper given at the annual meet- 
ing that the association representing psychoanalysis in France at that time had 
held for eighteen years, a venerable tradition known as the "Congress of 
French-Speaking Psychoanalysts," though for the past two years it had been 
extended to Romance-language-speaking psychoanalysts (Holland being 
included out of linguistic tolerance). The Congress was to take place in Rome 
in September of 1953. 

In the meantime, serious disagreements led to a secession within the French 
group. These disagreements came out on the occasion of the founding of a 
"psychoanalytic institute." The team that succeeded in imposing its statutes 
and program on the new institute was then heard to proclaim that it would 
prevent the person who, along with others, had tried to introduce a different 



198 Ecrits 

conception of analysis from speaking in Rome, and it employed every means 
in its power to do so. 

238 Yet it did not seem to those who thus founded the new Societe Franchise 
de Psychanalyse that they had to deprive the majority of the students, who 
had rallied to their teaching, of the forthcoming event, or even to hold it else- 
where than in the eminent place in which it had been planned to be held. 

The generous fellow feeling that had been shown them by the Italian group 
meant that they could hardly be regarded as unwelcome guests in the Uni- 
versal City. 

For my part, I considered myself assisted — however unequal I might prove 
to be to the task of speaking about speech — by a certain complicity inscribed 
in the place itself. 

Indeed, I recalled that, well before the glory of the world's loftiest throne 
had been established, Aulus Gellius, in his Noctes A tticae, attributed to the place 
called Mons Vaticanus the etymology vagire, which designates the first stam- 
merings of speech. 

If, then, my talk was to be nothing more than a newborn's cry, at least it 
would seize the auspicious moment to revamp the foundations our discipline 
derives from language. 

Moreover, this revamping derived too much meaning from history for me 
not to break with the traditional style — that places a "paper" somewhere 
between a compilation and a synthesis — in order to adopt an ironic style suit- 
able to a radical questioning of the foundations of our discipline. 

Since my audience was to be the students who expected me to speak, it was 
above all with them in mind that I composed this talk, and for their sake that 
I dispensed with the rules, observed by our high priests, requiring one to mime 
rigor with meticulousness and confuse rule with certainty. 

Indeed, in the conflict that led to the present outcome, people had shown 
such an exorbitant degree of misrecognition regarding the students' auton- 
omy as subjects that the first requirement was to counteract the constant tone 
that had permitted this excess. 

The fact is that a vice came to light that went well beyond the local cir- 
cumstances that led to the conflict. The very fact that one could claim to reg- 
ulate the training of psychoanalysts in so authoritarian a fashion raised the 
question whether the established modes of such training did not paradoxically 
result in perpetual minimization. 

239 The initiatory and highly organized forms which Freud considered to be a 
guarantee of his doctrine 's transmission are certainly justified by the situation 
of a discipline that can only perpetuate itself by remaining at the level of a 
complete experience. 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 199 

But haven't these forms led to a disappointing formalism that discourages 
initiative by penalizing risk, and turns the reign of the opinion of the learned 
into a principle of docile prudence in which the authenticity of research is 
blunted even before it finally dries up? 

The extreme complexity of the notions brought into play in our field is 
such that in no other area does a mind run a greater risk, in laying bare its 
judgment, of discovering its true measure. 

But this ought to result in making it our first, if not only, concern to eman- 
cipate theses by elucidating principles. 

The severe selection that is, indeed, required cannot be left to the endless 
postponements of a fastidious cooptation, but should be based on the fecun- 
dity of concrete production and the dialectical testing of contradictory claims. 

This does not imply that I particularly value divergence. On the contrary, I 
was surprised to hear, at the London International Congress — where, because 
we had failed to follow the prescribed forms, we had come as appellants — a per- 
sonality well disposed toward us deplore the fact that we could not justify our 
secession on the grounds of some doctrinal disagreement. Does this mean that 
an association that is supposed to be international has some other goal than that 
of maintaining the principle of the collective nature of our experience? 

It is probably no big secret that it has been eons since this was the case, and 
it was without creating the slightest scandal that, to the impenetrable Mr. Zil- 
boorg — who, making ours a special case, insisted that no secession should be 
accepted unless it is based on a scientific dispute — the penetrating Mr. Walder 
could reply that, if we were to challenge the principles in which each of us 
believes his experience is grounded, our walls would very quickly dissolve 
into the confusion of Babel. 

To my way of thinking, if I innovate, I prefer not to make a virtue of it. 

In a discipline that owes its scientific value solely to the theoretical con- 
cepts Freud hammered out as his experience progressed — concepts which, 
because they continue to be poorly examined and nevertheless retain the ambi- 
guity of everyday language, benefit from the latter 's resonances while incur- 240 
ring misunderstanding — it would seem to me to be premature to break with 
the traditional terminology. 

But it seems to me that these terms can only be made clearer if we estab- 
lish their equivalence to the current language of anthropology, or even to the 
latest problems in philosophy, fields where psychoanalysis often need but take 
back its own property. 

In any case, I consider it to be an urgent task to isolate, in concepts that are 
being deadened by routine use, the meaning they recover when we reexam- 
ine their history and reflect on their subjective foundations. 



200 Ecrits 

That, no doubt, is the teacher's function — the function on which all the 
others depend — and the one in which the value of experience figures best. 

If this function is neglected, the meaning of an action whose effects derive 
solely from meaning is obliterated, and the rules of analytic technique, being 
reduced to mere recipes, rob analytic experience of any status as knowledge 
[connaissance] and even of any criterion of reality. 

For no one is less demanding than a psychoanalyst when it comes to what 
gives his actions their status, which he himself is not far from regarding as 
magical because he doesn't know where to situate them in a conception of his 
field that he hardly dreams of reconciling with his practice. 

The epigraph with which I have adorned this preface is a rather fine exam- 
ple of this. 

Doesn't his conception of his field correspond to a conception of analytic 
training that is like that of a driving school which, not content to claim the 
unique privilege of issuing drivers' licenses, also imagines that it is in a posi- 
tion to supervise car construction? 

Whatever this comparison may be worth, it is just as valid as those which 
are bandied about in our most serious conventicles and which, because they 
originated in our discourse to idiots, do not even have the savor of inside jokes, 
but seem to gain currency nevertheless due to their pompous ineptitude. 

They begin with the well-known comparison between the candidate who 
allows himself to be prematurely dragged into practicing analysis and the sur- 
geon who operates without sterilizing his instruments, and they go on to the 
comparison that brings tears to one 's eyes for those unfortunate students who 
241 are torn by their masters' conflicts just like children torn by their parents' 

divorce. 

This late-born comparison seems to me to be inspired by the respect due 
to those who have, in effect, been subjected to what, toning down my thought, 
I will call a pressure to teach, which has put them sorely to the test; but on 
hearing the quavering tones of the masters, one may also wonder whether the 
limits of childishness have not, without warning, been stretched to the point 
of foolishness. 

Yet the truths contained in these cliches are worthy of more serious exam- 
ination. 

As a method based on truth and demystification of subjective camouflage, 
does psychoanalysis display an incommensurate ambition to apply its princi- 
ples to its own corporation — that is, to psychoanalysts' conception of their 
role in relation to the patient, their place in intellectual society, their relations 
with their peers, and their educational mission? 

Perhaps, by reopening a few windows to the broad daylight of Freud's 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 201 

thought, my paper will allay the anguish some people feel when a symbolic 
action becomes lost in its own opacity. 

Whatever the case may be, in referring to the context of my talk, I am not 
trying to blame its all too obvious shortcomings on the haste with which it was 
written, since both its meaning and its form derive from that same haste. 

Moreover, in an exemplary sophism involving inter subjective time, I have 
shown the function of haste in logical precipitation, where truth finds its unsur- 
passable condition. 1 

Nothing created appears without urgency; nothing in urgency fails to sur- 
pass itself in speech. 

Nor is there anything that does not become contingent here when the time 
comes when a man can identify in a single reason the side he takes and the dis- 
order he denounces, in order to understand their coherence in reality [reel] 
and anticipate by his certainty the action that weighs them against each other. 

Introduction 242 

We shall determine this while we are still at the aphelion of our matter, for, 
when we arrive at the perihelion, the heat is liable to make us forget it. 
— Lichtenberg 

"Flesh composed of suns. How can such be?" exclaim the simple ones. 
— R. Browning, Parleying with Certain People 

Such is the fright that seizes man when he discovers the true face of his power 
that he turns away from it in the very act — which is his act — of laying it 
bare. This is true in psychoanalysis. Freud 's Promethean discovery was such 
an act, as his work attests; but that act is no less present in each psychoana- 
lytic experience humbly conducted by any one of the workers trained in his 
school. 

One can trace over the years a growing aversion regarding the functions 
of speech and the field of language. It is responsible for the "changes in aim 
and technique" that are acknowledged within the psychoanalytic movement, 
and whose relation to the general decline in therapeutic effectiveness is nev- 
ertheless ambiguous. Indeed, the emphasis on the object's resistance in cur- 
rent psychoanalytic theory and technique must itself be subjected to the 
dialectic of analysis, which can but recognize in this emphasis the attempt to 
provide the subject with an alibi. 

Let me try to outline the topography of this movement. If we examine the 
literature that we call our "scientific activity," the current problems of psy- 
choanalysis clearly fall into three categories: 



202 Ecrits 

(A) The function of the imaginary, as I shall call it, or, to put it more directly, 
of fantasies in the technique of psychoanalytic experience and in the con- 
stitution of the object at the different stages of psychical development. 
The impetus in this area has come from the analysis of children and from 
the favorable field offered to researchers' efforts and temptations by the 
preverbal structurations approach. This is also where its culmination is 
now inducing a return by raising the question of what symbolic sanction 
is to be attributed to fantasies in their interpretation. 
243 (B) The concept of libidinal object relations which, by renewing the idea of 

treatment progress, is quietly altering the way treatment is conducted. The 
new perspective began here with the extension of psychoanalytic method 
to the psychoses and with the momentary receptiveness of psychoana- 
lytic technique to data based on a different principle. Psychoanalysis leads 
here to an existential phenomenology — indeed, to an activism motivated 
by charity. Here, too, a clear-cut reaction is working in favor of a return 
to symbolization as the crux of technique. 

(C) The importance of countertransference and, correlatively, of analytic 
training. Here the emphasis has resulted from the difficulties related to 
the termination of analytic treatment that intersect the difficulties related 
to the moment at which training analysis ends with the candidate begin- 
ning to practice. The same oscillation can be observed here: On the one 
hand, the analyst's being is said, not without audacity, to be a non-negli- 
gible factor in the effects of an analysis and even a factor whose conduct 
should be brought out into the open at the end of the game; on the other 
hand, it is put forward no less energetically that a solution can come only 
from an ever deeper exploration of the unconscious mainspring. 

Apart from the pioneering activity these three problems manifest on three 
different fronts, they have one thing in common with the vitality of the psy- 
choanalytic experience that sustains them. It is the temptation that presents 
itself to the analyst to abandon the foundation of speech, and this precisely in 
areas where its use, verging on the ineffable, would seem to require examina- 
tion more than ever: namely, the child's education by its mother, Samaritan- 
type aid, and dialectical mastery. The danger becomes great indeed if the 
analyst also abandons his own language, preferring established languages about 
whose compensations for ignorance he knows very little. 

In truth, we would like to know more about the effects of symbolization in 
the child, and the officiating mothers in psychoanalysis — even those who give 
our top committees a matriarchal air — are not exempt from the confusion of 
tongues by which Ferenczi designated the law of the child /adult relationship. 2 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 203 

Our wise men's ideas about the perfect object-relation are based on a rather 
uncertain conception and, when exposed, they reveal a mediocrity that hardly 244 

does credit to the profession. 

There can be no doubt that these effects — where the psychoanalyst resem- 
bles the type of modern hero represented by ridiculous feats in situations of 
confusion — could be corrected by an appropriate return to the study of the 
functions of speech, a field the analyst ought by now to have mastered. 

But it seems that this central field of our domain has been left fallow since 
Freud. Note how he himself refrained from venturing too far into its periphery: 
He discovered children's libidinal stages by analyzing adults and intervened in 
little Hans's case only through the mediation of his parents; he deciphered a 
whole section of the language of the unconscious in paranoid delusion, but used 
for this purpose only the key text Schreber left behind in the volcanic debris of 
his spiritual catastrophe. Freud rose, however, to a position of total mastery 
regarding the dialectic of the work and the tradition of its meaning. 

Does this mean that if the place of the master remains empty, it is not so 
much due to his disappearance as to an increasing obliteration of the meaning 
of his work? To convince ourselves of this, isn't it enough for us to note what 
is happening in that place? 

A technique is being transmitted there, one that is gloomy in style — 
indeed, it is reticent in its opacity — and that any attempt to let in critical fresh 
air seems to upset. It has, in truth, assumed the appearance of a formalism that 
is taken to such ceremonial lengths that one might well suspect that it bears 
the same similarity to obsessive neurosis as Freud found so convincingly in 
the practice, if not the genesis, of religious rites. 

When we consider the literature that this activity produces for its own nour- 
ishment, the analogy becomes even more marked: the impression is often that 
of a curious closed circuit in which ignorance of the origin of terms generates 
problems in reconciling them, and in which the effort to solve these problems 
reinforces the original ignorance. 

In order to home in on the causes of this deterioration of analytic discourse, 
one may legitimately apply psychoanalytic method to the collectivity that sus- 
tains it. 

Indeed, to speak of a loss of the meaning of psychoanalytic action is as 
true and futile as it is to explain a symptom by its meaning as long as the lat- 245 

ter is not recognized. But we know that, in the absence of such recognition, 
analytic action can only be experienced as aggressive at the level at which it 
is situated; and that, in the absence of the social "resistances" which the psy- 
choanalytic group used to find reassuring, the limits of its tolerance toward 
its own activity — now "accepted," if not actually approved of — no longer 



204 Ecrits 

depend upon anything but the numerical percentage by which its presence in 
society is measured. 

These principles suffice to separate out the symbolic, imaginary, and real 
conditions that determine the defenses we can recognize in the doctrine — iso- 
lation, undoing what has been done, denial, and, in general, misrecognition. 

Thus, if the importance of the American group to the psychoanalytic 
movement is measured by its mass, we can evaluate the conditions one finds 
there by their weight. 

In the symbolic order, first of all, one cannot neglect the importance of the 
c factor which, as I noted at the Congress of Psychiatry in 1950, is a constant 
that is characteristic of a given cultural milieu: the condition, in this case, of 
ahistoricism, which is widely recognized as the major feature of "communi- 
cation" in the United States, and which in my view is diametrically opposed 
to analytic experience. To this must be added a native mindset, known as behav- 
iorism, which so dominates psychological notions in America that it clearly 
has now altogether topped Freud's inspiration in psychoanalysis. 

As for the other two orders, I leave to those concerned the task of assess- 
ing what the mechanisms that manifest themselves in the life of psychoana- 
lytic associations owe to relations of standing within the group and to the effects 
of their free enterprise felt by the whole of the social body, respectively. I also 
leave to them the task of determining the credence to be lent to a notion empha- 
sized by one of their most lucid representatives — namely, the convergence that 
occurs between the alien status of a group dominated by immigrants and the 
distance it is lured into taking from its roots by the function called for by the 
aforementioned cultural conditions. 

In any case, it seems indisputable that the conception of psychoanalysis in 
the United States has been inflected toward the adaptation of the individual 
to the social environment, the search for behavior patterns, and all the objec- 
tification implied in the notion of "human relations."* And the indigenous term, 
246 "human engineering,"* strongly implies a privileged position of exclusion with 

respect to the human object. 

Indeed, the eclipse in psychoanalysis of the liveliest terms of its experi- 
ence — the unconscious and sexuality, which will apparently cease before long 
to even be mentioned — may be attributed to the distance necessary to sustain 
such a position. 

We need not take sides concerning the formalism and small-time shop men- 
tality, both of which have been noted and decried in the analytic group's own 
official documents. Pharisees and shopkeepers interest us only because of their 
common essence, which is the source of the difficulties both have with speech, 
particularly when it comes to "talking shop."* 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 2o5 

The fact is that while incommunicability of motives may sustain a "grand 
master," it does not go hand in hand with true mastery — at least not with the 
mastery teaching requires. This was realized in the past when, in order to sus- 
tain one 's preeminence, it was necessary, for form's sake, to give at least one 
class. 

This is why the attachment to traditional technique — which is unfailingly 
reaffirmed by the same camp — after a consideration of the results of the tests 
carried out in the frontier fields enumerated above, is not unequivocal; the 
equivocation can be gauged on the basis of the substitution of the term "clas- 
sic" for "orthodox" that is used to qualify it. One remains true to propriety 
because one has nothing to say about the doctrine itself. 

For my part, I would assert that the technique cannot be understood, nor 
therefore correctly applied, if one misunderstands the concepts on which it is 
based. My task shall be to demonstrate that these concepts take on their full 
meaning only when oriented in a field of language and ordered in relation to 
the function of speech. 

A point regarding which I should note that in order to handle any Freudian 
concept, reading Freud cannot be considered superfluous, even for those con- 
cepts that go by the same name as everyday notions. This is demonstrated, 
as I am reminded by the season, by the misadventure of Freud's theory of the 
instincts when revised by an author somewhat less than alert to what Freud 
explicitly stated to be its mythical content. Obviously, the author could 
hardly be aware of it, since he approaches the theory through Marie Bona- 
parte 's work, which he repeatedly cites as if it were equivalent to Freud's 
text — without the reader being in any way alerted to the fact — relying per- 247 

haps, not without reason, on the reader's good taste not to confuse the two, 
but proving nonetheless that he hasn't the slightest inkling of the secondary 
text's true level. The upshot being that — moving from reductions to deduc- 
tions and from inductions to hypotheses — the author, by way of the strict 
tautology of his false premises, comes to the conclusion that the instincts in 
question are reducible to the reflex arc. Like the classic image of the pile of 
plates — whose collapse leaves nothing in the hands of the comedian but two 
ill-matched fragments — the complex construction that moves from the dis- 
covery of the migrations of the libido in the erogenous zones to the metapsy- 
chological passage from a generalized pleasure principle to the death instinct 
becomes the binomial of a passive erotic instinct, modeled on the activity of 
the lice seekers so dear to the poet, and a destructive instinct, identified sim- 
ply with motor functioning. A result that merits an honorable mention for 
the art, intentional or otherwise, of taking the consequences of a misunder- 
standing to their most rigorous conclusions. 



206 Ecrits 

/. Empty Speech and Full Speech in the Psychoanalytic 
Realisation of the Subject 

"Put true and stable speech into my mouth and make of me a cautious tongue" 
— The Internal Consolation, Chapter XLV: That one should not believe 
everyone and of slight stumbling over words. 

Cause toujours. 

— Motto of "causalist" thought 

Whether it wishes to be an agent of healing, training, or sounding the depths, 
psychoanalysis has but one medium: the patient's speech. The obviousness of 
this fact is no excuse for ignoring it. Now all speech calls for a response. 

I will show that there is no speech without a response, even if speech meets 
only with silence, provided it has an auditor, and this is the heart of its func- 
tion in analysis. 

But if the psychoanalyst is not aware that this is how speech functions, he 
248 will experience its call [appel] all the more strongly; and if emptiness is the 

first thing to make itself heard in analysis, he will feel it in himself and he will 
seek a reality beyond speech to fill the emptiness. 

This leads the analyst to analyze the subject's behavior in order to find in 
it what the subject is not saying. Yet for him to get the subject to admit to the 
latter, he obviously has to talk about it. He thus speaks now, but his speech has 
become suspicious because it is merely a response to the failure of his silence, 
when faced with the perceived echo of his own nothingness. 

But what, in fact, was the appeal the subject was making beyond the empti- 
ness of his words [dire]? It was an appeal to truth at its very core, through 
which the calls of humbler needs vacillate. But first and from the outset it was 
the call of emptiness itself, in the ambiguous gap of an attempted seduction of 
the other by means in which the subject manifests indulgence, and on which 
he stakes the monument of his narcissism. 

"That's introspection all right!" exclaims the bombastic, smug fellow who 
knows its dangers only too well. He is certainly not the last, he admits, to have 
tasted its charms, even if he has exhausted its benefits. Too bad he has no more 
time to waste. For you would hear some fine profundities from him were he 
to come and lie on your couch! 

It is strange that analysts who encounter this sort of person early on in their 
experience still consider introspection to be of importance in psychoanalysis. 
For the minute you accept his wager, all the fine things he thought he had been 
saving up slip his mind. If he forces himself to recount a few, they don't amount 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 207 

to much; but others come to him so unexpectedly that they strike him as idi- 
otic and silence him for quite a while. That's what usually happens. 3 

He then grasps the difference between the mirage of the monologue whose 
accommodating fancies once animated his bombast, and the forced labor of a 
discourse that leaves one no way out, on which psychologists (not without 
humor) and therapists (not without cunning) have bestowed the name "free 
association." 

For it really is work — so much so that some have said it requires an appren- 
ticeship, and have even considered this apprenticeship to constitute its true 
formative value. But if viewed in this way, what does it train but a skilled 
worker? 

Then what of this work? Let us examine its conditions and fruit in the hope 249 

of shedding more light on its aim and benefits. 

The aptness of the German word Durcharbeiten — equivalent to the Eng- 
lish "working through"* — has been recognized in passing. It has been the 
despair of French translators, despite what the immortal words of a master of 
French style offered them by way of an exhaustive exercise: "Cent fois sur le 
metier, remettez . . ." — but how does the work [/ ouvrage] progress here? 

The theory reminds us of the triad: frustration, aggressiveness, regression. 
This explanation seems so comprehensible that it may well spare us the effort 
to comprehend. Intuition is prompt, but we should be all the more suspicious 
of something obvious when it has become a received idea. Should analysis 
ever expose its weakness, it would be advisable not to rest content with 
recourse to "affectivity." This taboo-word of dialectical incapacity will, along 
with the verb "to intellectualize" (whose pejorative acceptation makes this inca- 
pacity meritorious), remain, in the history of the language, the stigmata of our 
obtuseness regarding the subject. 4 

Let us ask ourselves instead where this frustration comes from. Is it from 
the analyst's silence? Responding to the subject's empty speech — even and 
especially in an approving manner — often proves, by its effects, to be far more 
frustrating than silence. Isn't it, rather, a frustration that is inherent in the sub- 
ject's very discourse? Doesn't the subject become involved here in an ever 
greater dispossession of himself as a being, concerning which — by dint of sin- 
cere portraits which leave the idea of his being no less incoherent, of rectifi- 
cations that do not succeed in isolating its essence, of stays and defenses that 
do not prevent his statue from tottering, of narcissistic embraces that become 
like a puff of air in animating it — he ends up recognizing that this being has 
never been anything more than his own construction [oeuvre] in the imaginary 
and that this construction undercuts all certainty in him? For in the work he 



208 Ecrits 

does to reconstruct it for another, he encounters anew the fundamental alien- 
ation that made him construct it like another, and that has always destined it to 
be taken away from him by another. 5 

This ego,* whose strength our theorists now define by its capacity to bear 

250 frustration, is frustration in its very essence. 6 Not frustration of one of the sub- 
ject's desires, but frustration of an object in which his desire is alienated; and 
the more developed this object becomes, the more profoundly the subject 
becomes alienated from his jouissance. It is thus a frustration at one remove, 
a frustration that the subject — even were he to reduce its form in his discourse 
to the passivating image by which the subject makes himself an object by dis- 
playing himself before the mirror — could not be satisfied with, since even if 
he achieved the most perfect resemblance to that image, it would still be the 
other's jouissance that he would have gotten recognized there. Which is why 
there is no adequate response to this discourse, for the subject regards as con- 
temptuous [mepris] any speech that buys into his mistake [meprise]. 

The subject's aggressiveness here has nothing to do with animals' aggres- 
siveness when their desires are frustrated. This explanation, which most seem 
happy with, masks another that is less agreeable to each and every one of us: 
the aggressiveness of a slave who responds to being frustrated in his labor with 
a death wish. 

Thus we can see how this aggressiveness may respond to any intervention 
which, by exposing the imaginary intentions of the subject's discourse, dis- 
mantles the object the subject has constructed to satisfy them. This is, in effect, 
what is referred to as the analysis of resistances, and we can immediately see 
the danger that lies therein. It is already indicated by the existence of the naive 
analyst who has never seen any manifestations of aggressiveness except for 
the aggressive signification of his subjects' fantasies. 7 

251 He is the same one who, not hesitating to plead for a "causalist" analysis 
that would aim to transform the subject in the present by learned explana- 
tions of his past, betrays well enough, even in his very tone, the anxiety he 
wishes to spare himself — the anxiety of having to think that his patient's 
freedom may depend on that of his own intervention. If the expedient he 
seizes upon is beneficial at some point to the subject, it is no more beneficial 
than a stimulating joke and will not detain me any longer. 

Let us focus instead on the hie et nunc [here and now] to which some ana- 
lysts feel we should confine the handling of the analysis. It may indeed be 
useful, provided the analyst does not detach the imaginary intention he 
uncovers in it from the symbolic relation in which it is expressed. Nothing 
must be read into it concerning the subject's ego that cannot be assumed 
anew by him in the form of the "/," that is, in the first person. 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 209 

"I was this only in order to become what I can be": if this were not the con- 
stant culmination of the subject's assumption [assomption] of his own mirages, 
where could we find progress here? 

Thus the analyst cannot without danger track down the subject in the inti- 
macy of his gestures, or even in that of his stationary state, unless he reinte- 
grates them as silent parties into the subject's narcissistic discourse — and this 
has been very clearly noted, even by young practitioners. 

The danger here is not of a negative reaction on the subject's part, but rather 
of his being captured in an objectification — no less imaginary than before — of 
his stationary state, indeed, of his statue, in a renewed status of his alienation. 

The analyst's art must, on the contrary, involve suspending the subject's 
certainties until their final mirages have been consumed. And it is in the sub- 
ject's discourse that their dissolution must be punctuated. 

Indeed, however empty his discourse may seem, it is so only if taken at face 
value — the value that justifies Mallarme's remark, in which he compares the 
common use of language to the exchange of a coin whose obverse and reverse 
no longer bear but eroded faces, and which people pass from hand to hand "in 
silence." This metaphor suffices to remind us that speech, even when almost 
completely worn out, retains its value as a tessera. 

Even if it communicates nothing, discourse represents the existence of com- 
munication; even if it denies the obvious, it affirms that speech constitutes truth; 
even if it is destined to deceive, it relies on faith in testimony. 252 

Thus the psychoanalyst knows better than anyone else that the point is to 
figure out [entendre] to which "part" of this discourse the significant term is 
relegated, and this is how he proceeds in the best of cases: he takes the descrip- 
tion of an everyday event as a fable addressed as a word to the wise, a long 
prosopopeia as a direct interjection, and, contrariwise, a simple slip of the 
tongue as a highly complex statement, and even the rest of a silence as the 
whole lyrical development it stands in for. 

It is, therefore, a propitious punctuation that gives meaning to the subject's 
discourse. This is why the ending of the session — which current technique 
makes into an interruption that is determined purely by the clock and, as such, 
takes no account of the thread of the subject's discourse — plays the part of a 
scansion which has the full value of an intervention by the analyst that is 
designed to precipitate concluding moments. Thus we must free the ending 
from its routine framework and employ it for all the useful aims of analytic 
technique. 

This is how regression can occur, regression being but the bringing into 
the present in the subject's discourse of the fantasmatic relations discharged 
by an ego* at each stage in the decomposition of its structure. After all, the 



2io Ecrits 

regression is not real; even in language it manifests itself only by inflections, 
turns of phrase, and "stumblings so slight" that even in the extreme case they 
cannot go beyond the artifice of "baby talk" engaged in by adults. Imputing 
to regression the reality of a current relation to the object amounts to pro- 
jecting the subject into an alienating illusion that merely echoes one of the 
analyst's own alibis. 

This is why nothing could be more misleading for the analyst than to seek 
to guide himself by some supposed "contact" he experiences with the subject's 
reality. This vacuous buzzword of intuitionist and even phenomenological psy- 
chology has become extended in contemporary usage in a way that is thor- 
oughly symptomatic of the ever scarcer effects of speech in the present social 
context. But its obsessive value becomes flagrant when it is recommended in 
a relationship which, according to its very rules, excludes all real contact. 

Young analysts, who might nevertheless allow themselves to be impressed 
by the impenetrable gifts such recourse implies, will find no better way of 
253 dispelling their illusions than to consider the success of the supervision they 

themselves receive. The very possibility of that supervision would become 
problematic from the perspective of contact with the patient's reality [reel]. 
On the contrary, the supervisor manifests a second sight — that's the word 
for it! — which makes the experience at least as instructive for him as for his 
supervisee. And the less the supervisee demonstrates such gifts — which are 
considered by some to be all the more incommunicable the bigger the to-do 
they themselves make about their secrets regarding technique — the truer this 
almost becomes. 

The reason for this enigma is that the supervisee serves as a filter, or even 
as a refractor, of the subject's discourse, and in this way a ready-made stere- 
ography is presented to the supervisor, bringing out from the start the three 
or four registers on which the musical score constituted by the subject's dis- 
course can be read. 

If the supervisee could be put by the supervisor into a subjective position 
different from that implied by the sinister term controle (advantageously 
replaced, but only in English, by "supervision"*), the greatest benefit he would 
derive from this exercise would be to learn to put himself in the position of that 
second subjectivity into which the situation automatically puts the supervisor. 

There he would find the authentic path by which to reach what is expressed 
only very approximately by the classic formulation of the analyst's diffuse, or 
even absentminded, attention. For it is essential to know what that attention 
aims at; as all my work shows, it certainly does not aim at an object beyond 
the subject's speech the way it does for certain analysts who force themselves 
to never lose sight of that object. If this had to be the path of analysis, then it 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 211 

would surely have recourse to other means — otherwise it would provide the 
only example of a method that forbade itself the means to its own ends. 

The only object that is within the analyst's reach is the imaginary relation 
that links him to the subject qua ego; and although he cannot eliminate it, he 
can use it to adjust the receptivity of his ears, which is, according to both phys- 
iology and the Gospels, the normal use made of them: having ears in order not 
to hear [entendre]^ in other words, in order to detect what is to be understood 
[entendu]. For he has no other ears, no third or fourth ear designed for what 
some have tried to describe as a direct transaudition of the unconscious by the 
unconscious. I shall say what we are to make of this supposed mode of com- 254 

munication later. 

I have, thus far, approached the function of speech in analysis from its least 
rewarding angle, that of "empty" speech in which the subject seems to speak 
in vain about someone who — even if he were such a dead ringer for him that 
you might confuse them — will never join him in the assumption of his desire. 
I have pointed out the source of the growing devaluation of speech in both 
analytic theory and technique, and have had to lift incrementally, as if a heavy 
mill wheel had fallen on speech, what can only serve as the sails that drive the 
movement of analysis: namely, individual psychophysiological factors that are, 
in reality, excluded from its dialectic. To regard the goal of psychoanalysis as 
to modify their characteristic inertia is to condemn oneself to the fiction of 
movement, with which a certain trend in psychoanalytic technique seems to 
be satisfied. 

If we turn now to the other end of the spectrum of psychoanalytic experience — 
its history, casuistry, and treatment process — we shall learn to oppose the value 
of anamnesis as the index and mainspring of therapeutic progress to the analy- 
sis of the hie etnunc, hysterical inter subjectivity to obsessive intrasubjectivity, 
and symbolic interpretation to the analysis of resistance. The realization of 
full speech begins here. 

Let us examine the relation it constitutes. 

Let us recall that, shortly after its birth, the method introduced by Breuer 
and Freud was baptized the "talking cure"* by one of Breuer's patients, Anna 
0. Let us keep in mind that it was the experience inaugurated with this hys- 
teric that led them to the discovery of the pathogenic event dubbed traumatic. 

If this event was recognized as the cause of the symptom, it was because 
putting the event into words (in the patient's "stories"*) led to the removal of 
the symptom. Here the term "prise de conscience " (conscious realization), bor- 
rowed from the psychological theory that was immediately constructed to 
explain the fact, retains a prestige that merits the healthy distrust I believe is 



212 Ecrits 

called for when it comes to explanations that parade as self-evident. The psy- 
chological prejudices of Freud 's day were opposed to seeing in verbalization 

255 as such any other reality than its flatus vocis. The fact remains that, in the hyp- 
notic state, verbalization is dissociated from conscious realization, and this 
alone is enough to require a revision of such a conception of its effects. 

But why don't the valiant defenders of the behaviorist Aufhebung set an 
example here, making their point that they do not need to know whether the 
subject remembers anything whatsoever? She simply recounts the event. For 
my part, I would say that she verbalizes it, or — to further exploit this term 
whose resonances in French call to mind a Pandora figure other than the one 
with the box (in which the term should probably be locked up) — that she forces 
the event into the Word [le verbe\ or, more precisely, into the epos by which 
she relates in the present the origins of her person. And she does this in a lan- 
guage that allows her discourse to be understood by her contemporaries and 
that also presupposes their present discourse. Thus it happens that the recita- 
tion of the epos may include a discourse of earlier days in its own archaic, even 
foreign tongue, or may even be carried out in the present with all the vivac- 
ity of an actor; but it is like indirect speech, isolated in quotation marks in the 
thread of the narrative, and, if the speech is performed, it is on a stage imply- 
ing the presence not only of a chorus, but of spectators as well. 

Hypnotic remembering is, no doubt, a reproduction of the past, but it is above 
all a spoken representation and, as such, implies all sorts of presences. It stands 
in the same relation to the remembering while awake of what in analysis is curi- 
ously called "the material," as drama — in which the original myths of the City 
State are produced before its assembly of citizens — stands in relation to his- 
tory, which may well be made up of materials, but in which a nation today learns 
to read the symbols of a destiny on the march. In Heideggerian language one 
could say that both types of remembering constitute the subject as gewesend — 
that is, as being the one who has thus been. But in the internal unity of this tem- 
poralization, entities [/ 'e'tant] mark the convergence of the having-beens [des 
ayant ete\ In other words, if other encounters are assumed to have occurred 
since any one of these moments having been, another entity would have issued 
from it that would cause him to have been altogether differently. 

The reason for the ambiguity of hysterical revelation of the past is not so 
much the vacillation of its content between the imaginary and reality \reel\ 
for it is situated in both. Nor is it the fact that it is made up of lies. It is that it 

256 presents us with the birth of truth in speech, and thereby brings us up against 
the reality of what is neither true nor false. At least, that is the most disturb- 
ing aspect of the problem. 

For it is present speech that bears witness to the truth of this revelation in 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 213 

current reality and grounds it in the name of this reality. Now only speech 
bears witness in this reality to that portion of the powers of the past that has 
been thrust aside at each crossroads where an event has chosen. 

This is why the condition of continuity in the anamnesis, by which Freud 
measures the completeness of the cure, has nothing to do with the Bergson- 
ian myth of a restoration of duration in which the authenticity of each instant 
would be destroyed if it did not recapitulate the modulation of all the preced- 
ing instants. To Freud 's mind, it is not a question of biological memory, nor 
of its intuitionist mystification, nor of the paramnesia of the symptom, but of 
remembering, that is, of history; he rests the scales — in which conjectures about 
the past make promises about the future oscillate — on the knife-edge of 
chronological certainties alone. Let's be categorical: in psychoanalytic anam- 
nesis, what is at stake is not reality, but truth, because the effect of full speech 
is to reorder past contingencies by conferring on them the sense of necessities 
to come, such as they are constituted by the scant freedom through which the 
subject makes them present. 

The meanders of the research pursued by Freud in his account of the case 
of the Wolf Man confirm these remarks by deriving their full meaning from 
them. 

Freud demands a total objectification of proof when it comes to dating the 
primal scene, but he simply presupposes all the resubjectivizations of the event 
that seem necessary to him to explain its effects at each turning point at which 
the subject restructures himself — that is, as many restructurings of the event 
as take place, as he puts it, nachtraglich^ after the fact. 8 What's more, with an 
audacity bordering on impudence, he declares that he considers it legitimate, 
in analyzing the processes, to elide the time intervals during which the event 257 

remains latent in the subject. 9 That is to say, he annuls the times for understanding 
in favor of the moments of concluding which precipitate the subject's medita- 
tion toward deciding the meaning to be attached to the early event. 

Let it be noted that time for understanding and moment of concluding are 
functions I have defined in a purely logical theorem, 10 and are familiar to my 
students as having proven extremely helpful in the dialectical analysis 
through which I guide them in the process of a psychoanalysis. 

This assumption by the subject of his history, insofar as it is constituted by 
speech addressed to another, is clearly the basis of the new method Freud called 
psychoanalysis, not in 1904 — as was taught until recently by an authority who, 
when he finally threw off the cloak of prudent silence, appeared on that day 
to know nothing of Freud except the titles of his works — but in 1895. 11 

In this analysis of the meaning of his method, I do not deny, any more than 
Freud himself did, the psychophysiological discontinuity manifested by the 



214 Ecrits 

states in which hysterical symptoms appear, nor do I deny that these symp- 
toms may be treated by methods — hypnosis or even narcosis — that repro- 
duce the discontinuity of these states. It is simply that I repudiate any reliance 
on these states — as expressly as Freud forbade himself recourse to them after 
a certain moment in time — to either explain symptoms or cure them. 

For if the originality of the method derives from the means it foregoes, it 
is because the means that it reserves for itself suffice to constitute a domain 
whose limits define the relativity of its operations. 

Its means are those of speech, insofar as speech confers a meaning on the 
functions of the individual; its domain is that of concrete discourse qua field 
of the subject's transindividual reality; and its operations are those of history, 
insofar as history constitutes the emergence of truth in reality [reel]. 

First, in fact, when a subject begins an analysis, he accepts a position that 
258 is more constitutive in itself than all the orders by which he allows himself to 

be more or less taken in — the position of interlocution — and I see no disad- 
vantage in the fact that this remark may leave the listener dumbfounded [inter- 
loque]. For I shall take this opportunity to stress that the subject's act of 
addressing [allocution] brings with it an addressee [allocutaire] n — in other 
words, that the speaker [locuteur] 13 is constituted in it as intersubjectivity. 

Second, it is on the basis of this interlocution, insofar as it includes the inter- 
locutor's response, that it becomes clear to us why Freud requires restoration 
of continuity in the subject's motivations. An operational examination of this 
objective shows us, in effect, that it can only be satisfied in the intersubjective 
continuity of the discourse in which the subject's history is constituted. 

Thus, while the subject may vaticinate about his history under the influ- 
ence of one or other of those drugs that put consciousness to sleep and have 
been christened in our day "truth serums" — where the sureness of the mis- 
nomer betrays the characteristic irony of language — the simple retransmis- 
sion of his own recorded discourse, even if pronounced by his doctor, cannot 
have the same effects as psychoanalytic interlocution because it comes to the 
subject in an alienated form. 

The true basis of the Freudian discovery of the unconscious becomes clear 
in its position as a third term. This may be simply formulated in the follow- 
ing terms: 

The unconscious is that part of concrete discourse qua transindividual, 
which is not at the subject 's disposal in reestablishing the continuity of his con- 
scious discourse. 

This disposes of the paradox presented by the concept of the unconscious 
when it is related to an individual reality. For to reduce this concept to uncon- 
scious tendencies is to resolve the paradox only by avoiding analytic experi- 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 21 5 

ence, which clearly shows that the unconscious is of the same nature as 259 

ideational functions, and even of thought. Freud plainly stressed this when, 
unable to avoid a conjunction of opposing terms in the expression "uncon- 
scious thought," he gave it the necessary support with the invocation: sit venia 
verbo. Thus we obey him by casting the blame, in effect, onto the Word, but 
onto the Word realized in discourse that darts from mouth to mouth, confer- 
ring on the act of the subject who receives its message the meaning that makes 
this act an act of his history and gives it its truth. 

Hence the objection that the notion of unconscious thought is a contradic- 
tion in terms, which is raised by a psychology poorly grounded in its logic, 
collapses when confronted by the very distinctiveness of the psychoanalytic 
domain, insofar as this domain reveals the reality of discourse in its autonomy. 
And the psychoanalyst's eppur si muove! 'has the same impact as Galileo's, which 
is not that of a fact-based experiment but of an experimentum mentis. 

The unconscious is the chapter of my history that is marked by a blank or 
occupied by a lie: it is the censored chapter. But the truth can be refound; most 
often it has already been written elsewhere. Namely, 

• in monuments: this is my body, in other words, the hysterical core of neu- 
rosis in which the hysterical symptom manifests the structure of a language, 
and is deciphered like an inscription which, once recovered, can be 
destroyed without serious loss; 

• in archival documents too: these are my childhood memories, just as 
impenetrable as such documents are when I do not know their provenance; 

• in semantic evolution: this corresponds to the stock of words and accepta- 
tions of my own particular vocabulary, as it does to my style of life and my 
character; 

• in traditions, too, and even in the legends which, in a heroicized form, 
convey my history; 

• and, lastly, in its traces that are inevitably preserved in the distortions 
necessitated by the insertion of the adulterated chapter into the chapters 
surrounding it, and whose meaning will be re-established by my exegesis. 

Students who believe that, in order to understand Freud, reading Freud is 260 

preferable to reading Fenichel — and this belief is so rare that I try to foster it 
in my teaching — will realize, once they set about it, that what I have just said 
is hardly original, even in its verve; indeed, I have not used a single metaphor 
that Freud's works do not repeat with the frequency of a leitmotifs revealing 
the very fabric of his work. 

At every instant of their practice from then on, they will more easily grasp 



2i6 Ecrits 

the fact that these metaphors — like negation, whose doubling undoes it — lose 
their metaphorical dimension, and they will recognize that this is so because 
they are operating in metaphor's own realm, metaphor being but a synonym 
for the symbolic displacement brought into play in the symptom. 

After that it will be easier for them to evaluate the imaginary displacement 
that motivates Fenichel's work, by gauging the difference in the solidity and 
efficacy of technique generated by referring to the supposedly organic stages 
of individual development and by searching for the particular events of a sub- 
ject's history. It is precisely the difference that separates authentic historical 
research from the supposed laws of history, of which it can be said that every 
age finds its own philosopher to propagate them according to the values preva- 
lent at the time. 

This is not to say that there is nothing worth keeping in the different mean- 
ings uncovered in the general march of history along the path which runs from 
Bossuet (Jacques-Benigne) to Toynbee (Arnold), and which is punctuated by 
the edifices of Auguste Comte and Karl Marx. Everyone knows, of course, 
that the laws of history are worth as little for directing research into the recent 
past as they are for making any reasonable presumptions about tomorrow's 
events. Besides, they are modest enough to postpone their certainties until the 
day after tomorrow, and not too prudish either to allow for the adjustments 
that permit predictions to be made about what happened yesterday. 

If, therefore, their role in scientific progress is rather slight, their interest 
nevertheless lies elsewhere: in their considerable role as ideals. For it leads us 
to distinguish between what might be called the primary and secondary func- 
tions of historicization. 

For to say of psychoanalysis and of history that, qua sciences, they are both 
261 sciences of the particular, does not mean that the facts they deal with are purely 

accidental or even factitious, or that their ultimate value comes down to the 
brute aspect of trauma. 

Events are engendered in a primal historicization — in other words, history 
is already being made on the stage where it will be played out once it has been 
written down, both in one 's heart of hearts and outside. 

At one moment in time, a certain riot in the Faubourg Saint- Antoine is expe- 
rienced by its actors as a victory or defeat of the Parliament or the Court; at 
another moment, as a victory or defeat of the proletariat or the bourgeoisie. 
And although it is "the common people," to use Cardinal de Retz's expres- 
sion, who always pay the price, it is not at all the same historical event — I mean 
that they do not leave behind the same sort of memory in men's minds. 

This is because, with the disappearance of the reality of the Parliament and 
the Court, the first event will return to its traumatic value, allowing for a pro- 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 21 j 

gressive and authentic effacement, unless its meaning is expressly revived. 
Whereas the memory of the second event will remain very much alive even 
under censorship — just as the amnesia brought on by repression is one of the 
liveliest forms of memory — as long as there are men who enlist their revolt 
in the struggle for the proletariat's political ascension, that is, men for whom 
the keywords of dialectical materialism have meaning. 

Thus it would be going too far to say that I am about to carry these remarks 
over into the field of psychoanalysis, since they are already there, and since 
the clear distinction they establish between two things that were formerly con- 
fused — the technique of deciphering the unconscious and the theory of 
instincts, or even drives — goes without saying. 

What we teach the subject to recognize as his unconscious is his history — 
in other words, we help him complete the current historicization of the facts 
that have already determined a certain number of the historical "turning points" 
in his existence. But if they have played this role, it is already as historical facts, 
that is, as recognized in a certain sense or censored in a certain order. 

Thus, every fixation at a supposed instinctual stage is above all a historical 
stigma: a page of shame that one forgets or undoes, or a page of glory that 262 

obliges. But what is forgotten is recalled in acts, and the undoing of what has 
been done contradicts what is said elsewhere, just as obligation perpetuates in 
symbols the very mirage in which the subject found himself trapped. 

To put it succinctly, the instinctual stages are already organized in subjec- 
tivity when they are being lived. And to put it clearly, the subjectivity of the 
child who registers as victories and defeats the epic of the training of his sphinc- 
ters — enjoying in the process the imaginary sexualization of his cloacal ori- 
fices, turning his excremental expulsions into aggressions, his retentions into 
seductions, and his movements of release into symbols — is not fundamentally 
different from the subjectivity of the psychoanalyst who strives to restore the 
forms of love that he calls "pregenital" in order to understand them. 

In other words, the anal stage is no less purely historical when it is actually 
experienced than when it is reconceptualized, nor is it less purely grounded in 
intersubjectivity. But officially recognizing it as a stage in some supposed 
instinctual maturation immediately leads even the best minds off track, to the 
point of seeing in it the reproduction in ontogenesis of a stage of the animal 
phylum that should be sought in ascaris, even in jellyfish — a speculation which, 
ingenious as it may be when penned by Balint, leads others to the most inco- 
herent musings, or even to the folly that goes looking in protista for the imag- 
inary schema of breaking and entering the body, fear of which is supposed to 
govern feminine sexuality. Why not look for the image of the ego in shrimp, 
under the pretext that both acquire a new shell after every molting? 



2i 8 Ecrits 

In the 1910s and 1920s, a certain Jaworski constructed a very pretty system 
in which the "biological level" could be found right up to the very confines 
of culture, and which actually provided shellfish their historical counterpart 
at some period of the late Middle Ages, if I remember rightly, due to a flour- 
ishing of armor in both; indeed, it left no animal form without some human 
correspondent, excepting neither mollusks nor vermin. 

Analogy is not the same thing as metaphor, and the use that the philoso- 
phers of nature have made of it requires the genius of Goethe, but even his 
example is not encouraging. No course is more repugnant to the spirit of our 

263 discipline, and it was by deliberately avoiding analogy that Freud opened up 
the path appropriate to the interpretation of dreams and, along with it, to the 
notion of analytic symbolism. Analytic symbolism, I insist, is strictly opposed 
to analogical thinking — a dubious tradition that still leads some people, even 
in our own ranks, to consider the latter to go hand in hand with the former. 

This is why excessive excursions into the ridiculous must be used for their 
eye-opening value, since, by opening our eyes to the absurdity of a theory, they 
direct our attention back to dangers that have nothing theoretical about them. 

This mythology of instinctual maturation, built out of bits and pieces 
selected from Freud 's work, actually engenders intellectual problems whose 
vapor, condensing into nebulous ideals, in return irrigates the original myth 
with its showers. The best writers spill their ink positing equations that sat- 
isfy the requirements of that mysterious "genital love"* (there are notions 
whose strangeness is better placed in the parenthesis of a borrowed term, and 
they initial their attempt with an admission of anon liquet). No one, however, 
appears to be shaken up by the malaise this results in; and people see it, rather, 
as a reason to encourage all the Munchhausens of psychoanalytic normaliza- 
tion to raise themselves up by the hair on their head in the hope of attaining 
the paradise of full realization of the genital object, indeed of the object itself. 

The fact that we analysts are in a good position to know the power of words 
is no reason to emphasize the insoluble character of their power, or to "bind 
heavy burdens, hard to bear, and lay them on men's shoulders," as Christ's 
malediction is expressed to the Pharisees in the text of Saint Matthew. 

The poverty of the terms within which we try to contain a subjective prob- 
lem may thus leave a great deal to be desired to particularly exacting minds, 
should they compare these terms to those that structured, in their very con- 

264 fusion, the ancient quarrels over Nature and Grace. 14 This poverty may thus 
leave them apprehensive as to the quality of the psychological and sociologi- 
cal effects they can expect from the use of these terms. And it is to be hoped 
that a better appreciation of the functions of the Logos will dissipate the mys- 
teries of our fantastic charismata. 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 219 

To confine ourselves to a more lucid tradition, perhaps we can understand 
the celebrated maxim by La Rochefoucauld — "There are people who would 
never have fallen in love but for hearing love discussed" — not in the roman- 
tic sense of a thoroughly imaginary "realization" of love that would make this 
remark into a bitter objection, but as an authentic recognition of what love 
owes to the symbol and of what speech brings with it by way of love. 

In any case, one need but consult Freud's work to realize to what a sec- 
ondary and hypothetical rank he relegates the theory of the instincts. The the- 
ory cannot in his eyes stand up for a single instant to the least important 
particular fact of a history, he insists, and the genital narcissism he invokes when 
summarizing the case of the Wolf Man clearly shows how much he scorns the 
constituted order of the libidinal stages. Moreover, he evokes instinctual con- 
flict there only to immediately distance himself from it and recognize in the 
symbolic isolation of the "I am not castrated," in which the subject asserts him- 
self, the compulsive form to which his heterosexual object choice remains riv- 
eted, in opposition to the effect of homosexualizing capture undergone by the 
ego when it was brought back to the imaginary matrix of the primal scene. 
This is, in truth, the subjective conflict — in which it is only a question of the 
vicissitudes of subjectivity, so much so that the "I" wins and loses against the 
"ego" at the whim of religious catechization or indoctrinating Aufklarung — 
a conflict whose effects Freud brought the subject to realize through his help 
before explaining them to us in the dialectic of the Oedipus complex. 

It is in the analysis of such a case that one clearly sees that the realization 
of perfect love is the fruit not of nature but of grace — that is, the fruit of an 
inter subjective agreement imposing its harmony on the rent nature on which 
it is based. 

"But what, then, is this subject that you keep drumming into our ears?" 
some impatient auditor finally exclaims. "Haven't we already learned the les- 
son from Monsieur de La Palice that everything experienced by the individ- 
ual is subjective?" 

Naive mouth — whose eulogy I shall spend my final days preparing — open 265 

up again to hear me. No need to close your eyes. The subject goes far beyond 
what is experienced "subjectively" by the individual; he goes exactly as far as 
the truth he is able to attain — which will perhaps come out of the mouth you 
have already closed again. Yes, this truth of his history is not all contained in 
his script, and yet the place is marked there in the painful conflicts he experi- 
ences because he knows only his own lines, and even in the pages whose dis- 
array gives him little comfort. 

The fact that the subject's unconscious is the other's discourse appears more 
clearly than anywhere else in tfye studies Freud devoted to what he called telepa- 



220 Ecrits 

thy, as it is manifested in the context of an analytic experience. This is the coin- 
cidence between the subject's remarks and facts he cannot have known about, 
but which are still at work in the connections to another analysis in which the 
analyst is an interlocutor — a coincidence which is, moreover, most often con- 
stituted by an entirely verbal, even homonymic, convergence, or which, if it 
includes an act, involves an "acting out"* by one of the analyst's other patients 
or by the patient's child who is also in analysis. It is a case of resonance in the 
communicating networks of discourse, an exhaustive study of which would 
shed light on similar facts of everyday life. 

The omnipresence of human discourse will perhaps one day be embraced 
under the open sky of an omnicommunication of its text. This is not to say 
that human discourse will be any more in tune with it than it is now. But this 
is the field that our experience polarizes in a relation that is only apparently a 
two-person relation, for any positioning of its structure in merely dyadic terms 
is as inadequate to it in theory as it is damaging to its technique. 

266 //. Symbol and Language as Structure and Limit of the Psychoanalytic Field 

Trjv apxrjv o xi Kcti XaXca v\iiv 
— Gospel according to Saint John, 8.25 

Do crossword puzzles. 

— Advice to a young psychoanalyst 

To take up the thread of my argument again, let me repeat that it is by a reduc- 
tion of a particular subject's history that psychoanalysis touches on relational 
gestalts, which analysis extrapolates into regular development; but that nei- 
ther genetic psychology nor differential psychology, on both of which analy- 
sis may shed light, is within its scope, because both require experimental and 
observational conditions that are related to those of analysis in name alone. 

To go even further: What separates out from common experience (which 
is confused with sense experience only by professional thinkers) as psychol- 
ogy in its crudest form — namely, the wonder that wells up, during some 
momentary suspension of daily cares, at what pairs off human beings in a dis- 
parity that goes beyond that of the grotesques of Leonardo or Goya, or sur- 
prise at the resistance of the thickness characteristic of a person's skin to the 
caress of a hand still moved by the thrill of discovery without yet being blunted 
by desire — this, one might say, is abolished in an experience that is averse to 
such caprices and recalcitrant to such mysteries. 

A psychoanalysis normally proceeds to its end without revealing to us very 
much of what is particular to our patient as regards his sensitivity to blows or 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 221 

colors, how quickly he grasps things with his hands or which parts of his body 
are sensitive, or his ability to retain things or invent, not to mention the vivac- 
ity of his tastes. 

This paradox is only an apparent one and is not due to any personal fail- 
ing; if it can be justified by the negative conditions of analytic experience, it 
simply presses us a little harder to examine that experience in terms of what is 
positive in it. 

For this paradox is not resolved by the efforts of certain people who — like 267 

the philosophers Plato mocked for being so driven by their appetite for real- 
ity [reel] that they went about embracing trees — go so far as to take every 
episode in which this reality, that slips away, rears its head for the lived reac- 
tion of which they prove so fond. For these are the very people who, making 
their objective what lies beyond language, react to analysis' "Don't touch" 
rule by a sort of obsession. If they keep going in that direction, I dare say the 
last word in transference reaction will be sniffing each other. I am not exag- 
gerating in the least: nowadays, a young analyst-in-training, after two or three 
years of fruitless analysis, can actually hail the long-awaited advent of the 
object-relation in being smelled by his subject, and can reap as a result of it 
the dignus est intrare of our votes, the guarantors of his abilities. 

If psychoanalysis can become a science (for it is not yet one) and if it is not 
to degenerate in its technique (and perhaps this has already happened), we 
must rediscover the meaning of its experience. 

To this end, we can do no better than return to Freud 's work. Claiming to 
be an expert practitioner does not give an analyst the right to challenge Freud 
III, because he does not understand him, in the name of a Freud II whom he 
thinks he understands. And his very ignorance of Freud I is no excuse for con- 
sidering the five great psychoanalyses as a series of case studies as badly cho- 
sen as they are written up, however marvelous he thinks it that the grain of 
truth hidden within them managed to escape. 15 

We must thus take up Freud 's work again starting with the Traumdeutung 
[The Interpretation of Dreams] to remind ourselves that a dream has the struc- 
ture of a sentence or, rather, to keep to the letter of the work, of a rebus — that 
is, of a form of writing, of which children's dreams are supposed to represent 
the primordial ideography, and which reproduces, in adults' dreams, the 
simultaneously phonetic and symbolic use of signifying elements found in 
the hieroglyphs of ancient Egypt and in the characters still used in China. 

But even this is no more than the deciphering of the instrument. What is 
important is the version of the text, and that, Freud tells us, is given in the 268 

telling of the dream — that is, in its rhetoric. Ellipsis and pleonasm, hyperba- 
ton or syllepsis, regression, repetition, apposition — these are the syntactical 



222 Ecrits 

displacements; metaphor, catachresis, antonomasia, allegory, metonymy, and 
synecdoche — these are the semantic condensations; Freud teaches us to read 
in them the intentions — whether ostentatious or demonstrative, dissimulat- 
ing or persuasive, retaliatory or seductive — with which the subject modulates 
his oneiric discourse. 

We know that he laid it down as a rule that the expression of a desire must 
always be sought in a dream. But let us be sure we understand what he meant 
by this. If Freud accepts, as the reason for a dream that seems to run counter 
to his thesis, the very desire to contradict him on the part of a subject whom 
he had tried to convince of his theory, 16 how could he fail to accept the same 
reason for himself when the law he arrived at is supposed to have come to him 
from other people? 

In short, nowhere does it appear more clearly that man's desire finds its mean- 
ing in the other's desire, not so much because the other holds the keys to the 
desired object, as because his first object(ive) is to be recognized by the other. 

Indeed, we all know from experience that from the moment an analysis 
becomes engaged in the path of transference — and this is what indicates to us 
that it has become so engaged — each of the patient's dreams is to be inter- 
preted as a provocation, a latent avowal or diversion, by its relation to the ana- 
lytic discourse, and that as the analysis progresses, his dreams become ever 
more reduced to the function of elements in the dialogue taking place in the 
analysis. 

In the case of the psychopathology of everyday life, another field conse- 
crated by another text by Freud, it is clear that every bungled action is a suc- 
cessful, even "well phrased," discourse, and that in slips of the tongue it is the 
gag that turns against speech, and from just the right quadrant for its word to 
the wise to be sufficient. 

But let us go straight to the part of the book where Freud deals with chance 
and the beliefs it gives rise to, and especially to the facts regarding which he 
269 applies himself to showing the subjective efficacy of associations to numbers 

that are left to the fate of an unmotivated choice, or even of a random selec- 
tion. Nowhere do the dominant structures of the psychoanalytic field reveal 
themselves better than in such a success. Freud's appeal, in passing, to 
unknown thought processes is nothing more in this case than his last-ditch 
excuse for the total confidence he placed in symbols, a confidence that wavers 
as the result of being fulfilled beyond his wildest dreams. 

If, for a symptom, whether neurotic or not, to be considered to come under 
psychoanalytic psychopathology, Freud insists on the minimum of overde- 
termination constituted by a double meaning — symbol of a defunct conflict 
beyond its function in a no less symbolic present conflict — and if he teaches us 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 223 

to follow the ascending ramification of the symbolic lineage in the text of the 
patient's free associations, in order to detect the nodal points [noeucts] of its 
structure at the places where its verbal forms intersect, then it is already quite 
clear that symptoms can be entirely resolved in an analysis of language, 
because a symptom is itself structured like a language: a symptom is language 
from which speech must be delivered. 

To those who have not studied the nature of language in any depth, the 
experience of numerical association will immediately show what must be 
grasped here — namely, the combinatory power that orders its equivoca- 
tions — and they will recognize in this the very mainspring of the unconscious. 

Indeed, if — from the numbers obtained by breaking up the series of digits 
[chiffres] in the chosen number, from their combination by all the operations 
of arithmetic, and even from the repeated division of the original number by 
one of the numbers split off from it — the resulting numbers 17 prove symbolic 
among all the numbers in the subject's own history, it is because they were 
already latent in the initial choice. And thus if the idea that these very num- 
bers [chiffres] determined the subject's fate is refuted as superstitious, we must 
nevertheless admit that everything analysis reveals to the subject as his uncon- 
scious lies in the existing order of their combinations — that is, in the concrete 
language they represent. 

We shall see that philologists and ethnographers reveal enough to us about 270 

the combinatory sureness found in the completely unconscious systems with 
which they deal for them to find nothing surprising in the proposition I am 
putting forward here. 

But should anyone still have reservations about what I am saying, I would 
appeal once more to the testimony of the man who, having discovered the uncon- 
scious, warrants credence when he designates its place; he will not fail us. 

For, however little interest has been taken in it — and for good reason — 
Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious remains the most unchallengeable 
of his works because it is the most transparent; in it, the effect of the uncon- 
scious is demonstrated in all its subtlety. And the visage it reveals to us is that 
of wit [I'esprit] in the ambiguity conferred on it by language, where the other 
face of its regalian power is the witticism [pointe], by which the whole of its 
order is annihilated in an instant — the witticism, indeed, in which language 's 
creative activity unveils its absolute gratuitousness, in which its domination 
of reality [reel] is expressed in the challenge of nonmeaning, and in which the 
humor, in the malicious grace of the free spirit [esprit libre], symbolizes a truth 
that does not say its last word. 

We must follow Freud, along the book's admirably compelling detours, on 
the walk on which he leads us in this chosen garden of bitterest love. 



224 Ecrits 

Here everything is substantial, everything is a real gem. The mind [esprit] 
that lives as an exile in the creation whose invisible support he is, knows that 
he is at every instant the master capable of annihilating it. No matter how dis- 
dained the forms of this hidden royalty — haughty or perfidious, dandy-like 
or debonair — Freud can make their secret luster shine. Stories of the marriage- 
broker on his rounds in the ghettos of Moravia — that derided Eros figure, like 
him born of penury and pain — discreetly guiding the avidity of his ill-man- 
nered client, and suddenly ridiculing him with the illuminating nonsense of 
his reply. "He who lets the truth escape like that," comments Freud, "is in real- 
ity happy to throw off the mask." 

It is truth, in fact, that throws off the mask in coming out of his mouth, but 
only so that the joke might take on another and more deceptive mask: the 
sophistry that is merely a stratagem, the logic that is merely a lure, even com- 
edy that tends merely to dazzle. The joke is always about something else. "A 
joke [esprit] in fact entails such a subjective conditionality [...]: a joke is only 
271 what I accept as such," continues Freud, who knows what he is talking about. 

Nowhere is the individual's intent more evidently surpassed by the sub- 
ject's find — nowhere is the distinction I make between the individual and the 
subject so palpable — since not only must there have been something foreign 
to me in my find for me to take pleasure in it, but some of it must remain for- 
eign for this find to hit home. This takes on its importance due to the neces- 
sity, so clearly indicated by Freud, of a joke's third person, who is always 
presupposed, and to the fact that a joke does not lose its power when told in 
the form of indirect speech. In short, this points, in the Other's locus, to the 
amboceptor that is illuminated by the artifice of the joke [mot] erupting in its 
supreme alacrity. 

There is only one reason for a joke to fall flat: the platitude of any expla- 
nation given of its truth. 

Now this relates directly to our problem. The current disdain for studies 
on the language of symbols — which can be seen simply by glancing at the 
table of contents of our publications before and after the 1920s — corresponds 
in our discipline to nothing less than a change of object, whose tendency to 
align itself with the most undifferentiated level of communication, in order to 
accommodate the new objectives proposed for psychoanalytic technique, is 
perhaps responsible for the rather gloomy balance sheet that the most lucid 
analysts have drawn up of its results. 18 

How, indeed, could speech exhaust the meaning of speech or — to put it 
better with the Oxford logical positivists, the meaning of meaning* — if not 
in the act that engenders it? Thus Goethe 's reversal of its presence at the ori- 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 225 

gin, "In the beginning was the act," is itself reversed in its turn: it was cer- 
tainly the Word that was [etait] in the beginning, and we live in its creation, 
but it is our mental [esprit] action that continues this creation by constantly 
renewing it. And we can only think back to this action by allowing ourselves 
to be driven ever further ahead by it. 

I shall try it myself only in the knowledge that this is its pathway . . . 

No one is supposed to be ignorant of the law; this formulation, provided by 272 

the humor in our Code of Laws, nevertheless expresses the truth in which our 
experience is grounded, and which our experience confirms. No man is actu- 
ally ignorant of it, because the law of man has been the law of language since 
the first words of recognition presided over the first gifts — it having taken the 
detestable Danai, who came and fled by sea, for men to learn to fear decep- 
tive words accompanying faithless gifts. Up until then, these gifts, the act of 
giving them and the objects given, their transmutation into signs, and even 
their fabrication, were so closely intertwined with speech for the pacific Argo- 
nauts — uniting the islets of their community with the bonds [noeuds] of a sym- 
bolic commerce — that they were designated by its name. 19 

Is it with these gifts, or with the passwords that give them their salutary 
nonmeaning, that language begins along with law? For these gifts are already 
symbols, in the sense that symbol means pact, and they are first and foremost 
signifiers of the pact they constitute as the signified; this is plainly seen in the 
fact that the objects of symbolic exchange — vases made to remain empty, 
shields too heavy to be carried, sheaves that will dry out, lances that are 
thrust into the ground — are all destined to be useless, if not superfluous by 
their very abundance. 

Is this neutralization by means of the signifier the whole of the nature of 
language? Were this the case, one would find a first approximation of lan- 
guage among sea swallows, for instance, during display, materialized in the 
fish they pass each other from beak to beak; ethologists — if we must agree 
with them in seeing in this the instrument of a stirring into action of the group 
that is tantamount to a party — would then be altogether justified in recog- 
nizing a symbol in this activity. 

It can be seen that I do not shrink from seeking the origins of symbolic 
behavior outside the human sphere. But it is certainly not by the pathway of 
an elaboration of signs, the pathway Jules H. Masserman, 20 following in the 
footsteps of so many others, has taken. I shall dwell on it for an instant here, 
not only because of the savvy tone with which he outlines his approach, but 273 

also because his work has been well received by the editors of our official 



226 Ecrits 

journal, who — following a tradition borrowed from employment agen- 
cies — never neglect anything that might provide our discipline with "good 
references." 

Think of it — we have here a man who has reproduced neurosis ex-pe-ri- 
men-tal-ly in a dog tied down on a table, and by what ingenious methods: a 
bell, the plate of meat that it announces, and the plate of apples that arrives 
instead; I'll spare you the rest. He will certainly not be one, at least so he assures 
us, to let himself be taken in by the "extensive ruminations," as he puts it, that 
philosophers have devoted to the problem of language. Not him, he's going 
to grab it by the throat. 

Can you imagine? — a raccoon can be taught, by a judicious conditioning 
of his reflexes, to go to his food box when he is presented with a card on which 
the meal he is to be served is printed. We are not told whether it lists the var- 
ious prices, but the convincing detail is added that if the service disappoints 
him, he comes back and tears up the card that promised too much, just as a 
furious woman might do with the letters of a faithless lover (sic). 

This is one of the arches supporting the road by which the author leads us 
from the signal to the symbol. It is a two-way street, and the way back is illus- 
trated by no less imposing structures. 

For if, in a human subject, you associate the ringing of a bell with the pro- 
jection of a bright light into his eyes and then the ringing alone to the order, 
"contract,"* you will succeed in getting the subject to make his pupils con- 
tract just by pronouncing the order himself, then by whispering it, and even- 
tually just by thinking it — in other words, you will obtain a reaction of the 
nervous system that is called autonomic because it is usually inaccessible to 
intentional effects. Thus, if we are to believe Masserman, a certain Hudgkins 
"had created in a group of people a highly individualized configuration of 
cognate and visceral reactions to the idea-symbol 'contract' — a response 
which could be traced through their special experiences to an apparently 
remote but actually basic physiologic source: in this instance, simply the pro- 
tection of the retina from excessive light." And Masserman concludes: "The 
274 significance of such experiments for psycho-somatic and linguistic research 

hardly needs further elaboration." 

For my part, I would have been curious to know whether subjects trained 
in this way also react to the enunciation of the same term in the expressions 
"marriage contract,"* "contract bridge,"* and "breach of contract,"* and even 
when the term is progressively shortened to the articulation of its first sylla- 
ble alone: contract, contrac, contra, contr . . . The control test required by strict 
scientific method would then be supplied all by itself as the French reader mut- 
tered this syllable under his breath, even though he would have been subjected 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis zzy 

to no other conditioning than that of the bright light projected on the problem 
by Masserman himself. I would then ask this author whether the effects thus 
observed among conditioned subjects still appeared to so easily do without fur- 
ther elaboration. For either the effects would no longer be produced, thus reveal- 
ing that they do not even conditionally depend on the semanteme, or they would 
continue to be produced, raising the question of the semanteme 's limits. 

In other words, they would cause the distinction between the signifier and 
the signified, so blithely confounded by the author in the English term "idea- 
symbol,"* to appear in the very word as instrument. And without needing to 
examine the reactions of subjects conditioned to react to the command "don't 
contract," or even to the complete conjugation of the verb "to contract," I 
could remark to the author that what defines any element whatsoever of a 
language [langue] as belonging to language is that, for all the users of the lan- 
guage [langue], this element is distinguished as such in the supposedly consti- 
tuted set of homologous elements. 

Thus, the particular effects of this element of language are linked to the 
existence of this set, prior to any possible link with any of the subject's par- 
ticular experiences. And to consider this last link independently of any refer- 
ence to the first is simply to deny the characteristic function of language to 
this element. 

This reminder of first principles might perhaps save our author from dis- 
covering, with an unequaled naivete, the verbatim correspondence of the gram- 
matical categories of his childhood to relations found in reality. 

This monument of naivete — of a kind which is, moreover, common 
enough in these matters — would not be worth so much attention if it had not 
been erected by a psychoanalyst, or rather by someone who, as if by chance, 275 

relates everything to it which is produced by a certain tendency in psycho- 
analysis — under the heading of the theory of the ego or technique of the analy- 
sis of defenses — that is diametrically opposed to Freudian experience; he 
thereby manifests a contrario that a sound conception of language is coherent 
with the preservation of Freudian experience. For Freud's discovery was that 
of the field of the effects, in man's nature, of his relations to the symbolic order 
and the fact that their meaning goes all the way back to the most radical 
instances of symbolization in being. To ignore the symbolic order is to con- 
demn Freud's discovery to forgetting and analytic experience to ruin. 

I declare — and this is a declaration that cannot be divorced from the seri- 
ous intent of my present remarks — that I would prefer to have the raccoon I 
mentioned earlier sitting in the armchair to which, according to our author, 
Freud's shyness confined the analyst by placing him behind the couch, rather 
than a scientist who discourses on language and speech as Masserman does. 



228 Ecrits 

For — thanks to Jacques Prevert ("A stone, two houses, three ruins, four 
ditch diggers, a garden, some flowers, a raccoon") — the raccoon, at least, has 
definitively entered the poetic bestiary and partakes as such, in its essence, of 
the symbol's eminent function. But that being resembling us who professes, 
as Masserman does, a systematic misrecognition of that function, forever ban- 
ishes himself from everything that can be called into existence by it. Thus, the 
question of the place to be assigned the said semblable in the classification of 
natural beings would seem to me to smack of a misplaced humanism, if his 
discourse, crossed with a technique of speech of which we are the guardians, 
were not in fact too fertile, even in producing sterile monsters within it. Let 
it be known therefore, since he also credits himself with braving the reproach 
of anthropomorphism, that this is the last term I would employ in saying that 
he makes his own being the measure of all things. 

Let us return to our symbolic object, which is itself extremely substantial 
[consistant] in its matter, even if it has lost the weight of use, but whose impon- 
derable meaning will produce displacements of some weight. Is that, then, law 
and language? Perhaps not yet. 
276 For even if there appeared among the sea swallows some kaid of the colony 

who, by gulping down the symbolic fish from the others' gaping beaks, were 
to inaugurate the exploitation of swallow by swallow — a fanciful notion I 
enjoyed developing one day — this would not in any way suffice to reproduce 
among them that fabulous history, the image of our own, whose winged epic 
kept us captive on Penguin Island-, something else would still be needed to cre- 
ate a "swallowized" universe. 

This "something else" completes the symbol, making language of it. In 
order for the symbolic object freed from its usage to become the word freed 
from the hie et nunc, the difference resides not in the sonorous quality of its 
matter, but in its vanishing being in which the symbol finds the permanence 
of the concept. 

Through the word — which is already a presence made of absence — 
absence itself comes to be named in an original moment whose perpetual re- 
creation Freud's genius detected in a child's game. And from this articulated 
couple of presence and absence — also sufficiently constituted by the drawing 
in the sand of a simple line and a broken line of the koua mantics of China — 
a language 's [langue] world of meaning is born, in which the world of things 
will situate itself. 

Through what becomes embodied only by being the trace of a nothingness 
and whose medium thus cannot be altered, concepts, in preserving the dura- 
tion of what passes away, engender things. 

For it is still not saying enough to say that the concept is the thing itself, 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 229 

which a child can demonstrate against the Scholastics. It is the world of words 
that creates the world of things — things which at first run together in the hie 
et nunc of the all in the process of becoming — by giving its concrete being to 
their essence, and its ubiquity to what has always been: KTrju.a eg aei. 

Man thus speaks, but it is because the symbol has made him man. Even if, 
in fact, overabundant gifts welcome a stranger who has made himself known 
to a group, the life of natural groups that constitute a community is subject to 
the rules of matrimonial alliance — determining the direction in which the 
exchange of women takes place — and to the mutual services determined by 
marriage: as the SiRonga proverb says, "A relative by marriage is an elephant's 
hip." Marriage ties are governed by an order of preference whose law con- 
cerning kinship names is, like language, imperative for the group in its forms, 
but unconscious in its structure. Now, in this structure, whose harmony or 
conflicts govern the restricted or generalized exchange discerned in it by eth- 277 

nologists, the startled theoretician refinds the whole logic of combinations; 
thus the laws of number — that is, of the most highly purified of all symbols — 
prove to be immanent in the original symbolism. At least, it is the richness of 
the forms — in which what are known as the elementary structures of kinship 
develop — that makes those laws legible in the original symbolism. And this 
suggests that it is perhaps only our unawareness of their permanence that allows 
us to believe in freedom of choice in the so-called complex structures of mar- 
riage ties under whose law we live. If statistics has already allowed us to glimpse 
that this freedom is not exercised randomly, it is because a subjective logic 
seems to orient its effects. 

This is precisely where the Oedipus complex — insofar as we still acknowl- 
edge that it covers the whole field of our experience with its signification — 
will be said, in my remarks here, to mark the limits our discipline assigns to 
subjectivity: namely, what the subject can know of his unconscious participa- 
tion in the movement of the complex structures of marriage ties, by verifying 
the symbolic effects in his individual existence of the tangential movement 
toward incest that has manifested itself ever since the advent of a universal 
community. 

The primordial Law is therefore the Law which, in regulating marriage ties, 
superimposes the reign of culture over the reign of nature, the latter being 
subject to the law of mating. The prohibition of incest is merely the subjec- 
tive pivot of that Law, laid bare by the modern tendency to reduce the objects 
the subject is forbidden to choose to the mother and sisters, full license, more- 
over, not yet being entirely granted beyond them. 

This law, then, reveals itself clearly enough as identical to a language 
order. For without names for kinship relations, no power can institute the 



23 o Ecrits 

order of preferences and taboos that knot and braid the thread of lineage 
through the generations. And it is the confusion of generations which, in the 
Bible as in all traditional laws, is cursed as being the abomination of the Word 
and the desolation of the sinner. 

Indeed, we know the damage a falsified filiation can do, going as far as dis- 
sociation of the subject's personality, when those around him conspire to sus- 
278 tain the lie. It may be no less when, as a result of a man marrying the mother 

of the woman with whom he has had a son, the son's brother will be his bio- 
logical mother's half-brother. But if the son is later adopted — and I have not 
invented this example — by the sympathizing couple formed by a daughter of 
his father's previous marriage and her husband, he will find himself once 
again a half-brother, this time of his foster mother; and one can imagine the 
complex feelings he will have while awaiting the birth of a child who, in this 
recurring situation, will be his brother and nephew simultaneously. 

So too, the mere time-lag produced in the order of generations by a late- 
born child of a second marriage, where a young mother finds herself the same 
age as an older brother from the first marriage, can produce similar effects; as 
we know, this was true in Freud's own family. 

This same function of symbolic identification — allowing primitive man to 
believe he is the reincarnation of an ancestor with the same name, and even 
determining an alternating recurrence of characteristics in modern man — thus 
brings about a dissociation of the Oedipus complex in subjects exposed to such 
discordances in the paternal relation, in which the constant source of its path- 
ogenic effects must be seen. Indeed, even when it is represented by a single 
person, the paternal function concentrates in itself both imaginary and real 
relations that always more or less fail to correspond to the symbolic relation 
that essentially constitutes it. 

It is in the name of the father that we must recognize the basis of the sym- 
bolic function which, since the dawn of historical time, has identified his per- 
son with the figure of the law. This conception allows us to clearly distinguish, 
in the analysis of a case, the unconscious effects of this function from the nar- 
cissistic relations, or even real relations, that the subject has with the image 
and actions of the person who embodies this function; this results in a mode 
of comprehension that has repercussions on the very way in which interven- 
tions are made by the analyst. Practice has confirmed the fecundity of this 
conception to me, as well as to the students whom I have introduced to this 
method. And, both in supervision and case discussions, I have often had occa- 
sion to stress the harmful confusion produced by neglecting it. 

Thus it is the virtue of the Word that perpetuates the movement of the Great 
Debt whose economy Rabelais, in a famous metaphor, extended to the stars 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 231 

themselves. And we shall not be surprised that the chapter in which he antic- 
ipates ethnographic discoveries with the macaronic inversion of kinship 279 
names, reveals in the Word the substantific divination of the human mystery 
that I am trying to elucidate here. 

Identified with sacred hau or omnipresent mana, the inviolable Debt is the 
guarantee that the voyage on which women and goods are sent will bring 
back to their point of departure, in a never-failing cycle, other women and 
other goods, all bearing an identical entity: what Levi-Strauss calls a "zero- 
symbol," thus reducing the power of Speech to the form of an algebraic sign. 

Symbols in fact envelop the life of man with a network so total that they 
join together those who are going to engender him "by bone and flesh" before 
he comes into the world; so total that they bring to his birth, along with the 
gifts of the stars, if not with the gifts of the fairies, the shape of his destiny; so 
total that they provide the words that will make him faithful or renegade, the 
law of the acts that will follow him right to the very place where he is not yet 
and beyond his very death; and so total that through them his end finds its 
meaning in the last judgment, where the Word absolves his being or condemns 
it — unless he reaches the subjective realization of being-toward-death. 

Servitude and grandeur in which the living being would be annihilated, if 
desire did not preserve his part in the interferences and pulsations that the cycles 
of language cause to converge on him, when the confusion of tongues inter- 
venes and the orders thwart each other in the tearing asunder of the universal 
undertaking. 

But for this desire itself to be satisfied in man requires that it be recognized, 
through the accord of speech or the struggle for prestige, in the symbol or the 
imaginary. 

What is at stake in an analysis is the advent in the subject of the scant real- 
ity that this desire sustains in him, with respect to symbolic conflicts and imag- 
inary fixations, as the means of their accord, and our path is the inter subjective 
experience by which this desire gains recognition. 

Thus we see that the problem is that of the relations between speech and 
language in the subject. 

Three paradoxes in these relations present themselves in our domain. 

In madness, of whatever nature, we must recognize on the one hand the 
negative freedom of a kind of speech that has given up trying to gain recog- 
nition, which is what we call an obstacle to transference; and, on the other, 280 
the singular formation of a delusion which — whether fabular, fantastical, or 
cosmological, or rather interpretative, demanding, or idealist — objectifies 
the subject in a language devoid of dialectic. 21 

The absence of speech is manifested in madness by the stereotypes of a dis- 



232 Ecrits 

course in which the subject, one might say, is spoken instead of speaking; we 
recognize here the symbols of the unconscious in petrified forms that find their 
place in a natural history of these symbols alongside the embalmed forms in 
which myths are presented in our collections of them. But it would be wrong 
to say that the subject assumes these symbols: the resistance to their recogni- 
tion is no less strong in psychosis than in the neuroses, when the subject is led 
to recognize them by an attempt at treatment. 

Let it be said in passing that it would be worthwhile noting the places in 
social space that our culture has assigned these subjects, especially as regards 
their relegation to the social services relating to language, for it is not unlikely 
that we find here one of the factors that consign such subjects to the effects of 
the breakdown produced by the symbolic discordances characteristic of the 
complex structures of civilization. 

The second case is represented by the privileged field of psychoanalytic 
discovery — namely, symptoms, inhibition, and anxiety in the constitutive 
economy of the different neuroses. 

Here speech is driven out of the concrete discourse that orders conscious- 
ness, but it finds its medium either in the subject's natural functions — pro- 
vided a painful organic sensation wedges open the gap between his individual 
being and his essence, which makes illness what institutes the existence of the 
subject in the living being 22 — or in the images that, at the border between the 
Umwelt and the Innenwelt, organize their relational structuring. 

A symptom here is the signifier of a signified that has been repressed from 
the subject's consciousness. A symbol written in the sand of the flesh and on 
28 1 the veil of Maia, it partakes of language by the semantic ambiguity that I have 

already highlighted in its constitution. 

But it is fully functioning speech, for it includes the other's discourse in the 
secret of its cipher [chiffre]. 

It was by deciphering this speech that Freud rediscovered the first language 
of symbols, 23 still alive in the sufferings of civilized man (Das Unbehagen in 
der Kultur {Civilisation and Its Discontents^). 

Hieroglyphics of hysteria, blazons of phobia, and labyrinths oiZwangsneu- 
rose [obsessive neurosis]; charms of impotence, enigmas of inhibition, and ora- 
cles of anxiety; talking arms of character, 24 seals of self-punishment, and 
disguises of perversion: these are the hermetic elements that our exegesis 
resolves, the equivocations that our invocation dissolves, and the artifices that 
our dialectic absolves, by delivering the imprisoned meaning in ways that run 
the gamut from revealing the palimpsest to providing the solution [mot] of the 
mystery and to pardoning speech. 

The third paradox of the relation of language to speech is that of the sub- 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 233 

ject who loses his meaning in the objectifications of discourse. However meta- 
physical its definition may seem, we cannot ignore its presence in the fore- 
ground of our experience. For this is the most profound alienation of the subject 
in our scientific civilization, and it is this alienation that we encounter first 
when the subject begins to talk to us about himself. In order to eliminate it 
entirely, analysis should thus be conducted until it has reached the endpoint 
of wisdom. 

To provide an exemplary formulation of this, I can find no more relevant 
terrain than the usage of everyday speech, pointing out that the expression "ce 
suis-je" ["it is I"] of Villon's era has become inverted in the expression "c'est 
moi" ["it's me"] of modern man. 

The me [moi] of modern man, as I have indicated elsewhere, has taken on 
its form in the dialectical impasse of the beautiful soul who does not recog- 
nize his very reason for being in the disorder he denounces in the world. 

But a way out of this impasse is offered to the subject where his discourse 
rants and raves. Communication can be validly established for him in science 's 282 

collective undertaking and in the tasks science ordains in our universal civi- 
lization; this communication will be effective within the enormous objectifi- 
cation constituted by this science, and it will allow him to forget his subjectivity. 
He will make an effective contribution to the collective undertaking in his daily 
work and will be able to occupy his leisure time with all the pleasures of a pro- 
fuse culture which — providing everything from detective novels to historical 
memoirs and from educational lectures to the orthopedics of group relations — 
will give him the wherewithal to forget his own existence and his death, as well 
as to misrecognize the particular meaning of his life in false communication. 

If the subject did not rediscover through regression — often taken as far back 
as the mirror stage [stade] — the inside of a stadium [stade] in which his ego 
contains his imaginary exploits, there would hardly be any assignable limits 
to the credulity to which he would have to succumb in this situation. Which 
is what makes our responsibility so formidable when, with the mythical 
manipulations of our doctrine, we bring him yet another opportunity to 
become alienated, in the decomposed trinity of the ego,* the superego,* and 
the id,* for example. 

Here it is a wall of language that blocks speech, and the precautions against 
verbalism that are a theme of the discourse of "normal" men in our culture 
merely serve to increase its thickness. 

There might be some point in measuring its thickness by the statistically deter- 
mined total pounds of printed paper, miles of record grooves, and hours of radio 
broadcasts that the said culture produces per capita in sectors A, B, and C of its 
domain. This would be a fine research topic for our cultural organizations, and 



234 Ecrits 

it would be seen that the question of language does not remain entirely within 
the region of the brain in which its use is reflected in the individual. 

We are the hollow men 
We are the stuffed men 
Leaning together 
Headpiece filled with straw, Alas! 
(and so on.) 

283 The resemblance between this situation and the alienation of madness — 

insofar as the formulation given above is authentic, namely, that the mad sub- 
ject is spoken rather than speaking — is obviously related to the requirement, 
presupposed by psychoanalysis, of true speech. If this consequence, which takes 
the paradoxes that are constitutive of what I am saying here as far as they can 
go, were to be turned against the common sense of the psychoanalytic per- 
spective, I would readily grant the pertinence of this objection, but only to 
find my own position confirmed in it — by a dialectical reversal for which there 
would be no shortage of authorized patrons, beginning with Hegel's critique 
of "the philosophy of the skull," and stopping only at Pascal's resounding warn- 
ing, at the dawn of the historical era of the "me" ["moi"\ formulated in the 
following terms: "Men are so necessarily mad that it would be another twist 
of madness not to be mad." 

This is not to say, however, that our culture pursues its course in the shad- 
ows outside of creative subjectivity. On the contrary, creative subjectivity has 
not ceased in its struggle to renew here the never-exhausted power of sym- 
bols in the human exchange that brings them to light. 

To emphasize the small number of subjects who prop up this creation would 
be to give in to a romantic perspective by comparing things that are not equiv- 
alent. The fact is that this subjectivity, regardless of the domain in which it 
appears — mathematics, politics, religion, or even advertising — continues to 
animate the movement of humanity as a whole. Looking at it from another, 
probably no less illusory, angle would lead us to emphasize the opposite trait: 
the fact that its symbolic character has never been more manifest. The irony 
of revolutions is that they engender a power that is all the more absolute in its 
exercise, not because it is more anonymous, as people say, but because it is 
reduced more completely to the words that signify it. The strength of churches 
lies more than ever in the language they have been able to maintain — an 
instance, it should be noted, that Freud left aside in the article in which he 
sketches out for us what I call the "collective subjectivities" of the Church and 
the Army. 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 2j5 

Psychoanalysis has played a role in the direction of modern subjectivity, 
and it cannot sustain this role without aligning it with the movement in mod- 
ern science that elucidates it. 

This is the problem of the foundations that must assure our discipline its 284 

place among the sciences: a problem of formalization, which, it must be admit- 
ted, has gotten off to a very bad start. 

For it seems that, possessed anew by the very shortcoming in the medical 
mind in opposition to which psychoanalysis had to constitute itself, we were 
trying to jump back on the bandwagon of science — being half a century behind 
the movement of the sciences — by following medicine's example. 

This leads to abstract objectification of our experience on the basis of fic- 
titious, or even simulated, principles of experimental method — in which we 
find the effect of biases that must first be swept from our field if we wish to 
cultivate it according to its authentic structure. 

As practitioners of the symbolic function, it is surprising that we shy away 
from delving deeper into it, going so far as to neglect the fact that this func- 
tion situates us at the heart of the movement that is establishing a new order 
of the sciences, with a rethinking of anthropology. 

This new order simply signifies a return to a notion of true science whose 
credentials are already inscribed in a tradition that begins with Plato's Theaete- 
tus. This notion has degenerated, as we know, in the positivist reversal which, 
by making the human sciences the crowning glory of the experimental sci- 
ences, in fact subordinates them to the latter. This conception results from an 
erroneous view of the history of science founded on the prestige of a special- 
ized development of experimentation. 

Today, however, the conjectural sciences are discovering once again the 
age-old notion of science, forcing us to revise the classification of the sciences 
we have inherited from the nineteenth century in a direction clearly indicated 
by the most lucid thinkers. 

One need but follow the concrete evolution of the various disciplines in 
order to become aware of this. 

Linguistics can serve us as a guide here, since that is the vanguard role it is 
given by contemporary anthropology, and we cannot remain indifferent to it. 

The form of mathematicization in which the discovery of the phoneme is 
inscribed, as a function of pairs of oppositions formed by the smallest grasp- 
able discriminative semantic elements, leads us to the very foundations that 
Freud's final doctrine designates as the subjective sources of the symbolic func- 
tion in a vocalic connotation of presence and absence. 285 

And the reduction of any language [langue] to a group comprised of a very 
small number of such phonemic oppositions, initiating an equally rigorous 



236 Ecrits 

formalization of its highest-level morphemes, puts within our reach a strict 
approach to our own field. 

It is up to us to adopt this approach to discover how it intersects with our 
own field, just as ethnography, which follows a course parallel to our own, is 
already doing by deciphering myths according to the synchrony of mythemes. 

Isn't it striking that Levi-Strauss — in suggesting the involvement in myths 
of language structures and of those social laws that regulate marriage ties and 
kinship — is already conquering the very terrain in which Freud situates the 
unconscious? 25 

It is thus impossible not to make a general theory of the symbol the axis of 
a new classification of the sciences where the sciences of man will reassume 
their central position as sciences of subjectivity. Let me indicate its core 
principle, which, of course, does not obviate the need for further elaboration. 

The symbolic function presents itself as a twofold movement in the sub- 
ject: man makes his own action into an object, but only to return its founda- 
tional place to it in due time. In this equivocation, operating at every instant, 
lies the whole progress of a function in which action and knowledge [con- 
naissance] alternate. 26 

Here are two examples, one borrowed from the classroom, the other from 
the very pulse of our time: 

• The first is mathematical: in phase one, man objectifies two collections he 
has counted in the form of two cardinal numbers; in phase two, he man- 
ages to add the two collections using these numbers (see the example cited 
by Kant in the introduction to the transcendental aesthetic, section IV, in 
the second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason); 

• The second is historical: in phase one, a man who works at the level of pro- 
duction in our society considers himself to belong to the ranks of the prole- 
tariat; in phase two, in the name of belonging to it, he joins in a general strike. 

286 If these two examples come from areas which, for us, are the most highly 

contrasted in the domain of the concrete — the first involving the ever freer 
play of mathematical law, the second, the brazen face of capitalist exploita- 
tion — it is because, although they seem to come from radically different realms, 
their effects come to constitute our subsistence, precisely by intersecting there 
in a double reversal: the most subjective science having forged a new reality, 
and the shadow of the social divide arming itself with a symbol in action. 

Here the distinction people make between the exact sciences and those for 
which there is no reason to refuse the appellation "conjectural" no longer seems 
to be acceptable — for lack of any grounds for that distinction. 27 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 233 

For exactness must be distinguished from truth, and conjecture does not 
exclude rigor. If experimental science derives its exactness from mathematics, 
its relation to nature is nonetheless problematic. 

Indeed, if our link to nature incites us to wonder poetically whether it is 
not nature 's own movement that we refind in our science, in 



. . . cette voix 

Qui se connait quand elle sonne 
N'etre plus la voix de personne 
Tant que des ondes et des bois, 

it is clear that our physics is but a mental fabrication in which mathematical 
symbols serve as instruments. 

For experimental science is not so much defined by the quantity to which 
it is in fact applied, as by the measurement it introduces into reality [reel]. 

This can be seen in relation to the measurement of time without which exper- 
imental science would be impossible. Huyghens' clock, which alone gave exper- 
imental science its precision, is merely the organ that fulfills Galileo's 
hypothesis concerning the equal gravitational pull on all bodies — that is, the 
hypothesis of uniform acceleration that confers its law, since it is the same, on 
every instance of falling. 

It is amusing to point out that the instrument was completed before the 
hypothesis could be verified by observation, and that the clock thereby ren- 287 

dered the hypothesis useless at the same time as it offered it the instrument it 
needed to be rigorous. 28 

But mathematics can symbolize another kind of time, notably the inter- 
subjective time that structures human action, whose formulas are beginning 
to be provided by game theory, still called strategy, but which it would be bet- 
ter to call "stochastics." 

The author of these lines has attempted to demonstrate in the logic of a 
sophism the temporal mainsprings through which human action, insofar as it 
is coordinated with the other's action, finds in the scansion of its hesitations 
the advent of its certainty; and, in the decision that concludes it, gives the other's 
action — which it now includes — its direction [sens] to come, along with its 
sanction regarding the past. 

I demonstrate there that it is the certainty anticipated by the subject in the 
"time for understanding" which — through the haste that precipitates the 
"moment of concluding" — determines the other's decision that makes the sub- 
ject's own movement an error or truth. 

This example indicates how the mathematical formalization that inspired 



238 Ecrits 

Boolean logic, and even set theory, can bring to the science of human action 
the structure of intersubjective time that psychoanalytic conjecture needs to 
ensure its own rigor. 

If, moreover, the history of the historian's technique shows that its progress 
is defined in the ideal of an identification of the historian's subjectivity with 
the constitutive subjectivity of the primal historicization in which events are 
humanized, it is clear that psychoanalysis finds its precise scope here: that is, 
in knowledge [connaissance], as realizing this ideal, and in efficacy, as finding 
its justification here. The example of history also dissipates like a mirage the 
recourse to the "lived reaction" that obsesses both our technique and our the- 
ory, for the fundamental historicity of the events we are concerned with suf- 
fices to conceive the possibility of a subjective reproduction of the past in the 
present. 

Furthermore, this example makes us realize how psychoanalytic regression 
288 implies the progressive dimension of the subject's history — which Freud 

rightly considered to be lacking in the Jungian concept of neurotic regres- 
sion — and we see how analytic experience itself renews this progression by 
assuring its continuation. 

Finally, the reference to linguistics will introduce us to the method which, 
by distinguishing synchronic from diachronic structurings in language, will 
enable us to better understand the different value our language takes on in the 
interpretation of resistances and of transference, and to differentiate the 
effects characteristic of repression and the structure of the individual myth in 
obsessive neurosis. 

The list of disciplines Freud considered important sister sciences for an ideal 
Department of Psychoanalysis is well known. Alongside psychiatry and sex- 
ology we find "the history of civilization, mythology, the psychology of reli- 
gions, literary history, and literary criticism." 

This whole group of subjects, determining the curriculum for instruction 
in technique, can be easily accommodated in the epistemological triangle I have 
described, and would provide an advanced level of instruction in analytic the- 
ory and technique with its primer. 

For my part, I would be inclined to add: rhetoric, dialectic (in the techni- 
cal sense this term takes on in Aristotle 's Topics) , grammar, and poetics — the 
supreme pinnacle of the aesthetics of language — which would include the neg- 
lected technique of witticisms. 

While these subject headings may sound somewhat old-fashioned to cer- 
tain people, I would not hesitate to endorse them as a return to our sources. 

For psychoanalysis in its early development, intimately linked to the dis- 
covery and study of symbols, went so far as to partake in the structure of what 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 239 

was called "the liberal arts" in the Middle Ages. Deprived, like them, of a true 
formalization, psychoanalysis became organized, like them, into a body of priv- 
ileged problems, each one promoted by some felicitous relation of man to his 
own measure, taking on a charm and a humanity owing to this particularity 
that in our eyes might well make up for their somewhat recreational appear- 
ance. But let us not disdain this appearance in the early developments of psy- 
choanalysis; indeed, it expresses nothing less than the re-creation of human 289 
meaning in an arid era of scientism. 

These early developments should be all the less disdained since psycho- 
analysis has hardly raised the bar by setting off along the false pathways of a 
theorization that runs counter to its dialectical structure. 

Psychoanalysis can provide scientific foundations for its theory and 
technique only by adequately formalizing the essential dimensions of its 
experience, which — along with the historical theory of the symbol — are 
inter subjective logic and the temporality of the subject. 

III. The Resonances of Interpretation and the Time of the 
Subject in Psychoanalytic Technique 

Between man and love, 

There is woman. 
Between man and woman, 

There is a world. 
Between man and the world, 

There is a wall. 
— Antoine Tudal, Paris in the Year 2000 

Nam Sibyllam quidem Cumis ego ipse oculis meis vidi in ampulla pendere, et cum 
illi pueri dicerent: ZifivXka xi Ge^eig^ respondebat ilia: (XJtoGaveiv 0e)aD. 
— Petronius, Satyricon, XLVIII 

Bringing psychoanalytic experience back to speech and language as its foun- 
dations is of direct concern to its technique. While it is not situated in the inef- 
fable, we see the one-way slippage that has occurred, distancing interpretation 
from its core. We are thus justified in suspecting that this deviation in psy- 
choanalytic practice explains the new aims to which psychoanalytic theory has 
become receptive. 

If we look at the situation a little more closely, we see that the problems of 
symbolic interpretation began by intimidating our little group before becom- 
ing embarrassing to it. The successes obtained by Freud now astonish people 
because of the unseemly indoctrination they appear to involve, and the dis- 290 

play thereof — so evident in the cases of Dora, the Rat Man, and the Wolf 



240 Ecrits 

Man — strikes us as nothing short of scandalous. Indeed, our clever colleagues 
do not shrink from doubting whether the technique employed in these cases 
was actually any good. 

This disaffection in the psychoanalytic movement stems, in truth, from a 
confusion of tongues, about which the most representative personality of its 
present hierarchy made no secret in a recent conversation with me. 

It is well worth noting that this confusion grows when each analyst believes 
he has been assigned the job of discovering in our experience the conditions 
of a complete objectification, and when the enthusiasm that greets his theo- 
retical attempts is greater the more detached from reality they prove to be. 

It is clear that the principles of the analysis of the resistances, as well-founded 
as they may be, have in practice occasioned an ever greater misrecognition of 
the subject, because they have not been understood in relation to the inter- 
subjectivity of speech. 

If we follow the proceedings of Freud's first seven sessions with the Rat 
Man, which are reported to us in full, it seems highly improbable that Freud 
did not recognize the resistances as they arose — arising precisely in the places 
where our modern practitioners tell us he overlooked them — since it is 
Freud 's own text, after all, that enables the practitioners to pinpoint them. Once 
again Freud's texts manifest an exhaustion of the subject that amazes us, and 
no interpretation has thus far exploited all of its resources. 

I mean that Freud not only let himself be duped into encouraging his sub- 
ject to go beyond his initial reticence, but also understood perfectly well the 
seductive scope of this game in the imaginary. To convince oneself of this, one 
need but read the description he gives us of the expression on his patient's face 
during the patient's painful narrative of the purported torture that supplied 
the theme of his obsession, that of the rat forced into the victim's anus: "His 
face," Freud tells us, "reflected horror at a jouissance of which he was 
unaware." The effect in the present of his repeating this narrative did not escape 
Freud, no more than did the fact that he identified his analyst with the "cruel 
captain" who forced this narrative to become etched in the subject's memory, 
291 nor therefore the import of the theoretical clarifications the subject required 

as security before going on with what he was saying. 

Far from interpreting the resistance here, however, Freud astonishes us by 
granting the patient's request, to such an extent that he seems to let himself be 
roped into the subject's game. 

But the extremely approximate character of the explanations with which 
Freud gratifies him, so approximate as to appear crude, is sufficiently instruc- 
tive: it is clearly not so much a question here of doctrine or indoctrination as 
of a symbolic gift of speech — ripe with a secret pact, in the context of the imag- 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 241 

inary participation which includes it — whose import will be revealed later in 
the symbolic equivalence the subject establishes in his mind between rats and 
the florins with which he remunerates the analyst. 

We can see therefore that Freud, far from misrecognizing the resistance, 
uses it as a propitious predisposition for setting in motion the resonances of 
speech, and he conducts himself, as far as possible, in accordance with the first 
definition he gave of resistance, by employing it to involve the subject in his 
message. He later changes tack abruptly when he sees that, as a result of being 
handled delicately, the resistance is serving to keep the dialogue at the level of 
a conversation in which the subject tries to continue seducing the analyst by 
slipping beyond his reach. 

But we learn that analysis consists in playing on the multiple staves of the 
score that speech constitutes in the registers of language — which is where 
overdetermination comes in, the latter having no meaning except in this order. 

And we have simultaneously isolated here the mainspring of Freud's suc- 
cess. In order for the analyst's message to respond to the subject's profound 
questioning, the subject must understand it as a response that concerns him 
alone; and the privilege Freud's patients enjoyed, in receiving its good word 
from the lips of the very man who was its herald, satisfied this demand of theirs. 

Let us note in passing that the Rat Man had had a prior taste of it, since he 
had thumbed through The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, which had just 
come out. 

Which doesn't imply that the book is very much better known today, even 
among analysts, but the popularization of Freud's concepts and their resorp- 
tion into what I call the wall of language, would deaden the effect of our speech 
were we to give it the style of Freud's remarks to the Rat Man. 292 

The point here is not to imitate him. In order to rediscover the effect of Freud 's 
speech, I won't resort to its terms but rather to the principles that govern it. 

These principles are nothing but the dialectic of self-consciousness, as it is 
realized from Socrates to Hegel, beginning with the ironic assumption that all 
that is rational is real, only to precipitate into the scientific judgment that all 
that is real is rational. But Freud's discovery was to demonstrate that this ver- 
ifying process authentically reaches the subject only by decentering him from 
self-consciousness, to which he was confined by Hegel's reconstruction of the 
phenomenology of mind. In other words, this discovery renders still flimsier 
any search for "conscious realization" which, apart from being a psycholog- 
ical phenomenon, is not inscribed within the conjuncture of the particular 
moment that alone gives body to the universal, and failing which the latter 
dissipates into generality. 

These remarks define the limits within which it is impossible for our tech- 



242 Ecrits 

nique to ignore the structuring moments of Hegel's phenomenology: first and 
foremost, the master/slave dialectic, the dialectic of the beautiful soul and the 
law of the heart, and generally everything that allows us to understand how 
the constitution of the object is subordinate to the realization of the subject. 

But if there is still something prophetic in Hegel's insistence on the funda- 
mental identity of the particular and the universal, an insistence that reveals 
the extent of his genius, it is certainly psychoanalysis that provides it with its 
paradigm by revealing the structure in which this identity is realized as dis- 
junctive of the subject, and without appealing to the future. 

Let me simply say that this, in my view, constitutes an objection to any ref- 
erence to totality in the individual, since the subject introduces division 
therein, as well as in the collectivity that is the equivalent of the individual. 
Psychoanalysis is what clearly relegates both the one and the other to the sta- 
tus of mirages. 

This would seem to be something that could no longer be forgotten, were 
it not precisely psychoanalysis that teaches us that it is forgettable — confir- 
293 mation of which turns out, by a reversal [retour] that is more legitimate than 

one might think, to come from psychoanalysts themselves, their "new ten- 
dencies" representing this forgetting. 

Now while Hegel's work is also precisely what we need to confer a mean- 
ing on so-called analytic neutrality other than that the analyst is simply in a 
stupor, this does not mean that we have nothing to learn from the elasticity of 
the Socratic method or even from the fascinating proceedings of the technique 
by which Plato presents it to us, were it only by our sensing in Socrates and 
his desire the unresolved enigma of the psychoanalyst, and by situating in rela- 
tion to Platonic vision our own relation to truth — in this case, however, in a 
way that respects the distance separating the reminiscence Plato was led to 
presume to exist in any advent of the ideas, from the exhaustion of being con- 
summated in Kierkegaardian repetition. 29 

But there is also a historical difference between Socrates' interlocutor and 
ours that is worth weighing. When Socrates relies on an artisanal form of rea- 
son that he can extract just as well from a slave's discourse, it is in order to 
impress upon authentic masters the necessity of an order that turns their power 
into justice and the city's magic words [maitres-mots] into truth. But we ana- 
lysts deal with slaves who think they are masters, and who find in a language — 
whose mission is universal — support for their servitude in the bonds of its 
ambiguity. So much so that one might humorously say that our goal is to restore 
in them the sovereign freedom displayed by Humpty Dumpty when he 
reminds Alice that he is, after all, master of the signifier, even if he is not mas- 
ter of the signified from which his being derived its shape. 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 243 

We always come back, then, to our twofold reference to speech and lan- 
guage. In order to free the subject's speech, we introduce him to the language 
of his desire, that is, to the primary language in which — beyond what he tells 
us of himself — he is already speaking to us unbeknown to himself, first and 
foremost, in the symbols of his symptom. 

It is certainly a language that is at stake in the symbolism brought to light 
in analysis. This language, corresponding to the playful wish found in one of 
Lichtenberg's aphorisms, has the universal character of a tongue that would 
be understood in all other tongues, but at the same time — since it is the lan- 
guage that grabs hold of desire at the very moment it becomes humanized by 294 
gaining recognition — it is absolutely particular to the subject. 

It is thus a primary language, by which I do not mean a primitive language, 
since Freud — whose merit for having made this total discovery warrants com- 
parison with Champollion's — deciphered it in its entirety in the dreams of our 
contemporaries. The essential field of this language was rather authoritatively 
defined by one of the earliest assistants associated with Freud's work, and one 
of the few to have brought anything new to it: I mean Ernest Jones, the last 
survivor of those to whom the seven rings of the master were passed and who 
attests by his presence in the honorary positions of an international associa- 
tion that they are not reserved solely for relic bearers. 

In a fundamental article on symbolism, 30 Jones points out on page 102 that, 
although there are thousands of symbols in the sense in which the term is under- 
stood in analysis, all of them refer to one's own body, blood relatives, birth, 
life, and death. 

This truth, recognized de facto by Jones, enables us to understand that 
although the symbol, psychoanalytically speaking, is repressed in the uncon- 
scious, it bears in itself no mark of regression or even of immaturity. For it to 
have its effects in the subject, it is thus enough that it make itself heard, since 
these effects operate unbeknown to him — as we admit in our everyday expe- 
rience, when we explain many reactions by normal and neurotic subjects as 
their response to the symbolic meaning of an act, a relation, or an object. 

It is thus indisputable that the analyst can play on the power of symbols by 
evoking them in a calculated fashion in the semantic resonances of his remarks. 

This is surely the path by which a return to the use of symbolic effects can 
proceed in a renewed technique of interpretation. 

We could adopt as a reference here what the Hindu tradition teaches about 
dhvani? 1 defining it as the property of speech by which it conveys what it does 
not say. This is illustrated by a little tale whose naivete, which appears to be 295 

required in such examples, proves funny enough to induce us to penetrate to 
the truth it conceals. 



244 Ecrits 

A girl, it is said, is awaiting her lover on the bank of a river when she sees 
a Brahmin coming along. She approaches him and exclaims in the most ami- 
able tones: "What a lucky day this is for you! The dog whose barking used to 
frighten you will not be on this river bank again, for it was just devoured by 
a lion that roams around here ..." 

The absence of the lion may thus have as many effects as his spring — which, 
were he present, would only come once, according to the proverb relished by 
Freud. 

The primary character of symbols in fact makes them similar to those num- 
bers out of which all other numbers are composed; and if they therefore under- 
lie all the semantemes of a language, we shall be able to restore to speech its 
full evocative value by a discreet search for their interferences, following the 
course of a metaphor whose symbolic displacement neutralizes the secondary 
meanings of the terms it associates. 

To be taught and to be learned, this technique would require a profound 
assimilation of the resources of a language \langue\ especially those that are 
concretely realized in its poetic texts. It is well known that Freud was steeped 
in German literature, which, by virtue of an incomparable translation, can be 
said to include Shakespeare 's plays. Every one of his works bears witness to 
this, and to the continual recourse he had to it, no less in his technique than in 
his discovery. Not to mention his broad background in the classics, his famil- 
iarity with the modern study of folklore, and his keeping abreast of contem- 
porary humanism's conquests in the area of ethnography. 

Analytic practitioners should be asked not to consider it futile to follow 
Freud along this path. 

But the tide is against us. It can be gauged by the condescending attention 
paid to the "wording,"* as if to some novelty; and the English morphology 
here provides a notion that is still difficult to define with a prop that is suffi- 
ciently subtle for people to make a big to-do about it. 
296 What this notion covers, however, is hardly encouraging when we see an 

author 32 amazed at having achieved an entirely different success in the inter- 
pretation of one and the same resistance by the use, "without conscious pre- 
meditation," he emphasizes, of the term "need for love"* instead of and in the 
place of "demand for love,"* which he had first put forward, without seeing 
anything in it (as he himself tells us). While the anecdote is supposed to con- 
firm the interpretation's reference to the "ego psychology"* in the title of the 
article, it refers instead, it seems, to the analyst's ego psychology,* insofar as 
this interpretation makes do with such a weak use of English that he can extend 
his practice of analysis right to the very brink of gibberish. 33 

The fact is that need* and demand* have diametrically opposed meanings 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 245 

for the subject, and to maintain that they can be used interchangeably for even 
an instant amounts to a radical ignorance of the summoning characteristic of 
speech. 

For in its symbolizing function, speech tends toward nothing less than a 
transformation of the subject to whom it is addressed by means of the link it 
establishes with the speaker — namely, by bringing about a signifying effect. 

This is why we must return once more to the structure of communication 
in language and definitively dispel the mistaken notion of "language as signs," 
a source in this realm of confusions about discourse and of errors about speech. 

If communication based on language is conceived as a signal by which the 
sender informs the receiver of something by means of a certain code, there is 
no reason why we should not lend as much credence and even more to every 
other kind of sign when the "something" in question concerns the individual: 
indeed, we are quite right to prefer every mode of expression that verges on 
natural signs. 

It is in this way that the technique of speech has been discredited among us 
and we find ourselves in search of a gesture, a grimace, a posture adopted, a 
face made, a movement, a shudder — nay, a stopping of usual movement — for 297 

we are subtle and nothing will stop us from setting our bloodhounds on the 
scent. 

I shall show the inadequacy of the conception of language as signs by the 
very manifestation that best illustrates it in the animal kingdom, a manifesta- 
tion which, had it not recently been the object of an authentic discovery, would 
have to have been invented for this purpose. 

It is now generally recognized that, when a bee returns to its hive after gath- 
ering nectar, it transmits an indication of the existence of nectar near or far 
away from the hive to its companions by two sorts of dances. The second is 
the most remarkable, for the plane in which the bee traces out a figure-eight — 
a shape that gave it the name "wagging dance"* — and the frequency of the 
figures executed within a given time, designate, on the one hand, the exact 
direction to be followed, determined in relation to the sun's inclination (by 
which bees are able to orient themselves in all kinds of weather, thanks to their 
sensitivity to polarized light), and, on the other hand, the distance at which 
the nectar is to be found up to several miles away. The other bees respond to 
this message by immediately setting off for the place thus designated. 

It took some ten years of patient observation for Karl von Frisch to decode 
this kind of message, for it is certainly a code or signaling system, whose generic 
character alone forbids us to qualify it as conventional. 

But is it a language, for all that? We can say that it is distinguished from 
language precisely by the fixed correlation between its signs and the reality 



246 Ecrits 

they signify. For, in a language, signs take on their value from their relations 
to each other in the lexical distribution of semantemes as much as in the posi- 
tional, or even Sectional, use of morphemes — in sharp contrast to the fixity 
of the coding used by bees. The diversity of human languages takes on its full 
value viewed in this light. 

Furthermore, while a message of the kind described here determines the 
action of the "socius," it is never retransmitted by the socius. This means that 
the message remains frozen in its function as a relay of action, from which no 

298 subject detaches it as a symbol of communication itself. 34 

The form in which language expresses itself in and of itself defines sub- 
jectivity. Language says: "You will go here, and when you see this, you will 
turn off there." In other words, it refers to discourse about the other [discours 
de Vautre\. It is enveloped as such in the highest function of speech, inasmuch 
as speech commits its author by investing its addressee with a new reality, as 
for example, when a subject seals his fate as a married man by saying "You are 
my wife." 

Indeed, this is the essential form from which all human speech derives more 
than the form at which it arrives. 

Hence the paradox that one of my most acute auditors believed to be an 
objection to my position when I first began to make my views known on analy- 
sis as dialectic; he formulated it as follows: "Human language would then con- 
stitute a kind of communication in which the sender receives his own message 
back from the receiver in an inverted form." I could but adopt this objector's 
formulation, recognizing in it the stamp of my own thinking; for I maintain 
that speech always subjectively includes its own reply, that "Thou wouldst not 
seek Me, if thou hadst not found Me" simply validates the same truth, and that 
this is why, in the paranoiac refusal of recognition, it is in the form of a neg- 
ative verbalization that the unavowable feeling eventually emerges in a per- 
secutory "interpretation." 

Thus when you congratulate yourself for having met someone who speaks 
the same language as you, you do not mean that you encounter each other in 
the discourse of everyman, but that you are united to that person by a partic- 
ular way of speaking. 

The antinomy immanent in the relations between speech and language thus 

299 becomes clear. The more functional language becomes, the less suited it is to 
speech, and when it becomes overly characteristic of me alone, it loses its func- 
tion as language. 

We are aware of the use made in primitive traditions of secret names, with 
which the subject identifies his own person or his gods so closely that to reveal 
these names is to lose himself or betray these gods; and what our patients con- 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 24J 

fide in us, as well as our own recollections, teach us that it is not at all rare for 
children to spontaneously rediscover the virtues of that use. 

Finally, the speech value of a language is gauged by the inter subjectivity 
of the "we" it takes on. 

By an inverse antinomy, it can be observed that the more language 's role is 
neutralized as language becomes more like information, the more redundancies 
are attributed to it. This notion of redundancy originated in research that was 
all the more precise because a vested interest was involved, having been 
prompted by the economics of long-distance communication and, in particu- 
lar, by the possibility of transmitting several conversations on a single telephone 
line simultaneously. It was observed that a substantial portion of the phonetic 
medium is superfluous for the communication actually sought to be achieved. 

This is highly instructive to us, 35 for what is redundant as far as informa- 
tion is concerned is precisely what plays the part of resonance in speech. 

For the function of language in speech is not to inform but to evoke. 

What I seek in speech is a response from the other. What constitutes me as 
a subject is my question. In order to be recognized by the other, I proffer what 
was only in view of what will be. In order to find him, I call him by a name 
that he must assume or refuse in order to answer me. 

I identify myself in language, but only by losing myself in it as an object. 
What is realized in my history is neither the past definite as what was, since it 300 

is no more, nor even the perfect as what has been in what I am, but the future 
anterior as what I will have been, given what I am in the process of becoming. 

If I now face someone to question him, there is no cybernetic device imag- 
inable that can turn his response into a reaction. The definition of "response" 
as the second term in the "stimulus-response" circuit is simply a metaphor 
sustained by the subjectivity attributed to animals, only to be elided thereafter 
in the physical schema to which the metaphor reduces it. This is what I have 
called putting a rabbit into a hat so as to pull it out again later. But a reaction 
is not a response. 

If I press an electric button and a light goes on, there is a response only to 
my desire. If in order to obtain the same result I must try a whole system of 
relays whose correct position is unknown to me, there is a question only in 
relation to my expectation, and there will not be a question any more once I 
have learned enough about the system to operate it flawlessly. 

But if I call the person to whom I am speaking by whatever name I like, I 
notify him of the subjective function he must take up in order to reply to me, 
even if it is to repudiate this function. 

The decisive function of my own response thus appears, and this function 
is not, as people maintain, simply to be received by the subject as approval or 



248 Ecrits 

rejection of what he is saying, but truly to recognize or abolish him as a sub- 
ject. Such is the nature of the analyst's responsibility every time he intervenes 
by means of speech. 

The problem of the therapeutic effects of inexact interpretation, raised by 
Edward Glover in a remarkable paper, 36 thus led him to conclusions where 
the question of exactness fades into the background. For not only is every 
spoken intervention received by the subject as a function of his structure, but 
the intervention itself takes on a structuring function due to its form. Indeed, 
non-analytic psychotherapies, and even utterly ordinary medical "prescrip- 
tions," have the precise impact of interventions that could be qualified as 
301 obsessive systems of suggestion, as hysterical suggestions of a phobic nature, 

and even as persecutory supports, each psychotherapy deriving its particular 
character from the way it sanctions the subject's misrecognition of his own 
reality. 

Speech is in fact a gift of language, and language is not immaterial. It is a 
subtle body, but body it is. Words are caught up in all the body images that 
captivate the subject; they may "knock up" the hysteric, be identified with the 
object of Penisneid, represent the urinary flow of urethral ambition, or repre- 
sent the feces retained in avaricious jouissance. 

Furthermore, words themselves can suffer symbolic lesions and accomplish 
imaginary acts whose victim is the subject. Recall the Wespe (wasp), castrated 
of its initial W to become the S.P. of the Wolf Man's initials, at the moment he 
carried out the symbolic punishment to which he himself was subjected by 
Grusha, the wasp. 

Recall too the S that constitutes the residue of the hermetic formula into 
which the Rat Man's conjuratory invocations became condensed after Freud 
had extracted the anagram of his beloved's name from its cipher, and that, 
tacked onto the beginning of the final "amen" of his jaculatory prayer, eter- 
nally inundated the lady's name with the symbolic ejecta of his impotent desire. 

Similarly, an article by Robert Fliess, 37 inspired by Abraham's inaugural 
remarks, shows us that one 's discourse as a whole may become eroticized, fol- 
lowing the displacements of erogeneity in the body image, momentarily 
determined by the analytic relationship. 

Discourse then takes on a urethral-phallic, anal-erotic, or even oral-sadistic 
function. It is noteworthy, moreover, that the author grasps its effect above 
all in the silences that mark inhibition of the satisfaction the subject derives 
from it. 

In this way speech may become an imaginary or even real object in the sub- 
ject and, as such, debase in more than one respect the function of language. I 
shall thus relegate such speech to the parenthesis of the resistance it manifests. 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 249 

But not in order to exclude it from the analytic relationship, for the latter 302 

would then lose everything, including its raison d'etre. 

Analysis can have as its goal only the advent of true speech and the sub- 
ject's realization of his history in its relation to a future. 

Maintaining this dialectic is directly opposed to any objectifying orienta- 
tion of analysis, and highlighting this necessity is of capital importance if we 
are to see through the aberrations of the new trends in psychoanalysis. 

I shall illustrate my point here by once again returning to Freud, and, since 
I have already begun to make use of it, to the case of the Rat Man. 

Freud goes so far as to take liberties with the exactness of the facts when it 
is a question of getting at the subject's truth. At one point, Freud glimpses the 
determinant role played by the mother's proposal that he marry her cousin's 
daughter at the origin of the present phase of his neurosis. Indeed, as I have 
shown in my seminar, this flashes through Freud 's mind owing to his own per- 
sonal experience. But he does not hesitate to interpret its effect to the subject 
as that of a prohibition by his dead father against his liaison with his lady-love. 

This interpretation is not only factually, but also psychologically, inexact, 
for the father's castrating activity — which Freud affirms here with an insis- 
tence that might be believed systematic — played only a secondary role in this 
case. But Freud's apperception of the dialectical relationship is so apt that the 
interpretation he makes at that moment triggers the decisive destruction of the 
lethal symbols that narcissistically bind the subject both to his dead father and 
to his idealized lady, their two images being sustained, in an equivalence char- 
acteristic of the obsessive, one by the fantasmatic aggressiveness that perpet- 
uates it, the other by the mortifying cult that transforms it into an idol. 

Similarly, it is by recognizing the forced subjectivization of the obsessive 
debt 38 — in the scenario of futile attempts at restitution, a scenario that too per- 
fectly expresses its imaginary terms for the subject to even try to enact it, the 303 
pressure to repay the debt being exploited by the subject to the point of delu- 
sion — that Freud achieves his goal. This is the goal of bringing the subject to 
rediscover — in the story of his father's lack of delicacy, his marriage to the 
subject's mother, the "pretty but penniless girl," his wounded love-life, and 
his ungrateful forgetting of his beneficent friend — to rediscover in this story, 
along with the fateful constellation that presided over the subject 's very birth, 
the unfillable gap constituted by the symbolic debt against which his neuro- 
sis is a protest. 

There is no trace here at all of recourse to the ignoble specter of some sort 
of early "fear," or even to a masochism that it would be easy enough to bran- 
dish, much less to that obsessive buttressing propagated by some analysts in 
the name of the analysis of the defenses. The resistances themselves, as I have 



25o Ecrits 

shown elsewhere, are used as long as possible in the direction [sens] of the 
progress of the discourse. And when it is time to put an end to them, we man- 
age to do so by giving in to them. 

For this is how the Rat Man is able to insert into his subjectivity its true 
mediation in a transferential form: the imaginary daughter he gives Freud in 
order to receive her hand in marriage from him, and who unveils her true face 
to him in a key dream — that of death gazing at him with its bituminous eyes. 

And although it was with this symbolic pact that the ruses of the subject's 
servitude came to an end, reality did not fail him, it seems, in granting him 
these nuptial wishes. The footnote added to the case in 1923 — which Freud 
dedicated as an epitaph to this young man who had found in the risks of war 
"the end that awaited so many worthy young men on whom so many hopes 
had been founded," thus concluding the case with all the rigor of destiny — 
elevates it to the beauty of tragedy. 

In order to know how to respond to the subject in analysis, the method is 
to first determine where his ego* is situated — the ego* that Freud himself 
defined as formed by a verbal nucleus — in other words, to figure out through 
whom and for whom the subject asks his question. As long as this is not known, 
we risk misconstruing the desire that must be recognized there and the object 
to whom this desire is addressed. 

The hysteric captivates this object in a subtle intrigue and her ego* is in the 
third person by means of whom the subject enjoys the object who incarnates 
304 her question. The obsessive drags into the cage of his narcissism the objects 

in which his question reverberates in the multiplied alibi of deadly figures and, 
mastering their high-wire act, addresses his ambiguous homage toward the 
box in which he himself has his seat, that of the master who cannot be seen [se 
voir]. 

Trahit sua quemque voluptas; one identifies with the spectacle and the other 
puts on a show [donne a voir]. 

In the case of the hysterical subject, for whom the term "acting out"* takes 
on its literal meaning since he acts outside himself, you have to get him to rec- 
ognize where his action is situated. In the case of the obsessive, you have to 
get yourself recognized in the spectator, who is invisible from the stage, to 
whom he is united by the mediation of death. 

It is therefore always in the relation between the subject's ego and his dis- 
course 's / that you must understand the meaning of the discourse if you are 
to unalienate the subject. 

But you cannot possibly achieve this if you cleave to the idea that the sub- 
ject 's ego is identical to the presence that is speaking to you. 

This error is fostered by the terminology of the topography that is all too 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis z5i 

tempting to an objectifying cast of mind, allowing it to slide from the ego 
defined as the perception-consciousness system — that is, as the system of the 
subject's objectifications — to the ego conceived of as the correlate of an 
absolute reality and thus, in a singular return of the repressed in psychologis- 
tic thought, to once again take the ego as the "reality function" in relation to 
which Pierre Janet organizes his psychological conceptions. 

Such slippage occurred only because it was not realized that, in Freud's 
work, the ego,* id,* superego* topography is subordinate to the metapsychol- 
ogy whose terms he was propounding at the same time and without which the 
topography loses its meaning. Analysts thus became involved in a sort of psy- 
chological orthopedics that will continue to bear fruit for a long time to come. 

Michael Balint has provided a thoroughly penetrating analysis of the inter- 
action between theory and technique in the genesis of a new conception of 
analysis, and he finds no better term to indicate its result than the watchword 
he borrows from Rickman: the advent of a "two-body psychology."* 

Indeed, it couldn't be better put. Analysis is becoming the relation of two 
bodies between which a fantasmatic communication is established in which 
the analyst teaches the subject to apprehend himself as an object. Subjectivity 
is admitted into analysis only as long as it is bracketed as an illusion, and speech 305 

is excluded from a search for lived experience that becomes its supreme aim; 
but its dialectically necessary result appears in the fact that, since the analyst's 
subjectivity is freed [delivree] from all restraint, this leaves the subject at the 
mercy [livre] of every summons of the analyst's speech. 

Once the intrasubjective topography has become entified, it is in fact real- 
ized in the division of labor between the subjects present. This deviant use of 
Freud's formulation that all that is id* must become ego* appears in a demys- 
tified form: the subject, transformed into an /r, has to conform to an ego* which 
the analyst has no trouble recognizing as his ally, since it is, in fact, the ana- 
lyst's own ego.* 

It is precisely this process that is expressed in many a theoretical formula- 
tion of the splitting* of the ego* in analysis. Half of the subject's ego* crosses 
over to the other side of the wall that separates the analysand from the ana- 
lyst, then half of the remaining half, and so on, in an asymptotic progression 
that never succeeds — regardless of how great the inroads it makes into the 
opinion the subject will have formed of himself — in crushing his every pos- 
sibility of reversing the aberrant effects of his analysis. 

But how could a subject, who undergoes a type of analysis based on the prin- 
ciple that all his formulations are systems of defense, defend himself against 
the total disorientation to which this principle consigns the analyst's dialectic? 

Freud's interpretation, the dialectical method of which appears so clearly 



2S2 Ecrits 

in the case of Dora, does not present these dangers, for when the analyst's 
biases (that is, his countertransference, a term whose correct use, in my view, 
cannot be extended beyond the dialectical reasons for his error) have misled 
him in his intervention, he immediately pays a price for it in the form of a neg- 
ative transference. For the latter manifests itself with a force that is all the greater 
the further such an analysis has already led the subject toward an authentic 
recognition, and what usually results is the breaking off of the analysis. 

This is exactly what happened in Dora's case, because of Freud's relentless 
attempts to make her think Herr K. was the hidden object of her desire; the 
constitutive biases of Freud's countertransference led him to see in Herr K. 
the promise of Dora's happiness. 

Dora herself was undoubtedly mistaken [feintee] about her relationship with 
306 Herr K., but she did not feel any the less that Freud was too. Yet when she comes 

back to see him, after a lapse of fifteen months — in which the fateful cipher of 
her "time for understanding" is inscribed — we can sense that she begins to feign 
to have been feigning. The convergence of this feint, raised to the second power, 
with the aggressive intent Freud attributes to it — not inaccurately, of course, 
but without recognizing its true mainspring — presents us with a rough idea of 
the intersubjective complicity that an "analysis of resistances," sure of being 
within its rights, might have perpetuated between them. There can be little doubt 
that, with the means now available to us due to the "progress" that has been 
made in our technique, this human error could have been extended well beyond 
the point at which it would have become diabolical. 

None of this is my own invention, for Freud himself recognized after the 
fact the preliminary source of his failure in his own misrecognition at that time 
of the homosexual position of the object aimed at by the hysteric's desire. 

The whole process that led to this current trend in psychoanalysis no doubt 
goes back, first of all, to the analyst's guilty conscience about the miracle his 
speech performs. He interprets the symbol and, lo and behold, the symptom — 
which inscribes the symbol in letters of suffering in the subject's flesh — dis- 
appears. This thaumaturgy is unbecoming to us. For, after all, we are scientists 
and magic is not a justifiable practice. So we disclaim responsibility by accus- 
ing the patient of magical thinking. Before long we '11 be preaching the Gospel 
according to Levy-Bruhl to him. But in the meantime — behold — we have 
become thinkers again, and have re-established the proper distance between 
ourselves and our patients; for we had, no doubt, a little too quickly aban- 
doned the tradition of respecting that distance, a tradition expressed so nobly 
in the lines by Pierre Janet in which he spoke of the feeble abilities of the hys- 
teric compared to our own lofty ones. "She understands nothing about sci- 
ence," he confides to us regarding the poor little thing, "and doesn't even 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 25s 

imagine how anybody could be interested in it . . . If we consider the absence 
of control that characterizes hysterics' thinking, rather than allowing ourselves 
to be scandalized by their lies, which, in any case, are very naive, we should 
instead be astonished that there are so many honest ones ..." 

Since these lines represent the feelings to which many of those present-day 
analysts who condescend to speak to the patient "in his own language" have 
reverted, they may help us understand what has happened in the meantime. 
For had Freud been capable of endorsing such lines, how could he have heard 307 

as he did the truth contained in the little stories told by his first patients, or 
deciphered a dark delusion like Schreber's to such a great extent as to broaden 
it to encompass man eternally bound to his symbols? 

Is our reason so weak that it cannot see that it is the same in the meditations 
of scientific discourse and in the first exchange of symbolic objects, and can- 
not find here the identical measure of its original cunning? 

Need I point out what the yardstick of "thought" is worth to practitioners 
of an experience that associates the job of thought more closely with a men- 
tal eroticism than with an equivalent of action? 

Must the person who is speaking to you attest that he need not resort to 
"thought" to understand that, if he is speaking to you at this moment about 
speech, it is insofar as we have in common a technique of speech which enables 
you to understand him when he speaks to you about it, and which inclines him 
to address those who understand nothing of it through you? 

Of course, we must be attentive to the unsaid that dwells in the holes in dis- 
course, but the unsaid is not to be understood like knocking coming from the 
other side of the wall. 

If we are to concern ourselves from now on with nothing but such noises, 
as some analysts pride themselves on doing, it must be admitted that we have 
not placed ourselves in the most favorable of conditions to decipher their mean- 
ing — for how, without jumping to conclusions about their meaning, are we 
to translate what is not in and of itself language? Led then to call upon the sub- 
ject, since it is after all to his account that we must transfer this understand- 
ing, we shall involve him with us in a wager, a wager that we understand their 
meaning, and then wait for a return that makes us both winners. As a result, 
in continuing to perform this shuttling back and forth, he will learn quite sim- 
ply to beat time himself; it is a form of suggestion which is no worse than any 
other — in other words, one in which, as in every other form of suggestion, 
one does not know who starts the ball rolling. The procedure is recognized as 
being sound enough when it is a question of going to prison. 39 

Halfway to this extreme the question arises: does psychoanalysis remain a 
dialectical relation in which the analyst's nonaction guides the subject's dis- 308 



254 Ecrits 

course toward the realization of his truth, or is it to be reduced to a fantas- 
matic relation in which "two abysses brush up against each other" without 
touching, until the whole range of imaginary regressions is exhausted — 
reduced, that is, to a sort of "bundling"* 40 taken to the extreme as a psycho- 
logical test? 

In fact, this illusion — which impels us to seek the subject's reality beyond 
the wall of language — is the same one that leads the subject to believe that his 
truth is already there in us, that we know it in advance. This is also why he is 
so open to our objectifying interventions. 

He, of course, does not have to answer for this subjective error which, 
whether it is avowed or not in his discourse, is immanent in the fact that he 
entered analysis and concluded the original pact involved in it. And we can 
still less neglect the subjectivity of this moment because it reveals the reason 
for what may be called the constitutive effects of transference, insofar as they 
are distinguished by an indication of reality from the constituted effects that 
follow them. 41 

Freud, let us recall, in discussing the feelings people relate to the transfer- 
ence, insisted on the need to discern in them a reality factor. He concluded 
that it would be taking undue advantage of the subject's docility to try to per- 
suade him in every case that these feelings are a mere transferential repetition 
of the neurosis. Now, since these real feelings manifest themselves as primary 
and since our own charm remains a matter of chance, there might seem to be 
some mystery here. 

But this mystery is solved when viewed from the vantage point of the phe- 
309 nomenology of the subject, insofar as the subject is constituted in the search 

for truth. We need but consider the traditional facts — which Buddhists pro- 
vide us with, although they are not the only ones — to recognize in this form 
of transference the characteristic error of existence, broken down by Buddhists 
into the following three headings: love, hate, and ignorance. It is therefore as 
a counter to the analytic movement that we shall understand their equivalence 
in what is called a positive transference at the outset — each one being shed 
light on by the other two in this existential aspect, as long as one does not except 
the third, which is usually omitted because of its proximity to the subject. 

I am alluding here to the invective with which someone called upon me to 
witness the lack of discretion shown by a certain work (which I have already 
cited too often) in its insane objectification of the play of the instincts in analy- 
sis, someone whose debt to me can be recognized by his use of the term "real" 
in conformity with mine. It was in the following words that he "unburdened 
his heart," as they say: "It is high time we put an end to the fraud that tends 
to perpetrate the belief that anything real whatsoever takes place during treat- 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 255 

ment." Let us leave aside what has become of him, for alas, if analysis has not 
cured the dog's oral vice mentioned in the Scriptures, its state is worse than 
before: it is others' vomit that it laps up. 

This sally was not ill directed, since it sought in fact to distinguish between 
those elementary registers, whose foundations I have since laid, known as the 
symbolic, the imaginary, and the real — a distinction never previously made 
in psychoanalysis. 

Reality in analytic experience often, in fact, remains veiled in negative forms, 
but it is not that difficult to situate. 

Reality is encountered, for instance, in what we usually condemn as active 
interventions; but it would be an error to limit its definition in this way. 

For it is clear that the analyst's abstention — his refusal to respond — is also 
an element of reality in analysis. More exactly, the junction between the sym- 
bolic and the real lies in this negativity, insofar as it is pure — that is, detached 
from any particular motive. This follows from the fact that the analyst's non- 
action is founded on the knowledge affirmed in the principle that all that is 
real is rational, and on the resulting motive that it is up to the subject to find 310 

anew its measure. 

The fact remains that this abstention is not maintained indefinitely; when 
the subject's question assumes the form of true speech, we sanction it with our 
response; but I have shown that true speech already contains its own 
response — thus we are simply doubling his antiphon with our lay. What can 
this mean except that we do no more than give the subject's speech its dialec- 
tical punctuation? 

Thus we see the other moment — which I have already pointed out theo- 
retically — in which the symbolic and the real come together: in the function 
of time. It is worth dwelling for a moment on time 's impact on technique. 

Time plays a role in analytic technique in several ways. 

It presents itself first in the total length of an analysis, and concerns the 
meaning to be given to the term of the analysis, which is a question that must 
be addressed prior to examining that of the signs of its end. I shall touch on 
the problem of setting a time limit to an analysis. But it is already clear that its 
length can only be expected to be indefinite for the subject. 

This is true for two reasons that can only be distinguished from a dialecti- 
cal perspective: 

• The first, which is based on the limits of our field, and which confirms my 
remarks on the definition of its confines: we cannot predict how long a sub- 
ject's time for understanding will last, insofar as it includes a psychological 
factor that escapes us by its very nature. 



256 Ecrits 

• The second, which is a characteristic of the subject, owing to which setting 
a time limit to his analysis amounts to a spatializing projection in which he 
already finds himself alienated from himself: from the moment his truth's 
due date can be predicted — whatever may become of it in the intervening 
inter subjectivity — the fact is that the truth is already there; that is, we 
reestablish in the subject his original mirage insofar as he situates his truth 
in us and, by sanctioning this mirage with the weight of our authority, we 
set the analysis off on an aberrant path whose results will be impossible to 
correct. 

3 1 1 This is precisely what happened in the famous case of the Wolf Man, and 
Freud so well understood its exemplary importance that he used the case to 
support his argument in his article on analysis, finite or indefinite. 42 

Setting in advance a time limit to an analysis, the first form of active inter- 
vention, inaugurated (propudor/) by Freud himself — regardless of the div- 
inatory (in the true sense of the term) 43 sureness the analyst may evince in 
following Freud's example — will invariably leave the subject alienated from 
his truth. 

We find confirmation of this point in two facts from the Wolf Man case: 

In the first place, despite the whole network of proofs demonstrating the 
historicity of the primal scene, and despite the conviction he displays con- 
cerning it — remaining imperturbable to the doubts Freud methodically cast 
on it in order to test him — the Wolf Man never managed to integrate his rec- 
ollection of the primal scene into his history. 

Secondly, the same patient later demonstrated his alienation in the most 
categorical way: in a paranoid form. 

It is true that another factor comes in here, through which reality inter- 
venes in the analysis — namely, the gift of money whose symbolic value I shall 
leave aside for another occasion, but whose import is already indicated in what 
I have said about the link between speech and the gift that constitutes primi- 
tive exchange. In this case, the gift of money is reversed by an initiative of 
Freud's in which — as in the frequency with which he returns to the case — we 
can recognize his unresolved subjectivization of the problems this case left in 
abeyance. And no one doubts but that this was a triggering factor of the Wolf 

312 Man's psychosis, though without really being able to say why. 

Don't we realize, nevertheless, that allowing a subject to be nourished at 
the expense of the analytic academy in return for the services he rendered to 
science as a case (for it was in fact through a group collection that the Wolf 
Man was supported) is also to decisively alienate him from his truth? 

The material furnished in the supplementary analysis of the Wolf Man 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 25y 

entrusted to Ruth Mack Brunswick illustrates the responsibility of the previ- 
ous treatment with Freud by demonstrating my remarks on the respective places 
of speech and language in psychoanalytic mediation. 

What's more, it is from the perspective of speech and language that one can 
grasp how Mack Brunswick took her bearings not at all badly in her delicate 
position in relation to the transference. (The reader will be reminded of the 
very "wall" in my metaphor, as it figures in one of the Wolf Man's dreams, the 
wolves in the key dream displaying their eagerness to get around it . . .) Those 
who attend my seminar know all this, and others can try their hand at it. 44 

What I want to do is touch on another aspect of the function of time in ana- 
lytic technique that is currently a matter of much debate. I wish to say some- 
thing about the length of sessions. 

Here again it is a question of an element that manifestly belongs to reality, 
since it represents our work time, and viewed from this angle it falls within 
the purview of professional regulations that may be considered predominant. 

But its subjective impact is no less important — and, first of all, on the ana- 
lyst. The taboo surrounding recent discussion of this element is sufficient proof 
that the analytic group's subjectivity is hardly liberated on this question; and 
the scrupulous, not to say obsessive, character that observing a standard takes 
on for some if not most analysts — a standard whose historical and geograph- 
ical variations nevertheless seem to bother no one — is a clear sign of the exis- 
tence of a problem that analysts are reluctant to broach because they realize 
to what extent it would entail questioning the analyst's function. 

Secondly, no one can ignore its importance to the subject in analysis. The 
unconscious, it is said — in a tone that is all the more knowing the less the 
speaker is capable of justifying what he means — the unconscious needs time 
to reveal itself. I quite agree. But I ask: how is this time to be measured? By 313 

what Alexandre Koyre calls "the universe of precision"? We obviously live in 
such a universe, but its advent for man is relatively recent, since it goes back 
precisely to Huyghens' clock — in other words, to 1 659 — and the discontent 
of modern man precisely does not indicate that this precision serves him as a 
liberating factor. Is this time — the time characteristic of the fall of heavy bod- 
ies — in some way sacred in the sense that it corresponds to the time of the 
stars as it was fixed for all eternity by God — who, as Lichtenberg tells us, winds 
our sundials? Perhaps we could acquire a somewhat better idea of time by com- 
paring the amount of time required for the creation of a symbolic object with 
the moment of inattention in which we drop it. 

Whatever the case may be, if it is problematic to characterize what we do 
during this time as work, I believe I have made it quite clear that we can char- 
acterize what the patient does during this time as work. 



258 Ecrits 

But the reality, whatever it may be, of this time consequently takes on a 
localized value: that of receiving the product of this labor. 

We play a recording role by serving a function which is fundamental in any 
symbolic exchange — that of gathering what do kamo, man in his authenticity, 
calls "the lasting word." 

A witness blamed for the subject's sincerity, trustee of the record of his dis- 
course, reference attesting to its accuracy, guarantor of its honesty, keeper of 
its testament, scrivener of its codicils, the analyst is something of a scribe. 

But he remains the master of the truth of which this discourse constitutes 
the progress. As I have said, it is the analyst above all who punctuates its dialec- 
tic. And here he is apprehended as the judge of the value of this discourse. 
This has two consequences. 

The ending of a session cannot but be experienced by the subject as a punc- 
tuation of his progress. We know how he calculates the moment of its arrival 
in order to tie it to his own timetable, or even to his evasive maneuvers, and 
how he anticipates it by weighing it like a weapon and watching out for it as 
he would for a place of shelter. 

It is a fact, which can be plainly seen in the study of manuscripts of sym- 
bolic writings, whether the Bible or the Chinese canonical texts, that the absence 
314 of punctuation in them is a source of ambiguity. Punctuation, once inserted, 

establishes the meaning; changing the punctuation renews or upsets it; and 
incorrect punctuation distorts it. 

The indifference with which ending a session after a fixed number of min- 
utes has elapsed interrupts the subject's moments of haste can be fatal to the 
conclusion toward which his discourse was rushing headlong, and can even 
set a misunderstanding in stone, if not furnish a pretext for a retaliatory ruse. 

Beginners seem more struck by the effects of this impact than others — which 
gives one the impression that for others it is just a routine. 

The neutrality we manifest in strictly applying the rule that sessions be of 
a specified length obviously keeps us on the path of non-action. 

But this nonaction has a limit, otherwise we would never intervene at all — 
so why make intervening impossible at this point, thereby privileging it? 

The danger that arises if this point takes on an obsessive value for the ana- 
lyst lies simply in the fact that it lends itself to the subject's connivance, a con- 
nivance that is available not only to the obsessive, although it takes on a special 
force for him, owing precisely to his impression that he is working. The sense 
of forced labor that envelops everything for this subject, including even his 
leisure activities, is only too well known. 

This sense is sustained by his subjective relation to the master insofar as it 
is the master's death that he awaits. 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 25$ 

Indeed, the obsessive manifests one of the attitudes that Hegel did not develop 
in his master/ slave dialectic. The slave slips away when faced with the risk of 
death, when the opportunity to acquire mastery is offered to him in a struggle 
for pure prestige. But since he knows he is mortal, he also knows that the mas- 
ter can die. Hence he can accept to work for the master and give up jouissance 
in the meantime; and, unsure as to when the master will die, he waits. 

This is the inter subjective reason for both the doubt and procrastination 
that are obsessive character traits. 

Meanwhile, all his work is governed by this intention and thus becomes dou- 
bly alienating. For not only is the subject's creation [oeuvre] taken away from 
him by another — the constitutive relation of all labor — but the subject's 
recognition of his own essence in his creation, in which this labor finds its jus- 
tification, eludes him no less, for he himself "is not in it." He is in the antici- 
pated moment of the master's death, at which time he will begin to live; but in 
the meantime he identifies with the master as dead and is thus already dead 
himself. 

He nevertheless strives to fool the master by demonstrating his good inten- 3 1 5 

tions through hard work. This is what the dutiful children of the analytic cat- 
echism express in their crude language by saying that the subject 's ego* is trying 
to seduce his superego.* 

This intrasubjective formulation is immediately demystified if we under- 
stand it in the analytic relationship, where the subject's "working through" is 
in fact employed to seduce the analyst. 

And it is no accident that, once the dialectical progress begins to approach 
the challenging of the ego's* intentions in our subjects, the fantasy of the ana- 
lyst's death — often experienced in the form of fear or even of anxiety — never 
fails to be produced. 

And the subject then sets off again in an even more demonstrative elabo- 
ration of his "good will." 

Can there be any doubt, then, about what happens when the master mani- 
fests disdain for the product of such work? The subject's resistance may become 
completely disconcerted. 

From then on, his alibi — hitherto unconscious — begins to unveil itself to 
him, and we see him passionately seek the why and wherefore of so much effort. 

I would not say so much about it if I had not been convinced — in experi- 
menting with what have been called my "short sessions," at a stage in my career 
that is now over — that I was able to bring to light in a certain male subject fan- 
tasies of anal pregnancy, as well as a dream of its resolution by Cesarean sec- 
tion, in a time frame in which I would normally still have been listening to his 
speculations on Dostoyevsky's artistry. 



z6o Ecrits 

In any case, I am not here to defend this procedure, but to show that it has 
a precise dialectical meaning in analytic technique. 45 

And I am not the only one to have remarked that it bears a certain resem- 
blance to the technique known as Zen, which is applied to bring about the sub- 
ject 's revelation in the traditional ascesis of certain Far Eastern schools. 

316 Without going to the extremes to which this technique is taken, since they 
would be contrary to certain of the limitations imposed by our own, a discreet 
application of its basic principle in analysis seems much more acceptable to me 
than certain methods of the so-called analysis of the resistances, insofar as such 
an application does not in itself entail any danger of alienating the subject. 

For it shatters discourse only in order to bring forth speech. 

Here we are, then, up against the wall — up against the wall of language. 
We are in our place here, that is, on the same side of the wall as the patient, 
and it is off this wall — which is the same for him as for us — that we shall try 
to respond to the echo of his speech. 

There is nothing that is anything but outer darkness to us beyond this wall. 
Does this mean that we thoroughly master the situation? Certainly not, and 
on this point Freud has bequeathed us his testament regarding the negative 
therapeutic reaction. 

The key to this mystery, it is said, is in the insistence [instance] of a primary 
masochism — in other words, in a pure manifestation of the death instinct whose 
enigma Freud propounded for us at the height of his career. 

We cannot discount it, any more than I can postpone examining it here. 

For I note that two different groups join forces in refusing to accept this 
culminating point of Freud's doctrine: those whose approach to analysis 
revolves around a conception of the ego* which I have shown to be erroneous, 
and those who, like Reich, take the principle of seeking an ineffable organic 
expression beyond speech so far that, like him, in order to free it from its armor, 
they might symbolize, as he does, the orgasmic induction that, like him, they 
expect from analysis in the superimposition of the two vermicular forms whose 
stupefying schema is found in his book, Character Analysis. 

Once I have demonstrated the profound relationship uniting the notion of 
the death instinct to problems of speech, we will see that a rigorous logic gov- 
erning intellectual productions underlies this joining of forces. 

As even a moment's reflection shows, the notion of the death instinct 
involves a basic irony, since its meaning has to be sought in the conjunction 

317 of two opposing terms: "instinct" which, in its broadest acceptation, is the law 
that regulates the successive stages of a behavioral cycle in order to accom- 
plish a life function; and "death" which appears first of all as the destruction 
of life. 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 261 

Nevertheless, the definition of life provided by Bichat at the dawn of biol- 
ogy as the set of forces that resist death, and the most modern conception of 
life — found in Cannon's notion of homeostasis — as the function of a system 
maintaining its own equilibrium, are there to remind us that life and death 
come together in a relation of polar opposites at the very heart of phenomena 
that people associate with life. 

Hence the congruence of the contrasting terms of the death instinct with 
the phenomena of repetition, Freud in fact relating the former to the latter 
with the term "automatism," would not cause difficulty were it simply a ques- 
tion of a biological notion. 

But, as we all know, it is not, which is what makes the problem a stumbling 
block to so many of us. The fact that numerous analysts balk at the apparent 
incompatibility of these terms might well be worth our attention, for it man- 
ifests a dialectical innocence that would probably be disconcerted by the clas- 
sical problem posed to semantics in the determinative statement, "a hamlet on 
the Ganges," by which Hindu aesthetics illustrates the second form of the res- 
onances of language. 46 

This notion of the death instinct must be broached through its resonances 
in what I will call the poetics of Freud 's work — a first avenue for getting at 
its meaning, and a dimension that is essential for understanding the dialecti- 
cal repercussion of its origins at the apogee marked by this notion. It should 
be recalled, for example, that Freud tells us his vocation for medicine came to 
him during a public reading of Goethe 's famous "Hymn to Nature" — that is, 
in a text that was brought to light by one of Goethe 's friends, which the poet, 
in the twilight of his life, agreed to recognize as a putative child of the most 
youthful effusions of his pen. 

At the other end of Freud's life, we see in the article on analysis considered 
as finite or indefinite that he explicitly relates his new conception to the con- 
flict of the two principles governing the alternation of all life according to 
Empedocles of Agrigentum in the fifth century B.C. — that is, in the pre-Socratic 
era in which nature and mind were not distinguished. 

These two facts are a sufficient indication to us that what is at stake here is 
a myth of the dyad, whose exposition by Plato is, moreover, mentioned in 
Beyond the Pleasure Principle, a myth that can only be understood in the sub- 
jectivity of modern man by raising it to the negativity of the judgment in which 
it is inscribed. 

This is to say that, just as the repetition automatism — which is just as com- 
pletely misunderstood by those who wish to separate its two terms — aims at 
nothing but the historicizing temporality of the experience of transference, so 
the death instinct essentially expresses the limit of the subject's historical func- 



z6z Ecrits 

tion. This limit is death — not as the possible end date of the individual's life, 
nor as the subject's empirical certainty, but, as Heidegger puts it, as that "pos- 
sibility which is the subject's ownmost, which is unconditional, unsurpassable, 
certain, and as such indeterminable" — the subject being understood as 
defined by his historicity. 

Indeed, this limit is present at every instant in what is finished in this his- 
tory. It represents the past in its real form; it is not the physical past whose exis- 
tence is abolished, nor the epic past as it has become perfected in the work of 
memory, nor the historical past in which man finds the guarantor of his future, 
but rather the past which manifests itself in an inverted form in repetition. 47 

This is the dead person [le mort] subjectivity takes as its partner in the triad 
instituted by its mediation in the universal conflict of Philia^ love, and Neikos^ 
strife. 

Thus there is no further need to resort to the outdated notion of primary 
masochism to explain repetitive games in which subjectivity simultaneously 
masters its dereliction and gives birth to the symbol. 

These are occultation games which Freud, in a flash of genius, presented 
319 to us so that we might see in them that the moment at which desire is human- 

ized is also that at which the child is born into language. 

We can now see that the subject here does not simply master his depriva- 
tion by assuming it — he raises his desire to a second power. For his action 
destroys the object that it causes to appear and disappear by bringing about its 
absence and presence in advance. His action thus negativizes the force field of 
desire in order to become its own object to itself. And this object, being imme- 
diately embodied in the symbolic pair of two elementary exclamations, 
announces the subject's diachronic integration of the dichotomy of 
phonemes, whose synchronic structure the existing language offers up for him 
to assimilate; the child thus begins to become engaged in the system of the 
concrete discourse of those around him by reproducing more or less approx- 
imately in his Fort! and Da! the terms he receives from them. 

Fort! Da! It is already when quite alone that the desire of the human child 
becomes the desire of another, of an alter ego who dominates him and whose 
object of desire is henceforth his own affliction. 

Should the child now address an imaginary or real partner, he will see that 
this partner too obeys the negativity of his discourse, and since his call has the 
effect of making the partner slip away, he will seek to bring about the rever- 
sal that brings the partner back to his desire through a banishing summons. 

Thus the symbol first manifests itself as the killing of the thing, and this 
death results in the endless perpetuation of the subject's desire. 

The first symbol in which we recognize humanity in its vestiges is the bur- 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 263 

ial, and death as a means can be recognized in every relation in which man is 
born into the life of his history. 

This is the only life that endures and is true, since it is transmitted without 
being lost in a tradition passed on from subject to subject. It is impossible not 
to see how loftily this life transcends that inherited by the animal, in which 
the individual fades into the species, since no memorial distinguishes its 
ephemeral appearance from the appearance that reproduces it in the invari- 
ability of the type. Indeed, apart from the hypothetical mutations of the phy- 
lum that must be integrated by a subjectivity that man is still only approaching 
from the outside, nothing, except the experiments in which man uses it, dis- 
tinguishes a particular rat from rats in general, a horse from horses, nothing 
except the amorphous passage from life to death — whereas Empedocles, by 
throwing himself into Mount Etna, leaves forever present in the memory of 320 

men the symbolic act of his being-toward-death. 

Man's freedom is entirely circumscribed within the constitutive triangle of 
the following: the renunciation he imposes on the other's desire by threaten- 
ing to kill the other in order to enjoy the fruits of the other's serfdom, the sac- 
rifice of his life that he agrees to for the reasons that give human life its measure, 
and the suicidal abnegation of the vanquished party that deprives the master 
of his victory and leaves him to his inhuman solitude. 

Of these figures of death, the third is the supreme detour by which the imme- 
diate particularity of desire, reconquering its ineffable form, refinds in nega- 
tion a final triumph. And we must recognize its meaning, for as analysts we 
deal with it. It is not, in fact, a perversion of instinct, but rather a desperate 
affirmation of life that is the purest form we can find of the death instinct. 

The subject says "No!" to this darting game of inter subjectivity in which 
desire gains recognition for a moment only to lose itself in a will that is the 
other's will. The subject patiently withdraws his precarious life from the churn- 
ing aggregations of the symbol's Eros in order to finally affirm life in a speech- 
less curse. 

When we want to get at what was before the serial games of speech in the 
subject and what is prior to the birth of symbols, we find it in death, from 
which his existence derives all the meaning it has. Indeed, he asserts himself 
with respect to others as a death wish; if he identifies with the other, it is by 
freezing him in the metamorphosis of his essential image, and no being is ever 
conjured up by him except among the shadows of death. 

To say that this mortal meaning reveals in speech a center that is outside of 
language is more than a metaphor — it manifests a structure. This structure 
differs from the spatialization of the circumference or sphere with which some 
people like to schematize the limits of the living being and its environment: it 



264 Ecrits 

corresponds rather to the relational group that symbolic logic designates topo- 
logically as a ring. 

If I wanted to give an intuitive representation of it, it seems that I would 

321 have to resort not to the two-dimensionality of a zone, but rather to the three- 
dimensional form of a torus, insofar as a torus' peripheral exteriority and cen- 
tral exteriority constitute but one single region. 48 

This schema represents the endless circularity of the dialectical process that 
occurs when the subject achieves his solitude, whether in the vital ambiguity 
of immediate desire or in the full assumption of his being-toward-death. 

But we can simultaneously see that the dialectic is not individual, and that 
the question of the termination of an analysis is that of the moment at which 
the subject's satisfaction is achievable in the satisfaction of all — that is, of all 
those it involves in a human undertaking. Of all the undertakings that have 
been proposed in this century, the psychoanalyst's is perhaps the loftiest, 
because it mediates in our time between the care-ridden man and the subject 
of absolute knowledge. This is also why it requires a long subjective ascesis, 
indeed one that never ends, since the end of training analysis itself is not sep- 
arable from the subject's engagement in his practice. 

Let whoever cannot meet at its horizon the subjectivity of his time give it 
up then. For how could he who knows nothing of the dialectic that engages 
him in a symbolic movement with so many lives possibly make his being the 
axis of those lives? Let him be well acquainted with the whorl into which his 
era draws him in the ongoing enterprise of Babel, and let him be aware of his 
function as an interpreter in the strife of languages. As for the darkness of the 
mundus around which the immense tower is coiled, let him leave to mystical 
vision the task of seeing the putrescent serpent of life rise up there on an ever- 
lasting rod. 

Allow me to laugh if these remarks are accused of turning the meaning of 
Freud's work away from the biological foundations he would have wished for 
it toward the cultural references with which it is rife. I do not wish to preach 
to you the doctrine of the b factor, designating the first, nor of the c factor, 
designating the second. All I have tried to do is remind you of the neglected 
a, b, c structure of language, and to teach you to spell once again the forgot- 
ten ABC's of speech. 

322 For what recipe would guide you in a technique that is composed of the 
first and derives its effects from the second, if you did not recognize the field 
of the one and the function of the other? 

Psychoanalytic experience has rediscovered in man the imperative of the 
Word as the law that has shaped him in its image. It exploits the poetic func- 
tion of language to give his desire its symbolic mediation. May this experience 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 265 

finally enable you to understand that the whole reality of its effects lies in the 
gift of speech 49 ; for it is through this gift that all reality has come to man and 
through its ongoing action that he sustains reality. 

If the domain defined by this gift of speech must be sufficient for both your 
action and your knowledge, it will also be sufficient for your devotion. For it 
offers the latter a privileged field. 

When the Devas, the men, and the Asuras were finishing their novitiate 
with Prajapati, as we read in the first Brahmana of the fifth lesson of the Bri- 
hadaranyaka Upanishad, they begged him, "Speak to us." 

"Da" said Prajapati, god of thunder. "Did you hear me?" And the Devas 
answered, saying: "Thou hast said to us: Damyata, master yourselves" — the 
sacred text meaning that the powers above are governed by the law of speech. 

"Da" said Prajapati, god of thunder. "Did you hear me?" And the men 
answered, saying: "Thou hast said to us: Datta, give" — the sacred text mean- 
ing that men recognize each other by the gift of speech. 

"Da" said Prajapati, god of thunder. "Did you hear me?" And the Asuras 
answered, saying: "Thou hast said to us: Dayadhvam, be merciful" — the sacred 
text meaning that the powers below resound [resonnent] 50 to the invocation of 
speech. 

That, continues the text, is what the divine voice conveys in the thunder: 
Submission, gift, grace. Da da da. 

For Prajapati replies to all: "You have heard me." 



Notes 

1 . See "Logical Time," Ecrits 1 966, 1 97-2 1 3. Michael Balint written that a strengthening of 

2. Ferenczi, "Confusion of Tongues the ego* should be beneficial to a subject suf- 
between the Adult and the Child," IJP XXX, fering from ejaculatio praecox because it would 
4 (1949): 225-30. permit him to prolong the suspension of his 

3. (Added in 1966:) The preceding para- desire? But how can we think this, when it is 
graph has been rewritten. precisely to the fact that his desire depends on 

4. (Added in 1966:) Previously I had writ- the imaginary function of the ego* that the sub- 
ten: "in psychological matters." ject owes the short-circuiting of the act — which 

5. (Added in 1966:) The preceding para- psychoanalytic clinical experience clearly 
graph has been rewritten. shows to be intimately related to narcissistic 

6. This is the crux of a deviation that con- identification with the partner. 

cerns both practice and theory. For to identify 7. This in the same work I praised at the end 

the ego* with the subject's self-discipline is to of my introduction (added in 1966). It is clear 

confuse imaginary isolation with mastery of the in what follows that aggressiveness is only a 

instincts; here one is liable to make errors of side effect of analytic frustration, though it can 

judgment in the conduct of the treatment — be reinforced by a certain type of intervention; 

such as trying to strengthen the ego* in many as such, it is not the reason for the frustra- 

neuroses that are caused by its overly strong tion/ regression pair, 
structure, which is a dead end. Hasn't my friend 8. GW XII, 7 1 ; Cinq psychanalyses (Paris: 



266 



Ecri 



cnts 



PUF, 1 954), 356, a weak translation of the term. 

9. GJFXII, 72, £hl, the last few lines. The 
concept of Nachtraglichkeit is underlined in the 
footnote. Cinq psychanalyses, 356, fill. 

10. See Ecrits 1966, 204-10. 

11. Freud uses the term in an article acces- 
sible to even the least demanding of French 
readers, since it came out in the Revue Neu- 
rologique, a journal generally found on book- 
shelves in hospital staff rooms. The blunder 
exposed here illustrates, among other things, 
how the said authority I saluted on page 246 [in 
Ecrits 1966] measures up to his leadership.* 

12. (Added in 1966:) Even if he is speaking 
to everyone in general and no one in particu- 
lar [a la cantonade]. He addresses that Other 
(with a capital O) whose theoretical basis I 
have since consolidated, and which demands a 
certain epoche in returning to the term to which 
I limited myself at that time: that of "inter- 
subjectivity." 

1 3. 1 am borrowing these terms from the late 
and sorely missed Edouard Pichon who, both 
in the directions he gave for the advent of our 
discipline and in those that guided him in the 
murky shadows of persons, showed a divina- 
tion that I can only attribute to his practice of 
semantics. 

14. (Added in 1966:) This reference to the 
aporia of Christianity announced a more pre- 
cise one at its Jansenist climax: a reference to 
Pascal whose wager, still intact, forced me to 
take up the whole question again in order to get 
at what it conceals that is inestimable to psy- 
choanalysts^ — which is still, at this date (June 
1966), unrevealed. 

15. (Added in 1966:) This remark was made 
by one of the psychoanalysts most involved in 
the debate. 

16. See Gegenwunschtraume in the Traum- 
deutung, GJV\l, 156-57 and 163-64; SEW, 151 
and 157-58. 

17. (Added in 1966:) In order to evaluate the 
results of these procedures the reader should 
become thoroughly acquainted with the notes 
found in Emile BorePs book Le Hasard (Paris: 
F. Alcan, 1914), which I recommended already 
at that time, on the triviality of the "remark- 
able" results obtained by beginning in this way 
with just any number. 



18. See C. I. Oberndorf, "Unsatisfactory 
Results of Psychoanalytic Therapy," PQXDL 
(1950): 393-407. 

1 9. See, among others, Do Kamo: Person and 
Myth in the Melanesian World, by Maurice 
Leenhardt [trans. Basia Miller Gulati (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1979)], chapters 
IX and X. 

20. Jules H. Masserman, "Language, Behav- 
iour and Dynamic Psychiatry," 7/PXXV, 1-2 
(1944): 1-8. 

2 1 . Aphorism of Lichtenberg's: "A madman 
who imagines himself a prince differs from the 
prince who is in fact a prince only because the 
former is a negative prince, while the latter is 
a negative madman. Considered without their 
sign, they are alike." 

22. To obtain an immediate subjective con- 
firmation of this remark of Hegel's, it is enough 
to have seen in the recent epidemic a blind rab- 
bit in the middle of a road, lifting the emptiness 
of its vision changed into a gaze toward the set- 
ting sun: it was human to the point of tragedy. 

23. The lines before and after this term will 
show what I mean by it. 

24. Reich's error, to which I shall return, 
caused him to mistake a coat of arms for armor. 

25. See Claude Levi-Strauss, "Language 
and the Analysis of Social Laws," American 
Anthropologist LIII, 2 (April-June 1951): 
155-63. 

26. (Added in 1966:) The last four para- 
graphs have been rewritten. 

27. (Added in 1966:) The last two para- 
graphs have been rewritten. 

28. On the Galilean hypothesis and 
Huyghens' clock, see Alexandre Koyre, "An 
Experiment in Measurement," Proceedings of the 
American Philosophical SocietyXCVII, 2 (April 
1953): 222-37. (Added in 1966:) The last two 
paragraphs of my text have been rewritten. 

29. (Added in 1966:) I have developed these 
indications as the opportunity presented itself. 
Four paragraphs rewritten. 

30. "The Theory of Symbolism," British 
Journal of Psychology IX, 2. Reprinted in his 
Papers on Psycho-Analysis (Boston: Beacon, 
1961) [the page number given in the text cor- 
responds to this edition]. See [Lacan's article: 
"A la memoire d 'Ernest Jones: Sur sa theorie 



The Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis 267 



du symbolisme," La Psychanalyse V (1960): 
1-20] Ecrits 1966, 697-717. 

31. I am referring here to the teaching of 
Abhinavagupta in the tenth century. See Dr. 
Kami Chandra Pandey, "Indian Aesthetics," 
Chowkamba Sanskrit Series, Studies, II 
(Benares: 1950). 

32. Ernst Kris, "Ego Psychology and Inter- 
pretation in Psychoanalytic Therapy," PQ 
XX, 1 (1951): 15-29; see the passage quoted on 
pages 27-28. 

33. (Added in 1966:) Paragraph rewritten. 

34. This for the use of whoever can still 
understand it after looking in the Littre for jus- 
tification of a theory that makes speech into an 
"action beside," by the translation that it gives 
of the Greekparabole (why not "action toward" 
instead?) — without having noticed at the same 
time that, if this word nevertheless designates 
what it means, it is because of sermonizing 
usage that, since the tenth century, has reserved 
"Word" [verbe] for the Logos incarnate. 

35. Each language has its own form of 
transmission, and since the legitimacy of such 
research is founded on its success, nothing 
stops us from drawing a moral from it. Con- 
sider, for example, the maxim I chose as an epi- 
graph for the preface to this paper. [En 
particulier, il ne faudra pas oublier que la sepa- 
ration en embryologie, anatomie, physiologie, 
psychologies sociologies clinique n 'existepas dans 
la nature et qu 'il nyaqu 'une discipline: la neu- 
robiologie a laquelle V observation nous oblige 
d'ajouter Vepithete ^/'humaine en ce qui nous 
concerned Since it is so laden with redundan- 
cies, its style may strike you as a bit lacklus- 
ter. But lighten it of them and its audacity will 
arouse the enthusiasm it deserves. Hear ye: 
"Parfaupe ouclaspa nannanbryle anaphi ologi 
psysocline ixispad anlana — egnia kune n'rbiol' 
oblijouter tetumaine ennouconc ..." Here the 
purity of its message is finally laid bare. Its 
meaning raises its head here, the owning of 
being [I'aveu de I'etre] begins, and our victo- 
rious intelligence bequeaths to the future its 
immortal stamp. 

36. "The Therapeutic Effect of Inexact 
Interpretation: A Contribution to the Theory 
of Suggestion," 7/PXII, 4 (1931): 397-41 1. 

37. "Silence and Verbalization: A Supple- 



ment to the Theory of the 'Analytic Rule,' " 
7/PXXX, 1(1949): 21-30. 

38. Here equivalent to my mind to the term 
Zwangsbefiirchtung [obsessive or compulsive 
fear or apprehension], which should be broken 
down into its component elements without los- 
ing any of the semantic resources of the Ger- 
man language. 

39. (Added in 1966:) Two paragraphs 
rewritten. 

40. This term refers to the custom, of Celtic 
origin and still practiced by certain Bible sects 
in America, of allowing a couple engaged to be 
married, or even a passing guest and the fam- 
ily's daughter, to spend the night together in 
the same bed, provided that they keep their 
clothes on. The word derives its meaning from 
the fact that the girl is usually wrapped up in 
sheets. (Quincey speaks of it. See also the book 
by Aurand le Jeune on this practice among the 
Amish.) Thus the myth of Tristan and Isolde, 
and even the complex that it represents, now 
underwrites the analyst in his quest for the soul 
destined for mystifying nuptials via the exten- 
uation of its instinctual fantasies. 

41 . (Added in 1966:) What I have since des- 
ignated as the basis of transference — namely, 
the "subject-supposed-to-know" — is thus 
already defined here. 

42. This is the correct translation of the two 
terms that have been rendered, with that unfail- 
ing flair for mistranslation I mentioned earlier, 
by "terminated analysis and interminable 
analysis." 

43. See Aulus GelWus, Attic Nights, II, 4: "In 
a trial, when it is a question of knowing who 
shall be given the task of presenting the accu- 
sation, and when two or more people volunteer 
for this office, the judgment by which the tri- 
bunal names the accuser is called divination . . . 
This word comes from the fact that since 
accuser and accused are two correlative terms 
that cannot continue to exist without each other, 
and since the type of judgment in question here 
presents an accused without an accuser, it is nec- 
essary to resort to divination in order to find 
what the trial does not provide, what it leaves 
still unknown, that is, the accuser." 

44. (Added in 1966:) Two paragraphs 



268 



Ecrits 



45. (Added in 1966:) Whether a chipped 
stone or a cornerstone, my forte is that I haven't 
given in on this point. 

46. This is the form called Laksanalaksana. 

47. (Added in 1966:) These four words [ren- 
verse dans la repetition], in which my latest for- 
mulation of repetition is found (1966), have 
been substituted for an improper recourse to 
the "eternal return" [toujours present dans Veter- 
nelretour], which was all that I could get across 
at that time. 



48. (Added in 1966:) These are premises of 
the topology I have been putting into practice 
over the past five years. 

49. It should be clear that it is not a ques- 
tion here of the "gifts" that novices are always 
supposed not to have, but of a tone that they 
are, indeed, missing more often than they 
should be. 

50. (Added in 1966:) Ponge writes it as fol- 
lows: reson. 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 323 

This title, the counterpart of another title promoting the unheard-of heading, 
"standard treatment," was assigned to me in 1953 as part of a project for 
which a committee of psychoanalysts was responsible. Selected from various 
tendencies due to their competence in the area, my friend Henri Ey had dele- 
gated to them the general responsibility he himself had received for the vol- 
ume on therapeutic methods in psychiatry, to be published in the Encyclopedic 
medico-chirurgicale. 

I accepted this role in order to investigate the scientific foundation of the 
said treatment, the only foundation on which the implicit reference to a devi- 
ation that such a title offered me could make any sense. 

A deviation that was all too palpable, in effect. At least I believe I suc- 
ceeded in raising a question about it, even though this undoubtedly ran 
counter to the intentions of its promoters. 

Are we to think that the question was resolved by the removal of my arti- 
cle [from subsequent editions of the encyclopedia], quickly explained, by the 
abovementioned committee, as part of the ordinary updating of this kind of 
work? 

Many people saw it as the sign of a certain precipitation, which would be 
understandable in this case by the very way in which a certain majority consid- 
ered itself to be defined by my criticism. (The article was published in 1955.) 



A Bat Question: Examining It in the Light of Day 

"Variations on the Standard Treatment" — this title constitutes a pleonasm, 
though not a simple one: 1 based on a contradiction, it is nonetheless lame. Is 
this twisting due to the fact that it is addressed to a medical audience? Or is it 324 

a distortion intrinsic to the question? 

This stopping point serves as an entry point into the problem, since it 
recalls what the public senses: namely, that psychoanalysis is not like any 
other form of therapeutics. For the term "variations" implies neither the 
adapting of the treatment to the "variety" of cases, in accordance with empir- 
ical or even clinical criteria, 2 nor a reference to the "variables" by which the 
field of psychoanalysis is distinguished, but rather a concern, which may 
even be hypersensitive, for purity in the means and ends, which allows us to 
foresee a more meritorious status than the label presented here. 

At stake here is clearly a rigor that is in some sense ethical, without which 
any treatment, even if it is filled with psychoanalytic knowledge, can only 
amount to psychotherapy. 



270 Ecrits 

This rigor would require a formalization, by which I mean a theoretical 
formalization, which has hardly been provided to date because it has been con- 
fused with a practical formalism — that is, a [set of rules] regarding what is 
done and what is not done. 

This is why it is not inauspicious to start from the "theory of therapeutic 
criteria" in order to shed light on this situation. 

Certainly, the psychoanalyst's lack of concern about the basics required 
for the use of statistics is only equaled by that still found in medicine. It is, 
however, more innocent in the analyst's case. For he makes less of assessments 
as cursory as "improved," "much improved," and "cured," being warned 
against them by a discipline that knows how to isolate haste in concluding as 
an element that is in and of itself questionable. 

Clearly advised by Freud to closely examine the effects in his experience 
of the danger sufficiently announced by the term furor sanandi, he does not, 
in the end, wish to appear to be motivated by it. 

While he thus views cure as an added benefit [la guerison comme benefice de 

surcroit] of psychoanalytic treatment, he is wary of any misuse of the desire to 

325 cure. This is so ingrained in him that, when an innovation in technique is based 

upon this desire, he worries deep inside and even reacts inside the analytic 

group by raising the automatic question: "Is that still psychoanalysis?" 

This point may appear to be tangential to the question at hand. But its import 
is precisely to encircle this question with a line which, while barely visible from 
the outside, constitutes the inner supporter of a circle, without the latter ceas- 
ing for all that to present himself as if nothing there separated him. 

In this silence, which is the privilege of undisputed truths, psychoanalysts 
find the refuge that makes them impermeable to all criteria other than those 
of a dynamic, a topography, and an economy that they are incapable of justi- 
fying to those outside. 

Hence no recognition of psychoanalysis, as either a profession or a science, 
can occur except by hiding a principle of extraterritoriality which it is as impos- 
sible for the psychoanalyst to give up as it is for him not to deny. This obliges 
him to place all validation of its problems under the heading of dual mem- 
bership and to arm himself with the postures of inscrutability adopted by the 
bat in the fable. 

All discussion of the present question thus begins with a misunderstand- 
ing, which is further heightened when it is backlit by a paradox from the inside. 

This paradox is clearly introduced by what all analytic writers express, the 
most authorized affirming it no less than the others, regarding analysis' ther- 
apeutic criteria — namely, that the more stridently we demand a theoretical 
reference the more these criteria vanish. This is a matter of serious concern, 



Variations on the Standard Treatment zyi 

when theory is alleged to give treatment its status. More serious is when, at 
such times, it suddenly becomes abundantly clear that the most widely 
accepted terms are utterly useless except as indices of inadequacy or as screens 
for incompetence. 

To appreciate this it suffices to read the papers given at the last Congress 
of the International Psychoanalytical Association, held in London [on July 
27, 1953]. These papers warrant being included in our file — all of them and 
each of them in its entirety. 3 1 will cite a measured assessment from one of 
them, the one by Edward Glover: 

About twenty years ago, I circulated a questionnaire with the intention 326 

of ascertaining what were the actual technical practices and working 
standards of analysts in this country [Great Britain]. Full replies were 
obtained from twenty-four of twenty-nine practising members, from the 
examination of which it transpired [sic] that on only six out of the sixty- 
three points raised was there complete agreement. Only one of these six 
points could be regarded as fundamental, viz., the necessity of analysing 
the transference; the others concerned such lesser matters as the inad- 
visability of accepting presents, avoidance of the use of technical terms 
during analysis, avoidance of social contact, abstention from answering 
questions, objection to preliminary injunctions and, interestingly 
enough, payment for all nonattendances. 4 

This survey taken long ago derives its value from the quality of the practi- 
tioners to whom it was addressed, since they still constituted a small elite at 
that time. Glover only mentions it here due to the urgency, which has now 
become public, of what had before been merely a personal need — namely (and 
this is the title of his article), to define the "Therapeutic Criteria of Psycho- 
Analysis." The major obstacle to doing so is found, in his view, in fundamental 
theoretical divergences: 

We need not go afield to find psycho-analytical societies riven by such 
differences, with extreme groups holding mutually incompatible views, 
the opposing sections being held in uneasy alliance by "middle groups" 
whose members, as is the habit of eclectics the world over, compensate 
themselves for their absence of originality by extracting virtue from their 
eclecticism, maintaining, either implicitly or explicitly, that, whether or 
not principles differ, scientific truth lies only in compromise. Despite 
these eclectic efforts to maintain a united front to the scientific or psy- 
chological public, it is obvious that in certain fundamental respects the 



zyz Ecrits 

327 techniques practised by the opposing groups must be as different as chalk 
from cheese. 5 

Moreover, the author cited has no illusions about his chances of attenuat- 
ing these discordances at the plenary Congress he is addressing, due to the 
lack of any critique of the 

sedulously cultivated assumptions that participants in such discussions 
hold roughly the same views, speak the same technical language, follow 
identical systems of diagnosis, prognosis, and selection of cases, [and] 
practise approximately the same technical procedures [...]. 
Not one of these assumptions will bear close investigation. 6 

As it would require ten full pages of this encyclopedia to list merely those 
articles and books in which the most widely recognized authorities confirm 
this view, any attempt to resort to philosophy's common sense would be ruled 
out in seeking some standard against which to measure variations in analytic 
treatment. The maintenance of standards falls more and more within the ambit 
of the group's interests, as is seen in the U.S.A. where the analytic group rep- 
resents a significant power. 

What is at stake is thus less a standard* than standing*. What I earlier termed 
"formalism" is what Glover calls "perfectionism." To realize this, it suffices 
to underscore how he speaks of it: analysis loses any measure of its "thera- 
peutic applicability"; this ideal leads analysis to criteria of its operation that 
are "undefined and uncontrolled," and even to a "mystique (he uses the French 
word) which not only baffles investigation but blankets all healthy discussion." 7 

This mystification — which is, in fact, the technical term for any process that 
hides from the subject the origin of the effects of his own action — is all the 
more striking in that analysis enjoys favor, a favor which earns its stripes by its 
duration, only because it is well regarded broadly enough to occupy its puta- 
tive place. It suffices to have those in human science circles look to psycho- 
analysis to give them their place, for psychoanalysis to have found its 
guarantee. 

328 Problems result from this that become of public interest in a country like 
America where the quantity of analysts gives the quality of the group the scope 
of a sociological factor influencing the collective. 

The fact that the milieu considers it necessary for the technique to be coher- 
ent with the theory is no more reassuring for all that. 

Only a global apprehension of the divergences, which is able to grasp them 
synchronically, can determine the cause of their discord. 



Variations on the Standard Treatment zys 

If we attempt to gain such an apprehension, we get the idea of a massive 
phenomenon of passivity, and even of subjective inertia, whose effects seem 
to grow with the spreading of the movement. 

At least this is what is suggested by the dispersion we observe both in the 
coordination of concepts and in their comprehension. 

Fine texts try to revitalize them and seem to take the hardy approach of 
arguing on the basis of their antinomies, but it is only to fall into purely fic- 
tive syncretisms that do not rule out indifference to false appearances. 

People even go so far as to rejoice in the fact that the weakness of inven- 
tion has not allowed for more damage to the fundamental concepts, those still 
being the concepts we owe to Freud. The latter's resistance to so many 
attempts to adulterate them becomes the a contrario proof of their consistency. 

This is true of transference, which manages to weather the storm of pop- 
ularizing theory and even popular ideas. It owes this to the Hegelian robust- 
ness of its constitution: Indeed, what other concept is there that better brings 
out its identity with the thing, the analytic thing in this case, cleaving to it with 
all the ambiguities that constitute its logical time? 

This temporal foundation is the one with which Freud inaugurates trans- 
ference and that I modulate by asking: Is it a return or a memorial? Others 
dwell on the thing regarding this resolved point by asking: Is it real or dereis- 
tic? Lagache 8 raises a question about the concept of transference: Need for 
repetition or repetition of need? 9 

We see here that the dilemmas in which the practitioner gets bogged down 329 

derive from depreciations by which his thinking fails his action. These con- 
tradictions captivate us when, extenuated in his theory, they seem to force his 
pen with some semantic Ananke in which the dialectic of his action can be read 
ab inferiori. 

Thus an external coherence persists in the deviations of analytic experi- 
ence that surround its axis, with the same rigor with which the shrapnel of a 
projectile, in dispersing, maintains its ideal trajectory with the center of grav- 
ity of the pyramidal shape it traces out. 

The condition of the misunderstanding which, as I noted above, obstructs 
psychoanalysis' path to recognition thus turns out to be redoubled by a mis- 
recognition internal to its own movement. 

It is here that the question of variations — which must arise anew for the 
analyst after having been presented to the medical public — can find an unfore- 
seen advantage. 

This platform is narrow: It is based entirely on the fact that a practice based 
on inter subjectivity cannot escape the latter's laws when, in seeking to gain 
recognition, it invokes their effects. 



2J4 Ecrits 

Perhaps the flash will be bright enough to bring out the fact that the hid- 
den extraterritoriality by which psychoanalysis proceeds in order to spread 
suggests that we treat it in the same way as a tumor by exteriorization. 

But we can only do justice to a claim that is rooted in misrecognition by 
accepting it in its crudest terms. 

The question of variations in treatment, taken further still here with the 
gallant jibe of "standard treatment," incites me to retain here but one crite- 
rion, since it is the only one at the disposal of the physician who orients his 
patient in the treatment. This criterion, which is rarely enunciated since it is 
considered tautological, can be stated as follows: A psychoanalysis, whether 
standard or not, is the treatment one expects from a psychoanalyst. 

From the Psychoanalyst's Pathway to Its Maintenance, Considered 
from the Viewpoint of Its Deviation 

The remark with which I closed the preceding section is only obvious ironi- 
cally. Highlighting, as it does, the apparent impasse of the question when taken 
330 dogmatically, it reiterates it — if we look at it closely, without omitting the nec- 

essary grain of salt — by way of a synthetic a priori judgment, on the basis of 
which practical reason could no doubt find its bearings. 

For if psychoanalysis' pathway is called into question so seriously by its 
variations that it can no longer recommend itself except on the basis of a stan- 
dard, such a precarious existence requires that a man maintain this pathway 
and that he be a real man. 

Furthermore, it is in the solicitations to which the real man is exposed by 
the ambiguity of this pathway that people will try to gauge what he makes of 
it through its effect on him. For if he pursues his task amid this ambiguity, it 
is because it does not stop him any more than is common in the majority of 
human practices. But if the question of the limit to be assigned to these vari- 
ations remains endemic to this particular practice, it is because no one sees 
where the ambiguity ends. 

Hence it is of little importance that the real man spares himself the effort 
of defining this endpoint on the basis of authorities who provide support here 
only by making him mistake one thing for another, or that he makes do by 
misrecognizing this endpoint in its rigor, avoiding experiencing its limit. In 
both cases, he is more duped \joue] by his action than he performs it [qu f il ne 
lajoue\ but he finds it all the easier to situate therein the gifts that adapt him 
to it — without noticing that, in abandoning himself to the bad faith of insti- 
tuted practice, he degrades it to the level of routines whose secrets are dis- 
pensed by clever analysts. Such secrets become unassailable, since they are 



Variations on the Standard Treatment zy5 

always subordinated to the same gifts — even if there were none left in the 
world — that they reserve themselves the right to detect. 

He who spares himself the trouble of concerning himself with his mission 
at such a cost will even consider his decision confirmed by a warning that still 
resonates from the very voice which formulated the fundamental rules of his 
practice: not to form too lofty an idea of this mission, still less to become the 
prophet of some established truth. Hence this precept, by which the master 
thought he was offering these rules for the understanding, merely lends itself 
to false humility because, being presented in a negative form, it was misun- 
derstood [contresens]. 

Along the path of true humility, we will not have to look far for the unbear- 
able ambiguity that is proposed to psychoanalysis; it is within everyone 's reach. 
It is revealed in the question of what it means to speak, and one encounters it 
simply by welcoming [accueillir] a discourse. For the very locution in which 331 

the French language records [recueille] its most naive intention — that of 
understanding what this discourse "means to say" [ce qu \l "veut dire "] — tells 
us clearly enough that it does not say it. But what this "means to say" means 
to say is still a double entendre and it is up to the hearer whether it is one or 
the other: whether it is what the speaker means to say to him by the discourse 
he addresses to him or what this discourse tells him about the condition of the 
speaker. Thus not only does the meaning of this discourse reside in he who 
listens to it, but the reception [accueil] he gives it determines who says it — 
namely, whether it is the subject to whom he gives permission and lends cre- 
dence or the other that his discourse delivers to the listener as constituted. 

Now the analyst seizes the listener's discretionary power to raise it to a sec- 
ond power. For apart from the fact that he expressly positions himself as an 
interpreter of the discourse for himself, and even for the speaking subject, he 
imposes upon the subject, in the topic of his discourse, the proper opening for 
the rule he assigns him as fundamental: This discourse must be pursued first 
without stopping and second without holding anything back, [something the 
subject might be inclined to do] not only out of a concern for its coherence or 
internal rationality but also out of shame regarding its ad hominem thrust or 
its unacceptability in polite society. The analyst thus widens the gap that places 
at his mercy the subject's overdetermination in the ambiguity of constituting 
speech and constituted discourse, as if he hoped that the extremes would meet 
up by a revelation that brings them together. But this conjunction cannot occur 
due to the rarely noticed limits within which supposedly free association 
remains contained, by which the subject's speech is maintained in syntactic 
forms that articulate it in discourse in the language employed as understood 
by the analyst. 



276* Ecrits 

Hence the analyst retains complete responsibility, in the weighty sense that 
I have just defined on the basis of his position as a listener. An ambiguity that 
is direct, since it is at his own discretion as an interpreter, turns into a secret 
summons that he cannot dismiss even by remaining silent. 

Psychoanalytic authors thus admit to its weight, as obscure as it remains to 
them. This is seen in all the ways in which their uneasiness can be identified, 
running the gamut from the awkwardness and even formlessness of their the- 
ories of interpretation, to the ever rarer use of interpretation in practice owing 
332 to its never properly explained postponement. The vague term "analyzing" 

all too often makes up for the imprecision that keeps them from using "inter- 
preting," because it has not been updated. This is an effect of the avoidance 
at work in the practitioner's thinking. The false consistency of the notion of 
countertransference, its stylishness, and the fanfare it fosters can be explained 
by the fact that it serves as an alibi: the analyst thereby avoids considering the 
action that it is incumbent upon him to take in the production of truth. 10 

The question of variations would be clarified by following this effect, 
diachronically this time, in a history of variations of the psychoanalytic move- 
ment, in bringing the type of parodic catholicity in which this question takes 
shape back to its universal root — namely, its introduction into the experience 
of speech. 

Moreover, there is no need to be a genius to realize that the key words that 
the real man I mentioned uses so sparingly to illustrate his technique are not 
always the words he conceptualizes the most clearly. Our oracles would turn 
red were they to all try to explain them at once, and are not unhappy that the 
shame of their junior colleagues — extending to the most inexperienced by a 
paradox explained by the training methods currently in favor — spares them 
any such ordeal. 

Analysis of the material, analysis of resistances — it is in these terms that 
analysts explain both the basic principle of and the ultimate key to their tech- 
nique, the analysis of the material seeming outdated since the promotion of 
the analysis of resistances. Nevertheless, since the relevance of the interpre- 
tation of a resistance is demonstrated by the production of "new material," 
the nuances, or even divergences, begin with what is done with this new mate- 
rial. And if we are to interpret it like we did before, we will be justified in won- 
dering whether the term "interpretation" has the same meaning at these two 
different points in time. 

To answer this question, we can look back to around 1920 when the "turn- 
ing point" (that is the term consecrated in the history of analytic technique) 
occurred which has since been considered decisive in the pathways of analy- 
sis. It was explained at that time by an ebbing in the results analysis was able 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 277 

to achieve, a finding one could only shed light on heretofore with the recom- 
mendation — whether apocryphal or not, in which the master's humor 
retroactively acquires the status of foresight — that we had better quickly take 333 

inventory of the unconscious before it closes back down. 

Yet the very term "material" has since denoted the fact that the set of phe- 
nomena in which we had hitherto learned to find the symptom's secret — an 
immense domain annexed by Freud 's genius to man's knowledge [connaissance] 
that warrants the true title of "psychoanalytic semantics," including dreams, 
bungled actions, slips of the tongue, memory disturbances, whims of thought 
association, and so on — has fallen out of favor in analytic technique. 

Prior to this "turning point," it was by deciphering such material that the 
subject was able to remember his history along with the outlines of the con- 
flict that determined his symptoms. And the value to be granted in technique 
to the elimination of symptoms was based on how well the order in his his- 
tory was restored and the gaps in it were filled. The observed elimination of 
symptoms demonstrated a dynamic in which the unconscious was defined as 
a clearly constituting subject, since it sustained symptoms in their meaning 
before it was revealed, and we experienced the unconscious directly, recog- 
nizing it in the ruse of disturbances in which the repressed compromises with 
the censorship — in this respect, let it be noted in passing, neurosis is akin to 
the most common condition of truth in speech and writing. 

If, then, the analyst gave the subject the solution [mot] to his symptom, but 
the symptom persisted, it was because the subject resisted recognizing its mean- 
ing; analysts thus concluded that it was this resistance that must, above all, be 
analyzed. Note that this conclusion still put its faith in interpretation, but it 
was the particular aspect of the subject in which people sought this resistance 
that led to the approaching deviation; for it is clear that this notion tends to 
take the subject to be constituted in his discourse. Should the deviation go on 
to seek his resistance outside of this discourse, it will be irremediable. No one 
will come back to question the constitutor function of interpretation regard- 
ing its failure. 

This move to give up on the use of speech justifies my saying that psycho- 
analysis has not since left behind its childhood illness, this term going beyond 
the commonplace here, with all the propriety it encounters due to this very 
move — where everything is, in effect, based on the methodological faux pas 
made by the best-known name in child analysis. 

The idea of resistance was not new, however. In 1895, Freud had already 334 

recognized its effect in the verbalization of chains of speech in which the sub- 
ject constitutes his history. Freud did not hesitate to illustrate his conception 
of this process by representing these chains as encompassing with their array 



2j8 Ecrits 

the pathogenic nucleus around which they bend, in order to indicate that resist- 
ance operates in a direction perpendicular to the parallelism of these chains. 
He even went so far as to posit the mathematical formula that this effect is 
inversely proportional to the distance between the nucleus and the chain being 
remembered, allowing us to gauge thereby how closely we have managed to 
approach it. 

It is clear here that while interpretation of the resistance at work in such a 
chain of speech is different from interpretation of meaning by which the sub- 
ject passes from one chain to another "deeper" chain, the first form of inter- 
pretation nevertheless operates on the very text of that speech, which includes 
its elusions, distortions, elisions, and even holes and syncopes. 

The interpretation of resistance thus introduces the same ambiguity that I 
analyzed above in the position of the listener, which is taken up again here in 
the question: Who is resisting? "The ego," answered the first doctrine, includ- 
ing therein the personal subject, no doubt, but solely from the undiscriminat- 
ing angle of its dynamics. 

It is here that the new orientation in technique runs headlong at a lure: it 
answers the question in the same way, neglecting the fact that it puts the blame 
on an ego whose meaning Freud, its oracle, has just changed; for Freud has just 
installed the ego in a new topography precisely in order to specify that resist- 
ance is not the privilege of the ego alone, but also of the id and the superego. 

Nothing else in his last conceptualization will henceforth be truly under- 
stood, as can be seen in the fact that the authors of the "turning point" wave 
are still at the stage of examining the death instinct from every angle, and even 
of getting bogged down regarding what the subject must properly identify 
with, the analyst's ego or his superego, without making a single worthwhile 
step forward, multiplying ever more instead an irresistible misconception. 

By reversing the correct choice that determines which subject is welcomed 
in speech, the symptom's constituting subject is treated as if he were consti- 
335 tuted — like material [en materiel], as they say — while the ego, as constituted 

as it may be in resistance, becomes the subject upon whom the analyst hence- 
forth calls as the constituting agency. 

The idea that this subject involves the person in his "totality" is a false effect 
of the new concept, even and especially insofar as it ensures a connection with 
the organs of the so-called perception-consciousness system. (Doesn't Freud, 
moreover, make the superego the first guarantor of an experience of reality?) 

What is in fact at stake is the return, of the most reactionary and thus of a 
highly instructive kind, of an ideology that has been given up everywhere else 
because it is quite simply bankrupt. 11 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 279 

Consider the lines with which Anna Freud's book The Ego and the Mech- 
anisms of Defense opens: 

There have been periods in the development of psychoanalytic science 
when the theoretical study of the individual ego was distinctly unpop- 
ular. [. . .] Whenever interest was shifted from the deeper to the more 
superficial psychic strata — whenever, that is to say, research was 
deflected from the id to the ego — it was felt that here was a beginning 
of apostasy from psychoanalysis as a whole. 

These few lines suffice to allow us to hear, in the anxious sound with which 
they preluded the advent of a new era, the sinister music with which Euripides 
inscribed, in The Phoenician Women, the mythical link between the character 
of Antigone and the moment of the Sphinx's repercussion on the hero's action. 

Since then it has become commonplace to repeat that we know nothing more 
about the subject than what his ego is willing to let us know. Otto Fenichel goes 
so far as to proffer quite simply, as if it were an indisputable truth, that "The 
understanding of the meaning of words is particularly a concern of the ego." 12 

The next step led to the confusing of resistances with ego defenses. 

The idea of defense, put forward by Freud already in 1894 when he first 336 

relates neurosis to a widely accepted conception of the function of illness, is 
taken up again by him in his major work, Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety , 
to indicate that the ego forms on the basis of the same moments as a symptom. 

But the semantic use Anna Freud makes of the ego, in the book just men- 
tioned, as the subject of verbs, suffices by itself to display the transgression 
she consecrates in it; it shows too that, in the thereafter-received deviation, 
the ego is truly the objectified subject whose defense mechanisms constitute 
resistance. 

Treatment is henceforth conceptualized as an attack, positing in theory the 
existence of a succession of systems of defense in the subject, which is ade- 
quately confirmed by the "cant phrase" — made fun of in passing by Edward 
Glover — by which one facilely tries to sound important by raising the ques- 
tion on any and every occasion whether one has sufficiently " analyse [d] the 
aggression." 13 In this way, the simpleton asserts that he has never encountered 
any transferential effects other than aggression. 

It is in this way that Fenichel tries to set things right by a reversal that con- 
fuses things still more. For while there may be some value in the order he traces 
of the operation to be carried out against the subject's defenses, which he con- 
siders to be like a fortress — implying that the defenses as a whole merely tend 



280 Ecrits 

to divert the attack from the one defense which, since it too closely covers 
what it hides, already gives it away, but also that this latter defense is hence- 
forth the essential stake, so much so that the drive hidden by this defense, when 
it offers itself up nakedly, must be considered to be the supreme artifice designed 
to preserve it — the impression of reality that holds our attention in this strat- 
egy serves as a prelude to the awakening that is such that where all suspicion 
of truth disappears, the dialectic reasserts its rights by appearing not to have 
to be useless in practice, if only by giving it a meaning. 

For there is no longer any end to the supposed depths or even any reason 

to seek them if what such a search discovers is no truer than what covers it 

337 over. In forgetting this, analysis degenerates into an immense psychological 

mess, and what we hear about the way it is practiced by certain analysts merely 

confirms this impression. 

If pretending to pretend is, indeed, a possible moment of the dialectic, the 
fact remains that the truth the subject confesses in order that we take it to be 
a lie is not the same as an error on his part. But the maintenance of this dis- 
tinction is only possible in a dialectic of intersubjectivity in which constitut- 
ing speech is presupposed in constituted discourse. 

Indeed, to flee the area shy of the reason for this discourse, people displace 
it to the beyond. While the subject's discourse could, possibly and occasion- 
ally, be bracketed in the initial perspective of an analysis because it may serve 
as a lure in or even as an obstruction to the revelation of truth, it is insofar as 
it serves as a sign that it is now permanently devalued. For it is no longer only 
that it is stripped of its content in order to dwell instead on its flow, its tone, 
its interruptions, and even its melody. It seems that any other manifestation of 
the subject's presence will soon have to be preferred to it: his presentation in 
his approach and gait, the affectation of his manners, and the way he takes his 
leave of us. An attitudinal reaction in the session will hold our attention more 
than a syntactical error and will be examined more in terms of its energy level 
than its gestural import. An up-welling of emotion and a visceral gurgle will 
be the sought- for evidence of the mobilization of resistance, and the idiocy of 
the fanatics of lived experience will go so far as to find the creme de la creme 
in smelling each other. 

But the more we separate the authenticity of the analytic relationship from 
the discourse in which it is inscribed, what we continue to call its "interpreta- 
tion" derives ever more exclusively from the analyst's knowledge. This 
knowledge has, of course, grown considerably in this pathway, but people can- 
not claim they have, in this way, left behind an intellectualist form of analy- 
sis, unless they admit that the communication of this knowledge to the subject 
acts only as a suggestion to which the criterion of truth remains foreign. Thus 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 281 

Wilhelm Reich, who clearly defined the conditions of this kind of interven- 
tion in his form of character analysis, which is rightly considered to be an essen- 338 
tial stage in the development of the new technique, admits that he can expect 
it to have an effect only on the basis of his insistence. 14 

This use of suggestion does not become a veritable interpretation just 
because it is analyzed as such. Such an analysis merely traces out the relation of 
one ego to another ego. This can be seen in the usual formulation that the ana- 
lyst must become an ally of the healthy part of the subject's ego, when it is com- 
pleted with the theory of the dissociation of the ego in psychoanalysis. 15 If we 
thus proceed to make a series of bipartitions in the subject's ego by doing this 
ad infinitum, it is clear that his ego is reduced, in the end, to the analyst's ego. 

Along this pathway, what does it matter if we proceed according to a for- 
mulation in which the return to the scholar's traditional disdain for "morbid 
thought" is clearly reflected? For by speaking to the patient in "his own lan- 
guage," we still will not render him his own speech. 

The ground of the question remains unchanged and is instead confirmed 
when it is formulated from an entirely different perspective, that of the object- 
relation, whose recent role in technique we shall see. But when object rela- 
tions theory refers to an introjection by the subject of the analyst's ego, in the 
guise of the good object, it makes us wonder what an observant Huron would 
deduce about the mentality of modern civilized man from this mystical meal, 
assuming he makes the same strange mistake we make in taking literally the 
symbolic identifications seen in the kind of thought that we call "primitive." 

The fact remains that a theoretician weighing in on the delicate question 
of the termination of analysis can crudely posit that it implies that the subject 
has identified with the analyst's ego, insofar as this ego analyzes him. 16 

This formulation, once demystified, signifies nothing if not that in ruling 
out any foundation of his relationship with the subject in speech, the analyst 
can communicate nothing to him that the analyst does not already know from 
his preconceived views or immediate intuition — that is, nothing that is not 339 

subject to the organization of the analyst's own ego. 

I will momentarily accept this aporia to which analysis is reduced in order 
to maintain its core in its deviation, and I will raise the question: What must 
the analyst's ego thus be if it assumes the role of being the measure of truth 
for all of us and for each subject who puts himself in the analyst's hands? 

On the Ego in Analysis and Its End in the Analyst 

The term "aporia" with which, at the end of the second section, I summed up 
the gain made with respect to the impasse in the first chapter, announces that 



282 Ecrits 

I intend to confront this gain in the psychoanalyst's common sense — and cer- 
tainly not take pleasure in the fact that he may be offended by it. 

Here again I will proceed by noting that the same things require a differ- 
ent discourse when they are taken up in another context, and will introduce 
my remarks by recalling that, if this connivance (Einfiihlung) and assessment 
{Alschatiung) — which Ferenczi (1928, p. 209) 17 will not have come from any- 
where but from the preconscious — have prevailed over the notorious "com- 
munication of unconsciouses" (considered, not unjustifiably, in an early phase 
of analysis to be the crux of true interpretation), the current promotion of 
effects that are placed under the heading of "countertransference" 18 is equally 
a step backward. 

Moreover, the quibbling can only continue given that the ego as an agency 
is situated as unrelated to its neighbor agencies by those who consider it to 
represent the subject's collateral [surete]. 

We must call upon the first impression the analyst gives, which is certainly 
not that the ego is his strength, at least when it comes to his own ego and the 
foundation it can serve as for him. 

Isn't that the hitch that requires the analyst to be analyzed, a principle that 
Ferenczi considers to warrant the title of the second fundamental rule of psy- 
choanalysis? And doesn't the analyst bend under the weight of the judgment 
340 that might well be viewed as Freud's last, since it was handed down by him 

two years before his death: "analysts in their own personalities have not invari- 
ably come up to the standard of psychical normality to which they wish to 
educate their patients." 19 This astonishing verdict, which there is no reason to 
revise today, means that the analyst cannot take advantage of the excuse that 
can be used in favor of every elite, which is that it finds its recruits among 
ordinary mortals. 

Since this elite is below average, the most favorable hypothesis is to attrib- 
ute it to the adverse repercussion of a disturbance [desarroi] that originates in 
the analytic act itself, as the preceding shows. 

Ferenczi, the first-generation author who most relevantly raised the ques- 
tion of what is required of the analyst as a person, in particular as regards the 
end of the treatment, elsewhere mentions the root of the problem. 

In his luminous article on psychoanalytic elasticity, he expresses himself as 
follows: 

I should like to mention, as a problem that has not been considered, that 
of the metapsychology of the analyst's mental processes during analy- 
sis. His cathexes oscillate between identification (analytic object-love) 
on the one hand and self-control or intellectual activity on the other. 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 283 

During the long day's work he can never allow himself the pleasure of 
giving his narcissism and egoism free play in reality, and he can give free 
play to them in his fantasy only for brief moments. A strain of this kind 
scarcely occurs otherwise in life, and I do not doubt that sooner or later 
it will call for the creation of a special hygiene for the analyst. 20 

Such is the abrupt precondition whose importance derives from the fact 
that it concerns what the psychoanalyst must first vanquish in himself. For 
why else would Ferenczi use this to introduce the tempered pathway that he 
wants to trace for us of the analyst's intervention with the elastic line he tries 
to define? 

The order of subjectivity that the analyst must bring about in himself is the 
only thing Ferenczi indicates with an arrow at each intersection, and it is monot- 
onously repeated by recommendations that are too varied for us not to try to 341 
grasp how they fit together. Menschenkenntnis and Menschenforschung are two 
terms he uses whose romantic ancestry, which pushes them toward the art of 
leading men and the natural history of man, allows us to appreciate what the 
author hopes to do with them, by way of a sure method and an open market: 
reduction of one 's personal impact; knowledge relegated to a subordinate posi- 
tion; authority that knows not to insist; goodness without indulgence; 21 dis- 
trust of the altar of good deeds; the only resistance to be attacked being that 
of indifference, Unglauben, or of refusal, Ablehnung; encouraging nasty com- 
ments; and true modesty regarding one 's knowledge. In all of these rules, isn't 
it the ego that effaces itself in order to give way to the subject-point of inter- 
pretation? Thus these rules can only take effect on the basis of the psychoan- 
alyst's personal analysis, and especially its end. 

Where is the end of analysis as far as the ego is concerned? How can we 
know this if we misrecognize the ego's function in the very action of psycho- 
analysis? Let us follow the path of a kind of criticism that puts a text to the test 
of the very principles it defends. 

And let us submit the so-called analysis of character to it. Character analy- 
sis presents itself as based on the discovery that the subject's personality is 
structured like a symptom that his personality feels to be foreign; in other 
words, like a symptom, his personality harbors a meaning, that of a repressed 
conflict. The material that reveals this conflict is elicited in the second stage, 
after a preliminary stage of treatment whose goal — as Reich expressly states 
it in his conception, which has remained a classic in analysis — is to get the 
subject to take his own personality as a symptom. 

This point of view has clearly borne fruit in an objectification of structures, 
such as the so-called "genital-narcissistic" and "masochistic" characters, 



284 Ecrits 

which were previously neglected because they were apparently asymptomatic, 
not to mention the hysterical and compulsive characters, which were already 
indicated by their symptoms, whose collection of traits constitutes a precious 

342 contribution to psychological knowledge, even if their theorization leaves 
something to be desired. 

It is all the more important to pause at the results of this form of analysis, 
of which Reich was the master craftsman, in the assessment he gives of them. 
It amounts to the following: the quantity of change in the subject that legiti- 
mates this kind of analysis never even goes so far as to blur the lines that sep- 
arate the original structures from each other. 22 Hence, the positive effects of 
the analysis of these structures that are felt by the subject, after the structures 
have been "symptomatized" through the objectification of their traits, oblige 
us to more closely indicate their relation to the tensions that the analysis has 
resolved. The whole theory that Reich provides of it is based on the idea that 
these structures are a defense by the individual against the orgasmic effusion 
whose primacy in lived experience can alone ensure its harmony. The 
extremes this idea led him to are well known — they went so far as to get him 
ousted by the analytic community. But, in ousting him not unjustifiably, no 
one ever really knew how to formulate why Reich was wrong. 

We have to realize, first, that these structures play only the role of a 
medium or material, since they persist after the resolution of the tensions that 
seem to motivate them. This medium or material is, no doubt, ordered like 
the symbolic material of neurosis, as analysis proves, but it derives its efficacy 
here from the imaginary function, as it is revealed in the triggering of instinc- 
tual behavior; we learn about this from animal ethology, even though ethol- 
ogy itself has been strongly influenced by the concepts of displacement and 
identification stemming from psychoanalysis. 

Thus Reich made only one mistake in his character analysis: what he calls 
"character armor"* and treats as such is actually but an armorial. The subject, 
after treatment, still carries the weight of the arms he received from nature, 
having merely effaced from them the mark of a blazon. 

If this confusion was nevertheless possible, it is because the imaginary func- 
tion — which in animals serves as a guide in their sexual fixation on the con- 
gener, in their display rituals by which the reproductive act is triggered, and 

343 even in their marking of territory — seems in man to be entirely diverted toward 
the narcissistic relation on which the ego is based, giving rise to an aggres- 
siveness whose coordinate denotes the signification that I will try to show to 
be the first and last word of this relation. Reich's error can be explained by his 
deliberate refusal of the signification that is tied to the death instinct, which 
was introduced by Freud at the height of his conceptual powers, and which is, 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 285 

as we know, the touchstone of the mediocrity of analysts, whether they reject 
it or disfigure it. 

Thus character analysis is only able to establish a properly mystifying 
conception of the subject on the basis of what proves to be a defense in that 
analysis, if we apply its own principles to it. 

To return psychoanalysis to a veridical path, it is worth recalling that analy- 
sis managed to go so far in the revelation of man's desires only by following, 
in the veins of neurosis and the marginal subjectivity of the individual, the 
structure proper to a desire that thus proves to model it at an unexpected 
depth — namely, the desire to have his desire recognized. This desire, in which 
it is literally verified that man's desire is alienated in the other's desire, in effect 
structures the drives discovered in analysis, in accordance with all the vicissi- 
tudes of the logical substitutions in their source, aim [direction], and object. 23 
But these drives, however far back we go into their history, instead of prov- 
ing to derive from the need for a natural satisfaction, simply modulate in phases 
that reproduce all the forms of sexual perversion — that, at least, is the most 
obvious and best known fact of analytic experience. 

But we more easily neglect the dominance found there of the narcissistic 
relation, that is, of a second alienation by which the internal splitting of his 
existence and his facticity is inscribed in the subject, along with the complete 
ambivalence of the position he identifies with in the perverse couple. It is nev- 
ertheless in the properly subjective meaning thus highlighted in perversion, 
far more than in its accession to a widely acknowledged objectification, that 
lies the step that psychoanalysis made man's knowledge take through its 
annexation, as the evolution of scientific literature alone demonstrates. 344 

Now, the theory of the ego in analysis remains marked by a fundamental 
misrecognition if we neglect the period of its elaboration in Freud 's work run- 
ning from 1910 to 1920, in which it is entirely inscribed in the structure of the 
narcissistic relation. 

In the early stage of psychoanalysis, the study of the ego never constituted 
a subject of aversion, as Anna Freud would have it in the above-cited passage. 
Rather, it is since people came up with the idea of promoting it in analysis that 
this study truly favors the subversion of psychoanalysis. 

The conception of the phenomenon of passionate love [amour-passion] as 
determined by the image of the ideal ego, like the question of its imminent 
hatred, are the points we must examine from the abovementioned period of 
Freud's thought if we are to properly understand the relation between the 
ego and the image of the other — such as it is already made sufficiently clear 
in his very title, which joins Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego 
(1921) 24 — in one of the texts with which Freud inaugurates the last period of 



286 Ecrits 

his thought, the one in which he completes the definition of the ego in his 
topography. 

But this completion can only be understood by grasping the coordinates of 
his progress in developing the notions of primary masochism and the death 
instinct, found in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920), 25 and in developing the 
conception of the negating root of objectification, as it is laid out in the short 
1925 article on Verneinung (negation). 26 

Only by studying Freud's progress in these areas can we explain his grow- 
ing interest in aggressiveness in transference, in resistance, and even in Civi- 
liiation and Its Discontents (1929), 27 showing that the kind of aggression we 
imagine to be at the root of the struggle for survival is not what is at stake in 
them. The notion of aggressiveness corresponds, on the contrary, to the rend- 
ing of the subject from himself, a rending whose primordial moment comes 
345 when the sight of the other's image, apprehended by him as a unified whole, 

anticipates his sense that he lacks motor coordination, this image retroactively 
structuring this lack of motor coordination in images of fragmentation. This 
experience explains both the depressive reaction, as reconstructed by Melanie 
Klein at the origins of the ego, and the child's jubiliatory assumption of his 
image in the mirror, the phenomenon of which, characteristic of the period 
beginning at six to eight months of age, is considered by the author of these 
lines to manifest in an exemplary manner the properly imaginary nature of 
the ego's function in the subject, along with the constitution of the ego's ideal 
UrbUd. 7 * 

It is thus at the heart of experiences of bearing and intimidation during the 
first years of his life that the individual is introduced to the mirage of mastery 
of his functions, in which his subjectivity will remain split, and whose imagi- 
nary formation, naively objectified by psychologists as the ego's synthetic func- 
tion, manifests instead the condition that introduces him to the alienating 
master/ slave dialectic. 

But if these experiences — which can be seen in animals too at many 
moments in their instinctual cycles, and especially in the preliminary displays 
of the reproductive cycle, with all the lures and aberrations these experiences 
involve — in fact open onto this signification in order to durably structure the 
human subject, it is because they receive this signification from the tension 
stemming from the impotence proper to the prematurity of birth, by which 
naturalists characterize the specificity of man's anatomical development — a 
fact that helps us grasp the dehiscence from natural harmony, required by Hegel 
to serve as the fruitful illness, life 's happy fault, in which man, distinguishing 
himself from his essence, discovers his existence. 

There is, in effect, no other reality behind the new prestige the imaginary 



Variations on the Standard Treatment z8y 

function takes on in man than this touch of death whose mark he receives at 
birth. For it is clearly the same "death instinct" that is manifested in this func- 
tion in the animal kingdom, if we stop to consider that (1) by serving in the 
specific fixation on the congener in the sexual cycle, subjectivity is not dis- 346 

tinguished there from the image that captivates it, and that (2) the individual 
appears there only as the passing representative of this image — that is, only 
as the passage of this represented image into life. Only to man does this image 
reveal its mortal signification and, at the same time, that he exists. But this 
image is only given to him as an image of the other — that is to say, it is rav- 
ished from him. 

Thus the ego is never but half of the subject; moreover, it is the half he loses 
in finding that image. We can thus understand why he clings to it and tries to 
hold on to it in everything that seems to stand in for \doubler\ it in himself or 
in the other, and offers him its resemblance, along with its effigy. 

Demystifying the meaning of what analytic theory calls "primary identifi- 
cations," let us say that the subject always imposes on the other — in the radi- 
cal diversity of relational modes that run the gamut from the invocation of 
speech to the most immediate sympathy — an imaginary form which bears the 
seal, or even superimposed seals, of the experiences of impotence by which this 
form has been shaped in the subject. And this form is no other than the ego. 

Thus, to return to the action of analysis, the subject always naively tends 
to concentrate his discourse on the focal point of the imaginary where this 
form is produced once he is freed, by the condition of the fundamental rule 
of psychoanalysis, from the threat that a total rejection may be addressed to 
him. It is the visual power this imaginary form retains from its origins that, in 
fact, justifies a condition which is rarely explained, even though it is felt to be 
crucial in variations in technique: the condition that the analyst occupy, in the 
session, a place that makes him invisible to the subject. For this allows the 
narcissistic image to be produced all the more purely and the regressive pro- 
teanism of its seductions to have freer range. 

Now, the analyst undoubtedly knows, on the other hand, that he must not 
respond to appeals that the subject makes to him in this place, as implicit as 
they may be; otherwise he will see transference love arise there that nothing, 
except its artificial production, distinguishes from passionate love, the condi- 
tions which produced it thus failing due to their effect, analytic discourse being 
reduced to the silence of the evoked presence. The analyst also knows that the 347 

more he fails to respond, the more he provokes in the subject the aggression, 
and even hatred, characteristic of negative transference. 

But he knows less well that what he says in his response is less important 
here than the place from which he responds. For he cannot content himself 



288 Ecrits 

with the precaution of avoiding entering into the subject's game when the prin- 
ciple of the analysis of resistances orders him to objectify it. 

Indeed, by simply targeting the object whose image is the subject's ego, that 
is, by targeting his character traits, the analyst falls under the sway of the illu- 
sions [prestiges] of his own ego, no less naively than the subject himself does. 
And the effect here is not so much to be gauged in the mirages they produce 
as in the distance they bring about in his object-relation. For it suffices for it 
to be fixed for the subject to know how to find it there. 

The analyst thus enters into the game of a more radical connivance in which 
the shaping of the subject by the analyst's ego serves merely as an excuse for 
the analyst's narcissism. 

If the truth of this aberration were not openly avowed in the theorization 
provided for it, whose forms I highlighted above, the proof could be found in 
the phenomena that one of the analysts the best trained in Ferenczi's school 
of authenticity so sensitively analyzes as characteristic of the cases that he con- 
siders to have been successfully terminated: whether he is describing the nar- 
cissistic ardor with which the subject is consumed and which we encourage 
him to douse in the cold shower of reality, or his oozing of an indescribable 
emotion at the final leave taking, going so far as to note that the analyst shares 
his emotion. 29 This is corroborated by the author's disappointed resignation 
at having to admit that certain beings cannot hope for anything more than to 
separate from their analysts in hatred. 30 

These results justify a use of transference corresponding to a theory of so- 
348 called "primary" love which takes as its model the mutual voracity of the 

mother/child couple: 31 in all the forms envisioned, we see the purely dyadic 
conception that has come to govern the analytic relationship. 32 

If the inter subjective relationship in analysis is, indeed, conceptualized as 
that of a dyad of individuals, it can only be based on the unity of a perpetu- 
ated vital dependency, the idea of which altered the Freudian conception of 
neurosis (abandonment neurosis); and it can only be carried out in the passi- 
vation/activation polarity of the subject, the terms of which are expressly con- 
sidered by Alice Balint to formulate the impasse that makes this theory 
necessary. 33 Such errors can be considered human inasmuch as they are ren- 
dered subtle in connotation by their author. 

These errors cannot be corrected without reference to the mediation that 
speech constitutes between subjects. But this mediation is inconceivable unless 
one presupposes the presence of a third term in the imaginary relationship 
itself: mortal reality — the death instinct — which conditions the illusions 
[prestiges] of narcissism, as I showed earlier, and whose effects can be found 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 289 

anew in a brilliant form in the results considered by Balint to be those of an 
analysis carried to its full term in an ego-to-ego relationship. 

In order for the transference relationship to escape these effects, the ana- 
lyst would have to strip the narcissistic image of his own ego of all the forms 
of desire by which that image has been constituted, reducing it to the only face 
that sustains it behind their masks: the face of the absolute master, death. 

It is thus clearly here that the analysis of the ego finds its ideal terminus: 
that in which the subject, having refound the origins of his ego in an imagi- 
nary regression, comes, by the progression of remembering, to its end in analy- 
sis — namely, the subjectification of his death. 

And this is supposed to be the end required of the analyst's ego, about whom 
we can say that he must acknowledge the prestige of but one master — death — 349 

in order for life, which he must guide through so many vicissitudes, to be his 
friend. This goal does not seem beyond human grasp — for it does not imply 
that for him, or for others, death is anything more than an illusion [prestige] — 
and it merely satisfies the requirements of his task, such as someone like Fer- 
enczi had defined it earlier. 

This imaginary condition can only be brought about, nevertheless, 
through an ascesis that is affirmed in a being by following a path along which 
all objective knowledge is progressively suspended. This is true because, for 
the subject, the reality of his own death is in no wise an object that can be imag- 
ined, and the analyst can know nothing about it, no more than anyone else, 
except that he is a being destined to die [promis a la mort]. Thus, assuming he 
has eliminated all the illusions [prestiges] of his ego in order to accede to "being- 
toward-death," no other knowledge, whether immediate or constructed, can 
be preferred by him to be made a power of, assuming it [il] is not simply abol- 
ished thereby. 

Thus he can now respond to the subject from the place he wants to respond 
from, but he no longer wants anything that determines this place. 

Here we find, if we think about it, the reason for the profound oscillatory 
movement that brings analysis back to an "expectant" practice after each 
misguided attempt to make it more "active." 

The analyst's approach cannot be left up to the indeterminacy of a free- 
dom of indifference, nevertheless. But the usual watchword of benevolent 
neutrality does not provide a sufficient indication here. For while it subordi- 
nates the analyst's pleasure to the subject's own good, it still does not place 
his knowledge at his disposal. 

Which brings us to the following question: What must the analyst know 
in analysis? 



2Cfo Ecrits 

What the Psychoanalyst Must Know: How to Ignore What He Knows 

The imaginary condition with which the preceding section culminates must 
be understood only as an ideal condition. But if we realize that the fact that 

350 something belongs to the imaginary does not mean that it is illusory, we can 
say that being taken to be ideal does not make it any more dereistic. For an 
ideal point and even a solution that is called "imaginary" in mathematics, 
because it provides the pivotal point of transformation, the node point of con- 
vergence of figures or functions that are entirely determined in reality [reel], 
are clearly constitutive parts of those figures and functions. This is true of the 
condition involving the analyst's ego in the form of the problem whose chal- 
lenge I have accepted. 

The question now directed at the analyst's knowledge derives its power 
from the fact that it does not bring with it the answer that the analyst knows 
what he is doing, since it is the obvious fact that he does not, whether in the- 
ory or in technique, which led us to raise the question here. 

For, if it is taken for granted that an analysis changes nothing in reality [reel] 
but "changes everything" for the subject, as long as the analyst cannot say 
what he is doing, the term "magical thinking" — used to designate the naive 
faith the subject he works with has in his power — only serves as an excuse for 
his own ignorance. 

If, indeed, there are many opportunities to demonstrate how idiotically this 
term is used both inside and outside of analysis, we will find here, no doubt, 
the most favorable opportunity for asking the analyst what authorizes him to 
consider his knowledge to be privileged. 

For his imbecilic recourse to the term "lived experience" to qualify the 
knowledge [connaissance] he gains from his own analysis, as if all knowledge 
[connaissance] deriving from an experience were not lived, does not suffice to 
distinguish his way of thinking from the way of thinking that considers him 
to be a man "not like the others." Nor can we attribute the vanity of this state- 
ment to the "they" [on] who repeat it. For if "they" are not justified, in effect, 
in saying that he is not a man like the others, since "they" recognize in their 
semblable a man in that "they" can speak to him, "they" are not wrong to 
mean by this that he is not a man like everyone else in that "they" recognize 
a man as their equal on the basis of the weight [portee] of his words. 

Now the analyst is different in that he makes use of a function that is com- 
mon to all men in a way that is not within everyone's grasp [portee] when he 
supports [ porte] speech. 

351 For that is what he does for the subject's speech, even by simply welcom- 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 291 

ing it, as I showed earlier, with an attentive silence. For this silence implies 
[comporte] speech, as we see in the expression "to keep silent" which, speak- 
ing of the analyst's silence, means not only that he makes no noise but that he 
keeps quiet instead 0/responding. 

We can go no further in this direction without asking: What is speech? And 
I will do my best to ensure that all the words hit their target [portent] here. 

Nevertheless, no concept supplies the meaning of speech, not even the con- 
cept of concept, for speech is not the meaning of meaning. But speech gives 
meaning its medium in the symbol that speech incarnates through its act. 

It is thus an act and, as such, it presupposes a subject. But it is not enough 
to say that, in this act, the subject presupposes another subject, for it is rather 
that he establishes himself here by being the other, but in a paradoxical unity 
of the one and the other by means of which, as I showed earlier, the one defers 
to the other in order to become identical to himself. 

We can thus say that speech manifests itself as a communication in which 
the subject, expecting the other to render his message true, proffers his mes- 
sage in an inverted form, and in which this message transforms him by 
announcing that he is the same. As is seen in any promise made [foi donne'e], 
in which the declarations "You are my wife" and "You are my master" sig- 
nify "I am your husband" and "I am your disciple." 

Speech thus seems to be an all the more true instance of speech [une parole] 
the less its truth is based on what is known as its "correspondence to the thing": 
true speech is thus paradoxically opposed to true discourse, their truth being 
distinguished by the fact that the former constitutes the recognition [recon- 
naissance] by the subjects of their beings insofar as they are invested [inter- 
esses] in them, while the latter is constituted by knowledge [connaissance] of 
reality \reel\ insofar as die subject targets reality in objects. But each of the 
truths distinguished here is altered when it crosses the path of the other truth. 

This is how true discourse, by isolating the givens [donnees] of promises in 
the giving of one's word [parole donnee\ makes the latter appear to be lying 
speech — since it pledges the future which, as they say, belongs to no one — 
and ambiguous too in that it constantly outstrips the being it concerns in the 
alienation in which its becoming is constituted. 

But true speech, questioning true discourse as to what it signifies, will find 352 

that one signification always refers to another signification in true discourse, 
no thing being able to be shown other than by a sign, and will thus make true 
discourse seem to be doomed to error. 

How, in navigating between the Charybdis and the Scylla of this inter- 
accusation of speech, could the intermediate discourse — that in which the sub- 



2<)2 Ecrits 

ject, in his design to get himself recognized, addresses speech to the other while 
taking into account what he knows of his being as given — avoid being forced 
into proceeding by way of ruse? 

This is, in effect, how discourse proceeds to con-vince, a word that involves 
strategy in the process of reaching an agreement. And, however little we may 
have participated in the enterprise of a human institution, or even in merely 
supporting it, we know that the struggle continues over the terms, even when 
the things have been agreed to. The prevalence of speech as the middle term 
is again manifested in this. 

This process is carried out while the subject manifests bad faith, steering 
his discourse between trickery, ambiguity, and error. But this struggle to assure 
so precarious a peace would not offer itself as the most common field of inter- 
subjectivity if man were not already completely per-suaded by speech, which 
means that he indulges in it thoroughly. 

For it is also true that man, in subordinating his being to the law of recog- 
nition, is traversed by the avenues of speech, which is why he is open to every 
suggestion. But he pauses and loses himself in the discourse of conviction, due 
to the narcissistic mirages that dominate his ego's relation to the other. 

Thus the subject's bad faith, being so constitutive of this intermediary dis- 
course that it is not even absent in his declaration of friendship, redoubles due 
to the misrecognition in which these mirages are instated. This is what Freud 
called the unconscious function of the ego in his topography, before he 
demonstrated its essential form in the discourse of negation (see "Die Vernei- 
nung," 1925). 

If the analyst is thus subjected to the ideal condition that the mirages of his 
narcissism must have become transparent to him, it is in order that he be per- 
meable to the other's authentic speech; we must now try to understand how 
he can recognize the latter through the other's discourse. 
353 Of course this intermediate discourse, even qua discourse of trickery and 

error, does not fail to bear witness to the existence of the kind of speech on 
which truth is based; for it sustains itself only by attempting to pass itself off 
as such, and even when it openly presents itself as a lying discourse, it merely 
affirms all the more strongly the existence of such speech. If we refind, 
through this phenomenological approach to truth, the key the loss of which 
leads positivist logicism in search of the "meaning of meaning," doesn't this 
approach also get us to recognize in truth the concept of concept insofar as it 
is revealed in speech in action [acte]? 

This speech, which constitutes the subject in its truth, is nevertheless for- 
ever forbidden to him, except in rare moments of his existence when he strives, 
ever so confusedly, to grasp it in his sworn word [foijuree]; it is forbidden in 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 293 

that he is doomed to misrecognize it by the intermediate discourse. This speech 
nonetheless speaks wherever it can be read in his being — that is, at all the lev- 
els at which it has shaped him. This antinomy is the very antinomy found in 
the meaning Freud gave to the notion of the unconscious. 

But if this speech is nevertheless accessible, it is because no true speech is 
simply the subject's speech, since true speech always operates by grounding 
the subject's speech in its mediation by another subject. In that way, this speech 
is open to the endless chain — which is not, of course, an indefinite chain, since 
it forms a closed loop — of words [paroles] in which the dialectic of recogni- 
tion is concretely realized in the human community. 

It is to the extent that the analyst manages to silence the intermediate dis- 
course in himself, in order to open himself up to the chain of true speech 
[paroles], that he can interpolate his revelatory interpretation. 

This can be seen whenever we consider an authentic interpretation in its 
concrete form. For example, in the analysis classically known as that of the 
Rat Man, the major turning point comes when Freud comprehends the resent- 
ment aroused in the subject by the fact that his mother suggested that his choice 
of a wife should be dictated in a calculating manner. The fact that the prohi- 
bition this advice brought with it for the subject, the prohibition against becom- 
ing engaged to the woman he thinks he loves, is associated by Freud with the 
father's speech, despite obvious facts to the contrary — especially the one, 
which takes precedence over all the others, that his father is dead — leaves us 
quite surprised. But it is justified at the level of a deeper truth that Freud seems 354 

to have unwittingly divined, which is revealed by the series of associations the 
subject then goes on to provide. This truth is situated solely in what Freud 
refers to here as the "word chain" — which, making itself heard both in the 
neurosis and in the subject's destiny, extends well beyond him as an individ- 
ual — and consists in the fact that a similar lack of good faith presided over his 
father's marriage and that this ambiguity itself covered over a breach of trust 
in money matters which, in causing his father to be discharged from the army, 
determined the latter's decision whom to marry. 

Now this chain, which is not made up of pure events (all of which had, in 
any case, occurred prior to the subject's birth), but rather of a failure (which 
was perhaps the most serious because it was the most subtle) to live up to the 
truth of speech and of an infamy more sullying to his honor — the debt engen- 
dered by the failure seeming to have cast its shadow over the whole of his par- 
ents' marriage, and the debt engendered by the infamy never having been 
paid — this chain provides the meaning by which we can understand the sim- 
ulacrum of redemption that the subject foments to the point of delusion in the 
course of the great obsessive trance that leads him to ask Freud for help. 



294 Ecrits 

Note that this chain is certainly not the whole structure of his obsessive 
neurosis, but that, in the text of the neurotic's individual myth, it crossbreeds 
with the web of fantasies in which the shadow of his dead father and the ideal 
of his lady-love are conjoined in a couple of narcissistic images. 

But if Freud's interpretation, by undoing this chain in all its latent import, 
leads the imaginary web of the neurosis to disintegrate, it is because this chain 
summons the subject, concerning the symbolic debt that is promulgated in his 
tribunal, less as its legatee than as its living witness. 

For it is important to consider that speech constitutes the subject's being 
not merely by a symbolic assumption, but that prior to his birth speech deter- 
mines — through the laws of marriage, by which the human order is distin- 
guished from nature — not only the subject's status but even the birth of his 
biological being. 

Now, it seems that Freud's access to the crucial point of the meaning with 
which the subject could literally decipher his destiny was made possible by the 
355 fact that a similar suggestion of familial prudence had been made to Freud 

himself, as we know from a fragment of his self-analysis, mentioned in his 
work, which was unmasked by Bernfeld. Had Freud himself not rejected it on 
that occasion, perhaps he might have missed the opportunity to recognize it 
when treating the Rat Man. 

The dazzling comprehension Freud demonstrates in such cases is, of 
course, clouded over often enough by the effects of his own narcissism. Still, 
owing nothing to an analysis conducted in the usual manner, it allows us to 
see that, in the lofty heights of his final doctrinal constructions, the paths of 
being were cleared for him. 

While this example makes us realize how important it is to comment upon 
Freud 's work in order to understand analysis, it will serve here only as a spring- 
board for the last stop in our discussion of this question — namely, the contrast 
between the objects proposed to the analyst by his experience and the discipline nec- 
essary to his training. 

Never having been fully conceptualized, or even approximately formulated, 
this contrast is nevertheless expressed, as we might well expect of any neg- 
lected truth, in the rebelliousness of the facts. 

The facts rebel first at the level of analytic experience, where no one gives 
voice to their rebellion better than Theodor Reik; we can confine our atten- 
tion here to his sounding of the alarm in his book Listening with the Third Ear, 34 
the "third ear" designating nothing other, no doubt, than the two at every man's 
disposal, on the condition that the function the Scriptures claim they do not 
have be restored to them. 

The reader will find there his reasons for opposing the requirement of a 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 295 

regular succession of levels of imaginary regression, whose principle was stip- 
ulated by the analysis of resistances, no less than the more systematic forms 
of planning* this kind of analysis went on to formulate — while he recalls, with 
a hundred lively examples, the pathway proper to true interpretation. One 
cannot, in reading his book, fail to note his recourse, that is unfortunately 
poorly defined, to divination, if the use of this term can refind its former virtue 
by evoking the juridical procedure it originally designated (Aulus Gellius,^mc 
Nights, II, 4), reminding us that human destiny depends upon the choice of 356 

he who will support speech's accusation in a trial. 

We will be no less concerned by the malaise that reigns regarding every- 
thing related to the analyst's training. To take but the most recent reverbera- 
tion, consider the declarations made in December 1952 by Dr. Knight in his 
presidential address to the American Psychoanalytic Association. 35 Among the 
factors that tend to "alter the character of analytic training," he points out, along- 
side the increase in the number of analysts-in- training, "the more structured 
training" in the institutes that offer training, opposing it to the earlier type of 
training by a master ("the earlier preceptorship type of training"*) [page 218]. 

Regarding the recruitment of analytic trainees, he says the following: 

[Formerly] they were primarily introspective individuals, inclined to be 
studious and thoughtful, and tended to be highly individualistic and to 
limit their social life to clinical and theoretical discussions with col- 
leagues. They read prodigiously and knew the psychoanalytic literature 
thoroughly. [. . .] In contrast, perhaps the majority of students of the 
past decade [. . .] are not so introspective, are inclined to read only the 
literature that is assigned in institute courses, and wish to get through 
with the training requirements as rapidly as possible. Their interests are 
primarily clinical rather than research and theoretical. Their motivation 
for being analyzed is more to get through this requirement of training. 
[. . .] The partial capitulation of some institutes [to the pressure arising 
from their students'] ambitious haste, and from their tendency to be sat- 
isfied with a more superficial grasp of theory, has created some of the 
training problems we now face [218-19]. 

It is quite clear, in this highly public discourse, how serious the problem is 
and also how poorly it is understood, if it is understood at all. What is desir- 
able is not that the analysands be more "introspective" but rather that they 
understand what they are doing; and the remedy is not that the institutes be 
less structured, but rather that analysts stop dispensing predigested knowl- 357 

edge in them, even if it summarizes the data of analytic experience. 



296 Ecrits 

But what we must understand above all is that, whatever the dose of knowl- 
edge thus transmitted, it is of no value in training analysts. 

For the knowledge accumulated in the course of an analyst's experience 
concerns the imaginary, which his experience constantly runs up against, so 
much so that his experience has come to adjust its pace to the systematic explo- 
ration of the imaginary in the subject. This experience has thus succeeded in 
constituting the natural history of the forms of desire 's capture and even of 
the subject's identifications that had never before been cataloged this rigor- 
ously in their richness or even approached in terms of their means of action, 
whether by science or even wisdom, even though their luxuriance and seduc- 
tion had long been deployed in artists' fanciful imaginings. 

But beyond the fact that the imaginary 's capture effects are extremely dif- 
ficult to objectify in a true discourse — creating the major obstacle to true dis- 
course in our daily work, which constantly threatens to make analysis into a 
bad science, given its continued uncertainty as to their limits in reality [reel] — 
this science, even if we assumed it were correct, is of only deceptive help in 
the analyst's action, for it concerns only the deposit, not the mainspring. 

In this respect, experience privileges neither the so-called "biological" ten- 
dency in analytic theory, which of course has nothing biological about it 
except the terminology, nor the sociological tendency sometimes referred 
to as "culturalist." The first tendency's ideal of "drive" harmony, based on 
individualist ethics, cannot, as it is easy to see, yield effects that are any more 
humanizing than the ideal of conformity to the group with which the sec- 
ond tendency exposes itself to the covetousness of "engineers of the soul." 
The difference one can see in their results derives only from the distance that 
separates an autoplastic graft from a member made of the orthopedic device 
that replaces it — what remains lame, in the first case, with regard to instinc- 
tual functioning (what Freud calls the "scar" of neurosis) leaves only an 
uncertain advantage over the compensatory artifice aimed at by the second's 
sublimations. 

In truth, if analysis borders closely enough on the scientific domains thus 
358 evoked that certain of its concepts have been adopted by them, these concepts 

are not grounded in the experience of those domains, and the attempts analy- 
sis makes to get its experience naturalized in science remain in a state of sus- 
pension that leads analysis to be highly regarded in science only insofar as it 
is posited as a problem. 

For psychoanalysis is also a practice subordinated by its purpose to what is 
most particular about the subject. And when Freud emphasizes this, going so 
far as to say that analytic science must be called back into question in the analy- 
sis of each case (see the case of "The Wolf Man," passim, the entire discussion 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 297 

of the case unfolding on the basis of this principle), he quite clearly indicates 
to the analysand the path his training should follow. 

Indeed, the analyst cannot follow this path unless he recognizes in his own 
knowledge the symptom of his own ignorance, in the properly analytic sense 
that the symptom is the return of the repressed in a compromise [formation] 
and that repression, here as elsewhere, constitutes the censorship of truth. Igno- 
rance must not, in fact, be understood here as an absence of knowledge but, 
just as much as love and hate, as a passion for being — for it can, like them, be 
a path by which being forms. 

This is clearly the passion that must give meaning to all of analytic train- 
ing, as is obvious if one simply allows oneself to see that this passion structures 
the analytic situation. 

People have tried to detect the inner obstacle to training analysis in the psy- 
chological attitude of candidacy in which the candidate places himself in rela- 
tion to the analyst, but they fail to realize that the obstacle lies in its essential 
foundation, which is the desire to know or the desire for power that motivates 
the candidate at the core of his decision. Nor have they recognized that this 
desire must be treated like the neurotic's desire to love, which is the very antin- 
omy of love, according to the wisdom of the ages — unless this is what is aimed 
at by the best analytic writers when they declare that every training analysis is 
obliged to analyze the reasons why the candidate chose the career of analyst. 36 

The positive fruit of the revelation of ignorance is nonknowledge, which 
is not a negation of knowledge but rather its most elaborate form. The can- 
didate 's training cannot be completed without some action on the part of the 
master or masters who train him in this nonknowledge — failing which he will 359 

never be anything more than a robotic analyst. 

It is here that we understand this closing up of the unconscious whose 
enigma I pointed out at the major turning point of analytic technique; Freud 
foresaw, in more than just a quick remark, that this closing up could result 
some day from the very effects on a social scale of analysis becoming more 
widespread. 37 Indeed, the unconscious shuts down insofar as the analyst no 
longer "supports speech [porte la parole]" because he already knows or thinks 
he knows what speech has to say. Thus, if he speaks to the subject, who, more- 
over, knows as much about it as he does, the latter cannot recognize in what 
the analyst says the truth in statu nascendi of his own particular speech. This 
also explains the effects, which are often astonishing to us, of the interpreta- 
tions Freud himself gave: the response he gave the subject was the true speech 
in which he himself was grounded; for in order to unite two subjects in its 
truth, speech requires that it be true speech for both of them. 

This is why the analyst must aspire to a kind of mastery of his speech that 



2$8 Ecrits 

makes it identical to his being. For he does not need to say much in the treat- 
ment (so little, indeed, that we might believe there is no need for him to say 
anything) in order to hear — every time he has, with the help of God, that is, 
with the help of the subject himself, brought an analysis to its full term — the 
subject pronounce before him the very words in which he recognizes the law 
of his own being. 

How could he be surprised by this, he whose action, in the solitude in which 
he must answer for his patient, does not fall solely under the jurisdiction of con- 
sciousness [conscience], as they say of surgeons, since his technique teaches him 
that the very speech it reveals concerns an unconscious subject. Thus the ana- 
lyst must know, better than anyone else, that he can only be himself in his speech. 

Isn't this the answer to the question that tormented Ferenczi, namely: In 
order for the patient's avowal to come to its full term, mustn't the analyst's 
avowal also be pronounced? Indeed, the analyst's being acts even in his 
silence, and it is at the low-water level of the truth that sustains him that the 
subject proffers his speech. But while, in accordance with the law of speech, 
360 it is in him qua other that the subject finds his own identity, it is in order to 

maintain his own being there. 

This result is far removed from narcissistic identification, so finely 
described by Balint (see above), for such identification leaves the subject, in 
infinite beatitude, more than ever exposed to the obscene and ferocious fig- 
ure that analysis calls the superego and that must be understood as the gap 
opened up in the imaginary by any and every rejection (Verwerfung) of the 
commandments of speech. 38 

And there is no doubt but that a training analysis has this effect if the sub- 
ject finds therein nothing more proper to witness the authenticity of his expe- 
rience, for example, of having fallen in love with the person who opens the 
door at his analyst's house, mistaking her for his analyst's wife. A titillating 
fancy, of course, by its specious conformity, but about which he can hardly 
brag that he derived his lived knowledge of it from Oedipus, this knowledge 
being destined, rather, to take this fancy away from him. For, in going no fur- 
ther, he will have experienced nothing more than the myth of Amphitryon, 
and he will have done so the way Sosia did, that is, without understanding 
anything about it. How then can we expect that, as subtle as he may have seemed 
to be in his promises, such a subject will prove to be anything other than a fol- 
lower whose head is full of idle gossip, when it will be his turn to add his two 
cents' worth to the question of variations in treatment? 

In order to avoid such results, training analysis, about which all analytic 
authors note that its conditions are never discussed except in a censored form, 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 299 

must not drive its ends and practice ever further into the shadows, as the for- 
malism of the guarantees that people claim to provide of it grows stronger — 
as Michael Balint declares and demonstrates with the greatest clarity. 39 

Indeed, the sheer quantity of researchers cannot bring quality to psycho- 
analytic research the way it does in a science that is constituted in objectivity. 
A hundred mediocre psychoanalysts do not advance analytic knowledge one 
iota, whereas a physician, being the author of a wonderful book on grammar 
(you must not imagine that it was some pleasant little product of medical 
humanism), defended his whole life long a certain style of communication 
within a group of analysts against the winds of its discordance and the tide of 361 

its servitudes. 

The fact is that psychoanalysis, since it progresses essentially in non- 
knowledge, is tied in the history of science to a state prior to its Aristotelian 
definition, which is known as dialectic. Freud 's work bears witness to this in 
its references to Plato and even to the pre-Socratics. 

But far from being isolated or even isolable, it simultaneously finds its place 
at the center of the vast conceptual movement which in our time — restruc- 
turing so many sciences that are improperly called "social," changing or refind- 
ing the meaning of certain sections of the exact science par excellence, 
mathematics, in order to restore the foundations of a science of human action 
insofar as it is based on conjecture — is reclassifying the body of sciences of 
intersubjectivity under the name "human sciences." 

The analyst will find much to borrow from linguistic research in its most 
concrete modern developments, with which to shed light on difficult prob- 
lems posed to him by verbalization in both his practice and doctrine. And we 
can see, in the most unexpected manner, in the elaboration of the unconscious' 
most original phenomena — dreams and symptoms — the very figures of the 
outdated rhetoric, which prove in practice to provide the most subtle specifi- 
cations of those phenomena. 

The modern notion of history will be no less necessary to the analyst if he 
is to understand the function of history in the subject's individual life. 

But it is above all the theory of symbols — revived from its status as a curios- 
ity during what one might call the paleontological age of analysis, when it was 
classed under the heading of a supposed "depth psychology" — that analysis 
must restore to its universal function. No study would be better suited to this 
than the study of whole numbers, whose nonempirical origin cannot be exces- 
sively pondered by the analyst. And without going into the fruitful exercises 
of modern game theory, much less into the highly suggestive formalizations 
of set theory, the analyst will find sufficient material upon which to base his 



300 Ecrits 

362 practice by simply learning to correctly count to four, as the author of these 

lines is trying to teach people to do (that is, to integrate the function of death 
into the ternary Oedipal relationship). 

My point is not to define the fields of a program of study, but rather to indi- 
cate that, in order to situate analysis in the eminent place that those responsible 
for public education should grant it, its foundations must be laid open to criti- 
cism, without which it will degenerate into effects of collective subornation. 

It is up to the discipline of analysis itself to avoid these effects in the train- 
ing of analysts and to thus bring clarity to the question of its variations. 

Only then will we be able to understand the extreme discretion with which 
Freud introduced the very forms of the "standard treatment" that have since 
become the norm: 

I must however make it clear that what I am asserting is that this tech- 
nique is the only one suited to my individuality; I do not venture to deny 
that a physician quite differently constituted might find himself driven 
to adopt a different attitude to his patients and to the task before him. 40 

For this discretion will then cease to be relegated to the status of a sign of 
Freud 's profound modesty, and will instead be recognized as affirming the 
truth that analysis cannot find its measure except along the pathways of a 
learned ignorance. 

Notes 

1. [Added in 1966:] In 1966 let us say that I [Added in 1966:] A French translation of the 
consider it to be abject. This assessment, which whole of this article can be found in the final 
I cannot help but pronounce, legitimates my pages of the collection of this author's work 
rewriting of the first section here in a lighter published under the title Technique de lapsych- 
manner. analyse (Paris: PUF, 1958). [In English, see The 

2. [Added in 1966:] Except in taking up Technique of Psycho-Analysis (New York: Inter- 
anew in the structure what specifies our "clin- national Universities Press, 1955)]. 

ical approach" [clinique], in the sense it still 5. Glover, "Therapeutic Criteria," 95-96. 

maintains from its moment of birth, an origi- 6. Glover, "Therapeutic Criteria," 96. Ital- 

nally repressed moment in the physician who ics in the original. 

extends it, he himself becoming ever more 7. Glover, "Therapeutic Criteria," 96. 

thoroughly the lost child of this moment. See 8. "Le probleme du transfert" ("The Prob- 

Michel Foucault, Naissance de la Clinique lem of Transference"), RFP XVI, 1-2(1952): 

(Paris: PUF, 1963) [The Birth of the Clinic 5-115. [A sample of Lagache's work on trans- 

(New York: Pantheon, 1973)]. ference can be found in English in "Some 

3. See 7/PXXXV, 2 (1954), the entire issue. Aspects of Transference," IJP XXXIV, 1 

4. Edward Glover, "Therapeutic Criteria of (1953): 1-10.] 

Psycho-Analysis," IJP XXXV, 2 (1954): 95. 9. [Added in 1966:] In 1966, Lagache is 



Variations on the Standard Treatment 



301 



someone who keeps up with my teaching with- 
out seeing in it that transference is the inmix- 
ing of the time of knowing. 

While rewritten, this text scrupulously fol- 
lows the statements I made in 1955. 

10. [Added in 1966:] Three paragraphs 
rewritten. 

11. [Added in 1966:] If I have managed with 
these lines, as with my classes, to lift the reign 
of boredom that I combat enough for their style 
of emission to self-correct in being reread here, 
let me add to them this note: in 1966, 1 would 
say that the ego is the theology of free enter- 
prise, and I would designate its patron saints as 
the triad Fenelon, Guizot, and Victor Cousin. 

1 2. Problemes de technique psychanalytique 
(Paris: PUF, 1953), 63. [In English, see Prob- 
lems of Psychoanalytic Technique (Albany: Psy- 
choanalytic Quarterly, 1941), 54.] 

13. Glover, "Therapeutic Criteria," 97. 

14. Wilhelm Reich, "Charakteranalyse" 
("Character Analysis"), Internationale Zeit- 
schriftfur Psychoanalyse XIV, 2 ( 1 928) : 1 80-96. 
English translation in The Psycho-analytic 
Reader (New York: International Universities 
Press, 1948). [See also Reich's book Character 
Analysis (New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux, 1972).] 

15. Richard Sterba, "The Fate of the Ego in 
Analytic Therapy," IJP XV, 2-3 (1934): 
117-26. 

16. W. Hoffer, "Three Psychological Crite- 
ria for the Termination of Treatment," IJP 
XXXI, 3 (1950): 194-95. 

17. Sandor Ferenczi, "Die Elastizitat der 
psychoanalytischen Technik," Internationale 
Zeitschrift fur Psychoanalyse XIV, 2 (1928): 
197-209. [In English, see "The Elasticity of 
Psycho- Analytic Technique," in The Selected 
Papers of Sandor Ferenczi, M.D., Vol. Ill, Final 
Contributions to the Problems and Methods of 
Psycho- Analysis (New York: Basic Books, 1 955), 
87-101. Note that Lacan renders Einfilhlung as 
connivence (connivance), not as "empathy" (or 
"understanding" or "sensitivity") as is usually 
the case and as it is rendered in the translation 
of Ferenczi's work cited here. See also the revised 
translation included in Sandor Ferenczi: Selected 
Writings (London: Penguin, 1999), 255-68.] 



18. [Added in 1966:] That is, the analyst's 
transference. 

1 9. Freud, "Die Endliche und die Unendliche 
Analyse," GJFXVI,93 ["Analysis Terminable 
and Interminable," SE XXIII, 247; Lacan here 
translates the title of the article as " U analyse 
finie et Vanalyse sans fin" "Finite (or Finished) 
Analysis and Endless Analysis."] 

20. Ferenczi, "Die Elastizitat der psychoan- 
alytischen Technik," 207. ["The Elasticity of 
Psycho-analytic Technique," 98.] 

21. [Added in 1966:] Ferenczi never imag- 
ined that this might one day serve as a billboard 
slogan. 

22. Reich, "Charakteranalyse," 196 [The 
Psycho-analytic Reader , 123]. 

23. Freud, "Triebe und Triebschicksale," 
GJFX, 210-32. ["Drives and Their Vicissi- 
tudes," SEXIV, 117-40, especially 122-23.] 

24. GJFXIII, 71-161 [SE XVIII, 69-143]. 

25. CJFXIII, 1-69 [SE XVIII, 7-64]. 

26. "Die Verneinung," GW XIV, 11-15 
["Negation," SE XIX, 235-39]. 

27. CJFXIV, 421-506 [SEXXl, 64-145]. 

28. Lacan, "Aggressiveness in Psycho- 
analysis" (1948) and "The Mirror Stage" 
(1949), in Ecrits 1966. 

29. M. Balint, "On the Termination of 
Analysis," 7/PXXXI, 3 (1950): 197. 

30. M. Balint, "On Love and Hate," in Pri- 
mary Love and Psychoanalytic Technique (Lon- 
don: Hogarth, 1952), 155. [The article is also 
found in IJP XXXIII (1952): 355-62; see espe- 
cially 361-62.] 

31. A. Balint, "Love for the Mother and 
Mother-Love," ///>XXX,4 (1949): 251-59. [I 
have corrected the mistaken attribution of this 
article to Michael Balint instead of to Alice 
Balint in the footnotes and text.] 

32. M. Balint, "Changing Therapeutic Aims 
and Techniques in Psycho- Analysis," IJP 
XXXI, 1-2 (1950). See his remarks on the 
"two-body psychology" on pages 123-24. 

33. See the appendix to her abovementioned 
article, "Love for the Mother." 

34. New York: Garden City Books, 1949. 
[Published in Great Britain as The Inner Expe- 
rience of a Psychoanalyst (London: George 
Allen &Unwin, 1949).] 



302 



Ecrits 



35. R. P. Knight, "The Present Status of 
Organized Psychoanalysis in the United 
States," Journal of the American Psychoanalytic 
Association I, 2 (1953): 197-221. 

36. Maxwell Gitelson, "Therapeutic Prob- 
lems in the Analysis of the 'Normal' Candi- 
date," 7/PXXXV, 2 (1954): 174-83. 

37. Freud, "Die zukiinftigen Chancen der 
psychoanalytischen Therapie" (1910), GW 
VIII, 104-15 ["The Future Prospects of Psy- 
cho-Analytic Therapy," SEXl, 141-51]. 



38. Freud, "Aus der Geschichte einer infan- 
tilen Neurose," G JFXII, 1 1 1 ["From the His- 
tory of an Infantile Neurosis (the Wolf Man)," 
SffXVII, 79-80]. 

39. M. Balint, "Analytic Training and Train- 
ing Analysis," 7/PXXXV, 2 (1954): 157-62. 

40. Freud, "Ratschlage fur den Arzt bei der 
psychoanalytischen Behandlung," GJFVIII, 
376 ["Recommendations to Physicians Prac- 
tising Psycho-Analysis," SE XII, 111. Lacan 
provides his own French translation here]. 



On a Purpose 3 6 3 



The two samples of my seminar that follow inspire me to give the reader 
some idea of the purpose of my teaching. 

These texts still bear traces of the violent novelty they brought with 
them. One can gauge how great a risk I ran at that time by observing that 
the subjects they deal with have yet to be taken up by others, even though 
I provided an elaboration of them which I have continued to corroborate 
through critique and construction. 

In rereading these texts, I am happy to see that I highlighted the repres- 
sion that struck the word "signor," which was recently echoed by a ques- 
tion that was posed to me about the locus where the forgotten term 
resides — to put it more precisely in the terms of my topology: Is that locus 
"the dummy" mentioned later in my "Direction of the Treatment" or the 
Other's discourse as formulated in "Function and Field"? 

To this work in progress let me add the personal difficulties that make 
it hard for someone to grasp a notion like that of Verwerfung [foreclosure] 
when he himself may be characterized by it. This is an everyday tragedy 
which serves as a reminder that my teaching, although it exposes its the- 
ory to everyone, has as its practical stakes the training of psychoanalysts. 

How influential is my teaching? Let us approach the question by first 
considering that the two pieces presented here were published in the first 
issue, which is now out of print, of the journal La Psychanalyse, the room 



304 Ecrits 

my texts took up in it measuring only imperfectly, by their very excess, 
the work I put into it. 

How can we evaluate what was required, due to the ever composite 
nature of such an undertaking, on the terrain of an exigency whose status 
I shall state? 

It would not be the whole story to note that such invective earth-mov- 
ing, were it to stir up dust here, would still be relevant. 
3 64 I would also maintain that the tenor of this journal stopped French cir- 

cles from sliding down the slippery slope seen in international psychoan- 
alytic congresses. I occasionally receive news from abroad of people 's 
astonishment at its collapse. 

It goes without saying that the journal was disavowed in psychoana- 
lytic circles right from its very introduction. 

Nothing in it goes beyond or goes against the order of importance that 
I have recently captured with a pun of my own making: poubellication. 

The two texts that follow here warrant further consideration since they 
are representative of the kind of work done in my Seminar, having framed 
the contribution that Jean Hyppolite, who was one of my auditors at the 
time, was willing to make at my request in the form of a commentary on 
Freud's paper entitled "Verneinung" ("Negation"). 

The reader will find his commentary in an appendix to the present vol- 
ume, permission for its reproduction having been graciously granted by 
its author. The latter would like its character as a memorial to be clear, 
and the reader will see that the efforts made to preserve its character as a 
set of notes obviate any and all misunderstanding, but also thereby its value 
for us. 

For it was by allowing himself to be led in this way by the letter of 
Freud's work, up to the spark that it necessitates, without selecting a des- 
tination in advance — and by not backing away from the residue, found 
anew at the end, of its enigmatic point of departure, and even by not con- 
sidering that he had accounted, at the end of the proceedings, for the aston- 
ishment by which he entered into the proceedings — that a tried and true 
logician brought me the guarantee of what constituted my request, when 
for the preceding three years already I had been legitimating my work as 
a literal commentary on Freud 's work. 

The requirement to read does not take up as much space in the culture 
of psychoanalysis as one might think. 

There is nothing superstitious in my privileging the letter of Freud's 
work. It is in circles where liberties are taken with that letter that people 



On a Purpose jo5 

render that letter sacred in a way that is altogether compatible with its 
debasement to routinized use. 

Freud 's discovery shows the structural reason why the literality of any 
text, whether proposed as sacred or profane, increases in importance the 
more it involves a genuine confrontation with truth. 

That structural reason is found precisely in what the truth that it bears, 
that of the unconscious, owes to the letter of language — that is, to what I 
call "the signifier." 

While this incidentally accounts for Freud's quality as a writer, it is 365 

above all decisive in interesting psychoanalysts as much as possible in lan- 
guage and in what language determines in the subject. 

Herein too lies the motive for the collaborations I obtained for the first 
issue of my journal La Psychanalyse: Martin Heidegger's for his article 
entitled "Logos" — even if I had to be so audacious as to translate it 
myself — and Emile Benveniste's for his critique of one of Freud's refer- 
ences, which was eminent in proving to be governed by language at the 
deepest level of the affective realm. 

Therein lay my motive, and not in some vain semblance of dialogue, 
even and especially philosophical: We need not, in psychoanalysis, 
broaden people 's minds. 

All of the illustrious neighboring fields that I brought together at cer- 
tain moments in lectures designed to further my purpose were destined 
by the structuralist nature of their own tasks to accentuate that purpose 
for us. It should be indicated that the exceptional stupidity that put an end 
to them, taking umbrage at them, had already quashed the undertaking 
by seeing in it nothing but propaganda. 

What thus impels the psychoanalyst to cast his anchor elsewhere? If 
approaching the repressed is accompanied by resistances that indicate the 
degree of repression, as Freud tells us, this implies at the very least that 
there is a close relationship between the two terms. This relationship is 
borne out here by functioning in the opposite direction. 

The truth effect that is delivered up in the unconscious and the symp- 
tom requires that knowledge adopt an inflexible discipline in following its 
contours, for these contours run counter to intuitions that keep it all too 
comfortably safe. 

This truth effect culminates in a veiled irreducibility in which the pri- 
macy of the signifier is stamped, and we know from Freud 's doctrine that 
nothing real shares in this more than sex. But the subject's foothold there 
can only be overdetermined: Desire is the desire to know, aroused by a 



So6 Ecrits 

cause connected with a subject's formation, owing to which this connec- 
tion is related to sex only through an awkward detour [biais] — an expres- 
sion in which the reader can recognize the topology with which I try to 
close in on that cause. 

This makes it necessary to render present a hole which can no longer 
be situated in the transcendental nature of knowledge [connaissance] — a 
locus that is, in sum, designed to simply move it back a step — but only in 
a place which is closer that pressures us to forget it. 

This is the place where being, which is so inclined to flee its jouissance 

366 that it shows itself in the process, nevertheless does not assume, even in a 

less permanent way, that it has rightful access to it — a pretension that 

escapes being comical due only to the anxiety provoked by the experience 

that deflates it. 

Curiously enough, Freud's success can be explained on the basis of this 
impasse; people capitulate when they understand his success so as not to 
encounter this impasse, and "his language" — as people say to reduce dis- 
course to the verbal — appears in statements involving a "we" [on] that 
most thoroughly flees the light of day. 

Who will be surprised, outside of this "we," that psychoanalysts attrib- 
ute the same success to Freud when — engaging in a sort of sucking of his 
thought through the gap that opens up in his thought, which is so much 
closer in that it takes on, in his practice, the insistence of an indecent inti- 
macy — this gap redoubles analysts' horror by usually forcing them to 
engage in the morose operation of obstructing it? 

This is why no one any longer deals with each delicate joint that Freud 
borrows from the most subtle aspects of language [langue], without pour- 
ing into them beforehand the confused images into which the worst trans- 
lations run headlong. 

In short, people read Freud in the same way that they write in psy- 
choanalysis — enough said. 

One can thus see that the watchword I adopted, a "return to Freud," 
has nothing to do with a return to the sources that could, here as else- 
where, signify no more than a regression. 

Even if the point were to correct a deviation from Freud that is too 
obvious not to be apparent at every crossroads, I would merely be mak- 
ing way for an external, albeit salubrious, necessity. 

My return to Freud has an entirely different meaning insofar as it is 
based on the subject's topology, which can only be elucidated through a 
second twist back [tour] on itself. Everything about it must be restated on 
another side so that what it hones in on can be closed, which is certainly 



On a Purpose soy 

not absolute knowledge but rather the position from which knowledge 
can reverse truth effects. It is, no doubt, on the basis of a suture that was 
made at one moment at this joint that what we have absolutely achieved 
by way of science was assured. Isn't that also enough to tempt us to under- 
take a new operation where this joint remains gaping in our lives? 

This double twist [tour], of which I provide the theory, lends itself, in 
effect, to another seam by offering up a new edge [bord] : a seam from which 
arises a structure that is far more apt than Antiquity's sphere to answer 367 

for what proposes itself to the subject as an inside and an outside. 1 

When Freud, in a famous text, presents Ananke and Logos together, 
should we believe that he does so because he enjoys the effect created or 
to restore a firm footing to the rabble [pied-plat] by holding out for them 
the step down to earth? 

The formidable power that Freud invokes — awakening us from the 
sleep in which we weaken it — great Necessity, is no other than that which 
is exercised in the Logos, which he was the first to clarify with the glanc- 
ing light of his discovery. 

It is repetition itself whose face he, as much as Kierkegaard, renews for 
us in the division of the subject, the fate of scientific man. Let another con- 
fusion be dispelled: it bears no relation to Nietzsche's "eternal return." 

Repetition is unique in being necessary, and should I be unable to tame 
the repetition for which I assume responsibility, my index would command 
it to continue. 

1966 

Note 

1. As I began to establish the very year (1961—1962) that my students concerned them- 
selves with the same relationship (inside-outside) in a more worldly context. Whereby 
others will benefit from the fact that I returned to it this year (1965—1966). 



369 Introduction to Jean Hyppolite 's Commentary 

on Freud's "Verneinung" 



Seminar on Freudian Technique, February 10th, 1954 x 



You have been able to gauge how fruitful my method of returning to Freud's 
texts proves to be for providing a critical examination of the current use of 
the fundamental concepts of psychoanalytic technique and especially of the 
notion of resistance. 

The adulteration this latter notion has undergone is all the more serious 
because of the order that Freud consecrated with his own authority to give 
pride of place in psychoanalytic technique to the analysis of resistances. For 
although Freud intended to mark thereby a turning point in psychoanalytic 
practice, I believe that there is nothing but confusion and misinterpretation in 
the way in which people justify a technique that misrecognizes nothing less 
than what it is applied to on the basis of an emergency measure. 

The question is that of the meaning that we must restore to the precepts of 
this technique which, since they will soon be reduced to fixed formulas, have 
lost the indicative virtue that they can only preserve through an authentic com- 
prehension of the truth of the experience they are designed to guide. Freud, 
of course, could not but have such a comprehension, like those who immerse 
themselves in his work. But, as you have had the opportunity to see, this is not 
370 the case of those in our discipline who noisily seek refuge behind the primacy 

of technique — no doubt in order to hide behind the simultaneous harmoniz- 
ing of their technique with progress in the theory, in the dumbed-down usage 
of analytic concepts which alone can justify their technique. 

One will be quite disappointed if one attempts to look a little more closely 



Introduction to Jean Hyppolite's Commentary on Freud's "Verneinung" 309 

at what the analysis of resistances represents in the dominant usage. For what 
strikes one first in reading the work of the doctrinaires of this perspective is 
that the dialectical handling of any idea whatsoever is so unthinkable to them 
that they cannot even recognize it when they are thrown into it — like Mon- 
sieur Jourdain was when he spoke in prose without realizing it — by a practice 
in which dialectic is in fact immanent. Thus they cannot reflect upon it with- 
out latching in panic onto the most simplistic or the most grossly imaginative 
objectifications. 

This is why resistance comes to be imagined rather than conceptualized by 
them according to what it connotes in its average semantic usage 2 — namely, 
if we examine this usage closely, in the indefinite transitive acceptation. 
Thanks to which the phrase "the subject resists" is understood as "he resists 
something." What does he resist? No doubt he resists his tendencies in the 
way he forces himself to behave as a neurotic subject, and resists avowing them 
in the justifications he proposes for his behavior to the analyst. But since the 
tendencies come back in force, and since the analyst's technique had some- 
thing to do with it, this resistance is presumed to be seriously tried; hence, in 
order to maintain it, he must work at it and, before we even have the chance 
to turn around, we have slipped into the rut of the obtuse idea that the patient 
"is being defensive." For the misinterpretation is only definitively sealed due 
to its conjunction with another misuse of language, the one that gives the term 
"defense" the carte blanche it has in medicine, without us realizing — for one 
does not become a better physician by being a bad psychoanalyst — that there 371 

is a misunderstanding in medicine too regarding the notion if we intend to 
echo its correct meaning in physiopathology. And we betray no less — for one 
becomes no better instructed in psychoanalysis by being ignorant in medi- 
cine — the perfectly well-informed application Freud made of it in his first writ- 
ings on the pathogenesis of the neuroses. 

But, people will ask us, by centering your aim of grasping a confused idea 
at its lowest point of disintegration, don't you fall into the trap of condemn- 
ing the patient, not for his acts, but for intentions you attribute to him [proces 
de tendance]} The fact is, I will answer, that nothing stops the users of a tech- 
nique thus fitted out from sliding down this dangerous slope, for the precepts 
with which they parry its original confusion do not in any wise remedy its 
consequences. This is what allows people to proffer the following: that the 
subject can communicate to us only about his ego and with his ego (here we 
see the defiant look of common sense that comes home to roost); that it is 
necessary, in order to get anywhere, to strengthen the ego or at least, they 
correct themselves, its healthy part (and heads nod in assent at this tomfool- 
ery); that in the use of analytic material we proceed by following blueprints 



310 Ecrits 

(of which we have, of course, the certified plans in our pocket); that we pro- 
ceed thusly from the surface to the depths (no putting the cart before the 
horse); that in order to do so the masters' secret is to analyse the subject's 
aggressiveness (no attaching a cart which would kill the horse); here, finally, 
are the dynamics of anxiety and the arcanes of its economy (let no one touch 
the potential of this sublime mana if he is not an expert in hydraulics). All 
these precepts, let it be said, and their theoretical trappings shall be ignored 
here because they are simply macaronic. 

In effect, resistance can but be misrecognized in its essence if it is not under- 
stood on the basis of the dimensions of the discourse in which it manifests itself 
in analysis. We encountered them right away in the metaphor with which Freud 
illustrated his first definition of resistance. I mean the one I commented on 
some time ago which evokes the staves on which the subject unfolds the chains 
372 of his discourse "longitudinally," to use Freud 's term, according to a musical 

score whose "pathogenic nucleus" is the leitmotiv. 3 In the reading of this score, 
resistance manifests itself "radially" — a term which is opposed to the preceding 
term ["longitudinally"] — and with a strength proportional to the proximity 
of the line being deciphered to the line that delivers the central melody by 
completing it. So much so that this strength, Freud stresses, can serve as a meas- 
ure of this proximity. 

Certain analysts even tried to find in this metaphor an indication of the 
mechanistic tendency with which Freud 's thought is supposedly shackled. This 
attempt evinces a complete lack of comprehension, as can be seen in the research 
I have carried out step-by-step into the successive clarifications Freud gave to 
the notion of resistance, especially in the writing we are now considering in 
which he gives the clearest formulation of it. 

What does Freud tell us, in fact? He reveals to us a phenomenon that 
structures every revelation of truth in the [psychoanalytic] dialogue. There is 
the fundamental difficulty that the subject encounters in what he has to say; the 
most common is the one that Freud demonstrated in repression, namely, the 
sort of discordance between the signified and the signifier that is brought on 
by all censorship of social origin. The truth can always, in this case, be com- 
municated between the lines. That is, he who wishes to make the truth known 
can always adopt the technique indicated by the fact that truth is identical to 
the symbols that reveal it; in other words, he can always arrive at his ends by 
deliberately introducing into a text discordances that cryptographically cor- 
respond to those imposed by the censorship. 

The true subject — that is, the subject of the unconscious — proceeds no 
differently in the language of his symptoms; that language is not so much 
deciphered by the analyst as it comes to be more and more solidly addressed 



Introduction to Jean Hyppolite 's Commentary on Freud 's " Verneinung" 311 

to him, for the ever renewed satisfaction of analytic experience. Indeed, this 
is what analysis recognized in the phenomenon of transference. 

What the subject who speaks says, however empty his discourse may at first 
be, derives its effect from the approximation made in it on the basis of speech 
in which he tries to fully convert the truth expressed by his symptoms. Let me 
indicate right away that this formulation is of more general import, as we shall 
see today, than the phenomenon of repression by which I just introduced it. 

Be that as it may, it is insofar as the subject arrives at the limit of what the 373 

moment allows his discourse to effectuate by way of speech, that a phenom- 
enon is produced in which, as Freud shows us, resistance is linked to the psy- 
choanalytic dialectic. For this moment and this limit are balanced in the 
emergence, outside of the subject's discourse, of the trait that can most par- 
ticularly be addressed to you in what he is in the process of saying. And this 
juncture is raised to the function of the punctuation of his speech. In order to 
convey this effect I have used the image that the subject's speech suddenly 
swings toward the presence of the listener. 4 

This presence, which is the purest relationship the subject can have with a 
being and which is all the more deeply felt as such since this being is for him 
less qualified, this presence, momentarily freed to the utmost from the veils 
that cover it over and elude it in everyday discourse insofar as the latter is con- 
stituted as "they" [on] discourse precisely for this purpose, this presence is 
marked in discourse by a suspensive scansion often connoted by a moment of 
anxiety, as I have shown you in an example from my own experience. 

Hence the import of the indication that Freud gave us from his own expe- 
rience: namely, that when the subject interrupts his discourse you can be sure 
that a thought is occupying him that is related to the analyst. 

You will see this indication most often confirmed if you ask the subject the 
following question: "What are you thinking about right now that is related to 
what is around you here and more precisely to me who is listening to you?" 
Still, the inner satisfaction you may derive from hearing more or less unflat- 
tering remarks about your general appearance and your mood that day, about 
your taste as denoted by your choice of furniture or the way in which you are 
dressed, does not suffice to justify your initiative if you do not know what you 
are expecting from these remarks, and the idea — which for many is a received 
idea — that these remarks give the subject the opportunity to discharge his 
aggression is utterly idiotic. 

As Freud said prior to the elaboration of the new topography, resistance is 374 

essentially an ego phenomenon. Let us try to understand here what that 
means. This will allow us later to understand what we mean by resistance when 
we relate it to the subject's other agencies. 



312 Ecrits 

The phenomenon in question here shows one of the purest forms in which 
the ego can manifest its function in the dynamic of analysis. This is why it 
makes us realize that the ego, as it operates in analytic experience, has noth- 
ing to do with the supposed unity of the subject's reality that so-called gen- 
eral psychology abstracts as instituted in its "synthetic functions." The ego 
we are talking about is absolutely impossible to distinguish from the imagi- 
nary captures that constitute it from head to toe — in both its genesis and its 
status, in both its function and its actuality — by an other and for an other. Stated 
differently, the dialectic that sustains our experience, being situated at the most 
enveloping level of the subject's efficacy, obliges us to understand the ego 
entirely in the movement of progressive alienation in which self-conscious- 
ness is constituted in Hegel's phenomenology. 

This means that if, in the moment we are studying, you are dealing with the 
subject's ego*, it is because you are at that moment the prop for his alter ego. 

I have reminded you that one of our colleagues — who has since been cured 
of this pruritus of thought which still tormented him at the time when he was 
cogitating about the cases in which psychoanalysis is indicated as a treatment — 
was seized by a suspicion of this truth; the miracle of intelligence illuminat- 
ing his face, he ended his talk regarding these indications by announcing the 
great news that analysis had to be subordinated to the primary condition that 
the subject have some sense of the existence of the other. 

It is precisely here that the question begins: What is the kind of alterity by 
which the subject is interested in this existence? For the subject's ego par- 
takes of this very alterity, so much so that if there is something to be known 
[une connaissance] which is truly classificatory for the analyst — and of a kind 
that can satisfy the requirement of having a preliminary orientation that the 
new technique proclaims with a tone that is all the more hilarious since it 
375 misrecognizes it right to the very core — it is the thing which in each neurotic 

structure defines the sector that is open to the ego's* alibis. 

In short, what we expect from the subject's reply in asking him this stereo- 
typical question, which most often frees him from the silence that serves us as 
a signal of this privileged moment of resistance, is that he show us who is 
speaking and to whom — which is, in fact, one and the same question. 

But it remains up to you to get him to understand it by questioning him in 
the imaginary place where he is situated; this will depend on whether or not 
you can tie the [unflattering] jibe [he makes at that moment of resistance] to 
the point in his discourse where his speech ground to a halt. 

You will thereby confirm this point as a correct punctuation. And it is here 
that the analysis of resistances and the analysis of the material, whose oppo- 



Introduction to Jean Hyppolite's Commentary on Freud's "Verneinung" jzj 

sition it would be ruinous to formally endorse, harmoniously converge. This 
is a technique in which you are given practical training in supervision. 

To those who have nevertheless learned another technique, the systemat- 
ics of which I know only too well, and who still lend it some credence, I would 
observe that you of course will not fail to obtain a relevant response by point- 
ing out the subject's aggression toward you and even by showing some mod- 
icum of finesse in recognizing therein, by way of contrast, the "need for love." 
And after thus plying your art, the field of defense 's ploys will open up before 
you. Big deal! Don't we know that where speech gives up, the domain of vio- 
lence begins, and that violence reigns there already without us even provok- 
ing it? 

Thus, if you bring war to it, you should at least be aware of its principles 
and realize that we misrecognize its limits when we do not understand it, as 
Clausewitz does, as a particular form of human commerce. 

We know that it was by recognizing, by the name of total war, its internal 
dialectic that Clausewitz was able to formulate that war is in command because 
it is considered to be an extension of political expedients. 

This has allowed more advanced practitioners in the modern experience of 
social warfare, to which he served as a prelude, to formulate the corollary that 
the first rule to be observed is not to allow the moment at which the adver- 
sary becomes other than he was to slip away — which means that we should 
rapidly divide up the stakes that form the basis of an equitable peace. It has 376 

been made amply clear to your generation that this art is unknown to dema- 
gogues who can no more detach themselves from abstractions than your ordi- 
nary psychoanalyst can. This is why the very wars they win serve only to 
engender contradictions in which one can rarely perceive the effects that they 
promised would be achieved thereby. 

Hence they throw themselves headlong into the undertaking of humaniz- 
ing the adversary who has become their responsibility through his defeat — 
even calling the psychoanalyst to the rescue to collaborate in restoring 
"human relations,"* a task in which the analyst, given the pace at which he 
now pursues things, does not hesitate to go astray. 

None of this seems irrelevant when we rediscover, at a turning point, Freud 's 
note (in the same text) about which I have already spoken, and this perhaps 
sheds new light on what Freud means when he says that one must not infer, 
on the basis of a battle that is waged sometimes for months around an isolated 
farm, that the farm itself represents the national sanctuary of one of the war- 
ring parties, or even that it shelters one of their military industries. In other 
words, the meaning of a defensive or offensive action is not to be found in the 



314 Ecrits 

object that is apparently fought over, but rather in the plan it forms a part of, 
which defines the adversary by his strategy. 

The gallows humor evinced in the morosity of the analysis of the defenses 
would no doubt bear more encouraging fruit for those who trust in it if they 
simply took their cue from the smallest real struggle, which would teach them 
that the most effective response to a defense is not to bring to bear upon it the 
test of strength. 

What they in fact do — instead of confining themselves to the dialectical 
pathways by which psychoanalysis has been elaborated, and lacking the tal- 
ent necessary to return to the pure and simple use of suggestion — is merely 
resort to a pedantic form of suggestion, taking advantage of our culture 's ambi- 
ent psychologism. In doing so, they offer up to their contemporaries the spec- 
tacle of people who were drawn to their profession by nothing other than the 
desire to always be able to have the last word, and who, when they encounter 
a little more difficulty than in other so-called professional [liberates] activities, 
377 sport the ridiculous face of Purgons, obsessed as they are by the "defense" of 

whomsoever does not understand why his daughter is mute. 

But in so doing they merely enter the dialectic of the ego and the other 
that constitutes the neurotic's impasse and renders his situation of a piece 
with the analyst's biased belief [prejuge] in his ill will. This is why I some- 
times say that there is no other resistance in analysis than that of the analyst. 
For this biased belief can only give way through a true dialectical conver- 
sion, a conversion that must, moreover, be maintained in the analyst by con- 
tinual use. This is what all the conditions of the training of a psychoanalyst 
truly come down to. 

Without such training this bias [prejuge], which has found its most stable 
formulation in the conception of pithiatism, will remain forever dominant. 
But other formulations had preceded it and I merely want to infer what Freud 
thought of it by recalling his feelings about its latest incarnation during his 
youth. I will extract his testimony about it from Chapter 4 of his great text, 
Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego. He speaks there of Bernheim's 
astonishing tours deforce with suggestion, which he witnessed in 1899. 

But I can remember even then feeling a muffled hostility to this tyranny 
of suggestion. When a patient who showed himself unamenable was met 
with a shout: "What are you doing? Vous vous contre-suggestionne{/ 9i , I 
said to myself that this was an evident injustice and an act of violence. 
For the man certainly had a right to countersuggestions if people were 
trying to subdue him with suggestions. Later on my resistance took 
the direction of protesting against the view that suggestion, which 



Introduction to Jean Hyppolite's Commentary on Freud's "Verneinung" ji5 

explained everything, was itself to be exempt from explanation. Think- 
ing of it, I repeated the old conundrum: 

Christopher bore Christ; Christ bore the whole world; 

Say, where did Christopher then put his foot? [SE XVIII, 89] 

And given that Freud goes on to deplore the fact that the concept of sug- 
gestion has drifted in an ever vaguer direction, which does not allow us to 378 
foresee the clarification of the phenomenon any time soon, what mightn't he 
have said about the current usage of the notion of resistance? How could he 
not have encouraged, at the very least, my efforts to tighten up its use in ana- 
lytic technique? In any case, my way of reintegrating it into the whole of the 
dialectical movement of an analysis is perhaps what will allow me to someday 
provide a formulation of suggestion that will stand up to the criteria of ana- 
lytic experience. 

This is the aim that guides me when I shed light on resistance at the moment 
of transparency at which it presents itself by its transferential end, to borrow 
an apt expression from Octave Mannoni. 

This is why I shed light on it with examples in which one can see the same 
dialectical syncope at work. 

This led me to highlight the example with which Freud illustrates, almost 
acrobatically, what he means by the desire in a dream. 5 For while he provides 
this example in order to cut short the objection that a dream undergoes alter- 
ation when it is recollected in the narrative, it appears quite clearly that only 
the elaboration of the dream interests him insofar as it is carried out in the nar- 
rative itself — in other words, the dream has no value for him except as a vec- 
tor of speech. Hence all the phenomena that he furnishes of forgetting, and 
even of doubt, which block the narrative must be interpreted as signifiers in 
this speech. And were there to remain of a dream but a fragment as evanes- 
cent as the memory floating in the air of the Cheshire cat who fades away in 
such a worrisome manner in Alice 's eyes, this would simply render more cer- 
tain that we have here the broken end of what constitutes the dream's trans- 
ferential tip — in other words, the part of the dream that directly addresses the 
analyst. Here this occurs by means of the word "channel," the sole vestige 
remaining of the dream — namely, a smile here too, but this time a woman's 
impertinent smile, with which she to whom Freud took the trouble to give a 
taste of his theory of jokes paid homage to it — which is translated by the sen- 
tence that concludes the funny story that she associates, at Freud 's invitation, 
to the word "channel": "Du sublime au ridicule il n'y a qu'un pas" ("From 
the sublime to the ridiculous there is but one step"). 

Similarly, in the example of the forgetting of names which I just recently 379 



3i6 Ecrits 

examined, it being literally the first that came along, in The Psychopathology 
of Everyday Life? I was able to discern that Freud's inability to find the name 
Signorelli in the dialogue he carried on with his colleague who was his trav- 
eling companion at that time, corresponded to the fact that — by censoring ear- 
lier in the conversation with the same gentleman everything that this man's 
remarks had stirred up in him both by their content and by memories that came 
in their wake, regarding the relationship of man and doctor to death, the 
absolute master, Herr^ signor — Freud had literally left in his partner, excised 
[retranche] from himself therefore, the broken half (to be understood in the 
most material sense of the term) of the sword of speech. For a little while, pre- 
cisely the time during which he continued to speak with this partner, he could 
no longer have this term as signifying material at his disposal since it remained 
attached to the repressed signification — especially since the theme of the work 
he needed to find anew in Signorelli, the author, namely, the fresco of the 
Antichrist at Orvieto, simply illustrated the mastery of death in one of the 
most manifest, albeit apocalyptic, forms. 

But can we confine our attention to repression here? I can, of course, assure 
you that repression is at work here thanks to the overdeterminations Freud him- 
self supplies us with regarding the phenomenon; and we can also confirm here, 
thanks to the relevance of these circumstances, the import of what I want to 
convey to you with the formulation, "the unconscious is the Other's discourse." 

For the man who breaks the bread of truth with his semblable in the act of 
speech shares a lie. 

But is that the whole story? Could the speech that was excised [retranchee] 
here avoid being extinguished before being-toward-death when speech 
approached it at a level at which only witticisms are still viable, appearances 
of seriousness no longer seeming to be anything but hypocritical in respond- 
ing to its gravity? 

Hence death brings the question of what negates [nie] discourse, but also 

the question whether or not it is death that introduces negation into discourse. 

For the negativity of discourse, insofar as it brings into being that which is 

380 not, refers us to the question of what nonbeing, which manifests itself in the 

symbolic order, owes to the reality of death. 

It is in this way that the axis of poles by which a first field of speech was 
oriented, whose primordial image is the material of the tessera (in which one 
finds anew the etymology of the symbol), is crossed here by a second dimen- 
sion which is not repressed but of necessity a lure. This is the dimension from 
which, alongside nonbeing, the definition of reality arises. 

Thus we already see the cement crumble, the cement with which the so- 



Introduction to Jean Hyppolite's Commentary on Freud's "Verneinung" jiy 

called new technique ordinarily plugs up its cracks by resorting to the rela- 
tionship to reality [reel], without in any way critiquing the notion. 

In order to get you to see that such critique is part and parcel of Freud's 
thought, I didn't think I could do any better than to confide the demonstra- 
tion to Jean Hyppolite who not only graces this seminar with his kind inter- 
est, but who, by his very presence, also in some sense guarantees you that I 
don't go astray in my dialectic. 

I asked him to comment on a text by Freud that is very short, but that, being 
situated in 1925 — in other words, much further along in the development of 
Freud's thought, since it comes after the main writings on the new topogra- 
phy 7 — brings us right to the heart of the new question raised by our exami- 
nation of resistance. I am referring to the text on negation [denegation]. 

Jean Hyppolite, by taking responsibility for this text, is sparing me an exer- 
cise in which my competence is far from attaining the level of his own. Let me 
thank him for having granted my request and let us give him the floor regard- 
ing Freud's "Verneinung." 8 



Notes 



1 . 1 am providing here the text of one of the 
meetings of the seminar held at the Saint Anne 
Hospital University Clinic which was devoted, 
during the 1 953-1 954 academic year, to Freud 's 
writings on technique and their relation to cur- 
rent technique. I have added to it a few refer- 
ences, which seemed useful, back to earlier 
classes, but I was not able to remove the diffi- 
culty of access inherent to a piece extracted 
from an ongoing teaching. 

2. This usage, let it be said in passing, cer- 
tainly includes nonnegligible oscillations 
regarding the accentuation of its transitivity, 
depending on the type of alterity to which it is 
applied. One says, "to resist the evidence"* like 
to "resist the authority of the Court,"* but, on 
the other hand, one says, nicht der Versuchung 
widerstehen. Note the range of nuances that can 
far more easily be displayed in the diversity of 
the semanteme in German — widerstehen; wider- 
streben; sich strduhen gegen, andauern, fortbeste- 
hen — whereby widerstehen can intentionally 
correspond more closely to the meaning I am 
going to isolate as being the properly analytic 
meaning of resistance. 



3. See pages 290-307 of the chapter "Zur 
Psychotherapie der Hysterie," written by 
Freud, in Studien iiher hysterie, GW\, published 
in 1895 with Josef Breuer. In English, see Stud- 
ies on Hysteria [SE II]. 

4. One will recognize in this the formula- 
tion by which I introduced what is at stake here 
at the very beginning of my teaching. The sub- 
ject, as I said then, begins analysis by speaking 
of himself without speaking to you, or by 
speaking to you without speaking of himself. 
When he can speak to you about himself, the 
analysis will be finished. 

5. GW\\-\\\, 511, fnl; SE V, 517-18, fn2; 
Science des rives, All. 

6. Indeed, this example opens the book: 
GW\N, 5-12 [SE VI, 2-7], Psychopathologie 
de la vie quotidienne, 1—8. 

7. 1 devoted the next year [of my seminar] 
to a commentary on the writing entitled Beyond 
the Pleasure Principle. 

8. Jean Hyppolite 's discourse can be found 
as an appendix to the present volume, begin- 
ning on page 879. 



3 8i Response to Jean Hyppolite 's Commentary 

on Freud's "Verneinung" 



I hope that the gratitude we all feel for the favor Prof. Hyppolite did for us by 
providing such an illuminating expose will justify in your eyes, no less I hope 
than in his, my insistence in asking him to prepare it. 

We see once again here that, in proposing a text by Freud — that is appar- 
ently of but the most local interest — to a mind that has the fewest preconcep- 
tions about it, even if that mind is certainly not the least practiced, we find in 
the text the inexhaustible richness of significations that it is destined to offer 
up to the discipline of commentary. It is not one of those two dimensional texts, 
which are infinitely flat, as mathematicians say, which have only a fiduciary 
value in a constituted discourse, but rather a text which carries speech insofar 
as speech constitutes a new emergence of truth. 

While it is fitting to apply to this sort of text all the resources of our exe- 
gesis, we do so not simply, as you see in this example, in order to investigate 
it in relation to he who is its author — a mode of historical or literary criticism 
whose value as "resistance" must be immediately obvious to a trained psy- 
choanalyst — but rather in order to make it respond to questions that it raises 
for us, to treat it like true speech in its transferential value, as we should say, 
assuming we know our own terms. 

This, of course, assumes that we interpret it. And is there, in fact, a better 
critical method than the method that applies to the comprehension of a mes- 
sage the very principles of comprehension that the message itself conveys? 
This is the most rational means by which to test its authenticity. 



Response to Jean Hyppolite 's Commentary on Freud 's " Verneinung" 319 

For full speech is defined by the fact that it is identical to what it speaks 
about. And this text by Freud provides us with an illuminating example by 382 

confirming my thesis regarding the transpsychological nature of the psycho- 
analytic field, as Jean Hyppolite just told you quite directly. 

This is why Freud's texts turn out, in the final analysis, to have true train- 
ing value for the psychoanalyst, making him practiced — which he must be, 
as I teach explicitly — in a register without which his experience becomes 
worthless. 

For what is at stake is nothing less than whether the analyst is equal to the 
level of man at which he grabs hold of him, regardless of what he thinks of it, 
at which he is called upon to respond to him, whether he likes it or not, and 
for which he assumes responsibility, despite any reservations he may have about 
doing so. This means that he is not free to let himself off the hook with a hyp- 
ocritical reference to his medical qualifications and an indeterminate refer- 
ence to clinical foundations. 

For the psychoanalytic New Deal* has more than one face — indeed, it 
changes faces depending on its interlocutors, such that it has had so many faces 
for some time now that it has been getting caught in its own alibis, starting to 
believe them itself, and even to erroneously see itself in them. 

Regarding what we have just heard, today I simply want to indicate to you 
the avenues that it opens up for our most concrete research. 

Prof. Hyppolite, in his analysis, has brought us over the high pass, marked 
by the difference in level in the subject of the symbolic creation of negation 
with respect to Bejahung. This creation of the symbol, as he stressed, must be 
conceptualized as a mythical moment rather than as a genetic moment. One 
cannot even relate it to the constitution of the object, since it concerns the rela- 
tion between the subject and being and not between the subject and the world. 

In this short text, as in the whole of his work, Freud thus proves to be very 
far ahead of his time and not at all lacking compared with the most recent aspects 
of philosophical reflection. He does not in any way anticipate the modern devel- 
opment of the philosophy of existence. But this philosophy is no more than 
the parry [parade] that reveals in certain people and covers over in others the 
more or less well understood repercussions of a meditation on being, which 
goes so far as to contest the whole tradition of our thought, believing it to stem 
from a primordial confusion of being among beings [I'etre dans Uetani\. 

Now, we cannot fail to be struck by what constantly shines through in 383 

Freud's work regarding the proximity of these problems, which leads me to 
believe that his repeated references to pre-Socratic doctrines do not simply 
bear witness to a discreet use of notes on his reading (which would, moreover, 
contradict Freud's almost mystifying reluctance to show how immensely cul- 



320 Ecrits 

tivated he was), but rather to a properly metaphysical apprehension of what 
were pressing problems for him. 

What Freud designates here as the affective has nothing to do — need we 
go back over this? — with the use made of this term by backers of the new psy- 
choanalysis; they use it as a psychological qualitas occulta in order to desig- 
nate that "lived experience" whose subtle gold, they claim, is only rendered 
through the decanting of a high alchemy; yet their quest for it evokes little 
more than a sniffing that hardly seems promising when we see them panting 
before its most inane forms. 

In this text by Freud, the affective is conceived of as what preserves its effects 
right down to the discursive structuration on the basis of a primordial sym- 
bolization, this structuration (which is also called "intellectual") having been 
constituted in such a way as to translate in the form of misrecognition what 
the first symbolization owes to death. 

We are thus brought to a sort of intersection of the symbolic with the real 
that one might call immediate, insofar as it occurs without an imaginary inter- 
mediary, but that is mediated — although in a form that goes back on itself [se 
renie] — by what was excluded at the first moment [temps] of symbolization. 

These formulations are accessible to you, despite their aridity, thanks to 
everything they condense related to the use of the categories of the symbolic, 
the imaginary, and the real, which you are kind enough to grant me. 

I want to give you an idea of the fertile fields, the key to which is what I 
earlier called the high pass defined by these categories. 

In order to do so, I will extract two examples as premises from two differ- 
ent fields: the first, from what these formulations can clarify about psycho- 
pathological structures and simultaneously allow nosography to understand; 
the second, from what these categories allow us to understand about psy- 
chotherapeutic clinical work and simultaneously shed light on for the theory 
of technique. 
384 The first concerns the function of hallucination. We cannot, of course, 

overestimate the magnitude of the displacement which occurred in the posi- 
tion of this problem by the so-called phenomenological envisioning of the 
data of hallucination. 

But whatever progress has been made here, the problem of hallucination 
remains just as centered as before on the attributes of consciousness. This is a 
stumbling block for a theory of thought that sought the guarantee of its cer- 
tainty in consciousness. As such — at the origin of the hypothesis of this coun- 
terfeiting of consciousness that one understands as one can using the term 
"epiphenomenon" — it is once again and more than ever as a phenomenon of 
consciousness that hallucination is subjected to phenomenological reduction, 



Response to Jean Hyppolite's Commentary on Freud's "Verneinung" 321 

[phenomenologists] believing that it yields its meaning to us when we tritu- 
rate the component forms of its intentionality. 

There is no more striking example of such a method than the pages devoted 
by Maurice Merleau-Ponty to hallucination in his Phenomenology of Percep- 
tion. But the limits to the autonomy of consciousness that he so admirably 
apprehended there in the phenomenon itself were too subtle to bar the way to 
the crude simplification of the hallucinatory noesis into which psychoanalysts 
regularly fall, incorrectly using Freud 's notions in their attempt to explain hal- 
lucinatory consciousness on the basis of an eruption of the pleasure principle. 1 

It would be all too easy to object to this that the noeme of an hallucina- 
tion — the hallucination's "content," as we would say in the vernacular — in 
fact has only the most contingent of relations with any of the subject's satis- 
factions. Hence the phenomenological preparation of the problem allows us 
to glimpse that it no longer has any value here other than that of laying out 
the terms necessary for a true conversion of the question — namely, whether 
or not the noesis of the phenomenon bears any necessary relationship to its 
noeme. 

It is here that this article, put back on the analyst's reading list, assumes its 
proper place by pointing out how much more structuralist Freud 's thought is 385 

than received ideas would have it. For we distort the meaning of the pleasure 
principle if we neglect the fact that it is never posited all by itself in Freud 's 
theory. 

The casting into structural form found in this article, as Prof. Hyppolite 
just outlined it for you, brings us immediately beyond the conversion that I 
consider to be necessary, if we know how to understand it. I am going to try 
to accustom you to this conversion by analyzing an example in which I hope 
you will sense the promise of a truly scientific reconstitution of the givens of 
a problem. Together we shall perhaps be the artisans of this reconstitution, 
insofar as we can find the handholds that have heretofore eluded [theoreti- 
cians concerned with] the crucial alternative of experience. 

I need go no further to find such an example than to take up the one that 
fell into our lap last week, by investigating a significant moment in the analy- 
sis of the Wolf Man. 2 

I believe that you still recall the hallucination whose trace the subject finds 
anew when he remembers [a scene from his childhood]. The hallucination 
appeared erratically in his fifth year, but it comes to him now with the illu- 
sion, whose falsity is soon demonstrated, that he has already told Freud about 
it. Our examination of this phenomenon will be rendered easier by what we 
already know about its context. For it is not on the basis of an accumulation 
of facts that light can shine forth, but on the basis of a fact that is well reported 



322 Ecrits 

with all its correlations, in other words, with the correlations that one forgets 
precisely because one does not understand the fact — except when a genius 
intervenes who formulates the enigma precisely (here again) as if he already 
knew its solution(s). 

This context is furnished to us in the obstacles to analysis that this case pre- 
sented, Freud seeming to proceed here from one surprise to the next. For he 
did not, of course, have the omniscience that allows our neopractitioners to 
situate case planning at the crux [principe] of the analysis. Indeed, it is in this 
very case study that he asserts with the greatest force that the crux should be 
quite the opposite — namely, that he would rather give up the entire stability 
386 of his theory than misrecognize the tiniest particularities of a case that might 

call his theory into question. This means that even if the sum total of analytic 
experience allows us to isolate some general forms, an analysis proceeds only 
from the particular to the particular. 

The obstacles of the present case, like Freud's surprises — assuming you 
remember not only what came to light last week but also my commentary on 
this case in the first year of this seminar 3 — lie at the heart of contemporary 
concerns: namely, the "intellectualization" of the analytic process, on the one 
hand, and the maintenance of repression, despite conscious acknowledgment 
[prise de conscience] of the repressed, on the other. 

For Freud, in his inflexible inflection of analytic experience, comments here 
that, although the subject manifested in his behavior that he had access (not 
without audacity) to genital reality, the latter went unheeded in his uncon- 
scious where the "sexual theory" of the anal phase still reigned. 

Freud discerns the reason for this phenomenon in the fact that the feminine 
position, assumed by the subject in the imaginary capture of the primal trauma 
(namely, the one whose historicity gives the case write-up its major raison 
d'etre) , makes it impossible for him to accept genital reality without inevitably 
being threatened with castration. 

But what Freud says about the nature of the phenomenon is far more remark- 
able. It is not a question, he says, of repression (Verdrangung), for repression 
cannot be distinguished from the return of the repressed in which the subject 
cries out from every pore of his being what he cannot talk about. 

Regarding castration, Freud tells us that this subject "did not want to 
know anything about it in the sense of repression" ("er von ihr nichts wissen 
wollte im Sinne der Verdrangung"). 4 And to designate this process he uses 
the term Verwerfung, for which, on the whole, I would propose the term 
"excision" [retranckement]. 5 

Its effect is a symbolic abolition. For, when Freud says, "Er verwarf sie," 
"he excises" castration (adding, "und blieb auf dem Standpunkt des Verkehrs 



Response to Jean Hyppolite 's Commentary on Freud 's " Verneinung" 323 

im After," "and held to his theory of anal intercourse"), he continues: "thereby 387 

one cannot say that any judgment regarding its existence was properly made, 
but it was as if it had never existed." 6 

Several pages earlier, right after having determined the historical situation 
of this process in the subject's biography, Freud concluded by distinguishing 
it expressly from repression in the following terms: "Eine Verdrangung ist 
etwas anderes als eine Verwerfung." 7 This is presented to us in the following 
terms in the French translation: "A repression is something other than a judg- 
ment which rejects and chooses." I will let you judge what kind of evil spell 
we must admit has cursed Freud's texts in French — assuming we refuse to 
believe that the translators made a pact to render them incomprehensible — 
not to mention the added impact of the complete extinguishing of the liveli- 
ness of his style. 

The process in question here known as Verwerfung^ which I do not believe 
has ever been commented on in a sustained manner in the analytic literature, 
is situated very precisely in one of the moments that Prof. Hyppolite has just 
brought out for us in the dialectic of Verneinung: Verwerfung is exactly what 
opposes the primal Bejahung and constitutes as such what is expelled. You will 
see proof of this in a sign whose obviousness will surprise you. For it is here 
that we find ourselves at the point at which I left you last week, a point beyond 
which it will be much easier for us to go after what we have just learned from 
Prof. Hyppolite 's talk. 

I will thus forge on ahead, and the most fervent devotees of the idea of devel- 
opment, if there still are any here, will be unable to object that the phenome- 
non occurred at too late a date [to constitute a primal scene], since Prof. 
Hyppolite has admirably shown you that it is mythically speaking that Freud 
describes it as primal. 

Verwerfung thus cut short any manifestation of the symbolic order — that 
is, it cut short the Bejahung that Freud posits as the primary procedure in which 
the judgment of attribution finds its root, and which is no other than the pri- 388 

mordial condition for something from the real to come to offer itself up to the 
revelation of being, or, to employ Heidegger's language, to be let-be. For it is 
clearly to this distant point that Freud brings us, since it is only afterwards that 
anything whatsoever can be found there as existent [comme etani\. 

Such is the inaugural affirmation, which can no longer recur [etre renou- 
vele'e] except through the veiled forms of unconscious speech, for it is only by 
the negation of the negation that human discourse allows us to return to it. 

But what thus becomes of that which is not let-be in this Bejahung? Freud 
told us right away that what the subject has thus excised (verworfen), as I put 
it, from the opening toward being will not be refound in his history, assum- 



324 Ecrits 

ing we designate by the latter term the locus in which the repressed manages 
to reappear. For I ask you to note how striking the formulation is since there 
is not the slightest ambiguity in it: the subject will not want "to know anything 
about it in the sense of repression" For, in order for him to be able to know 
something about it in this sense, it would have had to come in some way to 
light in the primordial symbolization. But once again, what becomes of it? 
You can see what becomes of it: what did not come to light in the symbolic 
appears in the real. 

For that is how we must understand "Einbeziehung ins Ich," taking into 
the subject, and "Ausstossung aus dem Ich," expelling from the subject. The 
latter constitutes the real insofar as it is the domain of that which subsists out- 
side of symbolization. This is why castration — which is excised by the sub- 
ject here from the very limits of what is possible, but which is also thereby 
withdrawn from the possibilities of speech — appears in the real, erratically. 
In other words, it appears in relations of resistance without transference — to 
extend the metaphor I used earlier, I would say, like a punctuation without a 
text. 

For the real does not wait [attend], especially not for the subject, since it 
expects [attend] nothing from speech. But it is there, identical to his existence, 
a noise in which one can hear anything and everything, ready to submerge 
with its roar what the "reality principle" constructs there that goes by the name 
of the "outside world." For if the judgment of existence truly functions as we 
389 have understood it in Freud 's myth, it is clearly at the expense of a world from 

which the cunning [ruse] of reason has twice collected its share [part]. 

There is no other value to be given, in fact, to the reiteration of the divid- 
ing up [partage] of the outside and the inside articulated by Freud's sentence: 
"Es ist, wie man sieht, wieder eine Frage des Aussen und Innen." "It is, we see, 
once more a question of the outside and the inside." When exactly does this 
sentence come? First there was the primal expulsion, that is, the real as out- 
side the subject. Then, within representation (Vorstellung), constituted by the 
(imaginary) reproduction of the original perception, there was the discrimi- 
nation of reality as that aspect of the object of the original perception which is 
not simply posited as existing by the subject but can be refound (wiedergefunden) 
in a place where he can grab hold of it. It is in this respect alone that the oper- 
ation, even if it is set in motion by the pleasure principle, escapes the latter's 
mastery. But in this reality, which the subject must compose according to the 
well-tempered scale of his objects, the real — as that which is excised from the 
primordial symbolization — is already there. We might even say that it talks all 
by itself [cause toutseul]. The subject can see something of it emerge in the form 
of a thing which is far from being an object that satisfies him and which involves 



Response to Jean Hyppolite 's Commentary on Freud's "Verneinung" sz5 

his present intentionality only in the most incongruous way — this is the hal- 
lucination here insofar as it is radically differentiated from the interpretive phe- 
nomenon. As we see here in the testimony Freud transcribes as the subject speaks. 
The subject tells him that: 

when he was five, he was playing in the garden next to his maid, and 
was cutting notches into the bark of one of the walnut trees (whose role 
in his dream we are aware of). Suddenly, he noticed, with a terror which 
was impossible to express, that he had sectioned his pinkie (right or left? 
he doesn't know) and that the finger was hanging on by the skin alone. 
He didn't feel any pain but a great deal of anxiety. He did not have the 
heart to say anything to the maid who was only a few steps away from 
him; he let himself fall onto a bench and remained there, incapable of 
looking at his finger again. In the end, he calmed down, looked care- 
fully at his finger, and — lo and behold! — it was altogether intact. 

Let us leave it to Freud to confirm for us — with his usual scrupulous care, 
employing all the thematic resonances and biographical correlations that he 390 

extracts from the subject by the pathway of association — the whole sym- 
bolic richness of the hallucinated scenario. But let us not ourselves be fasci- 
nated by it. 

The correlations of the phenomenon will teach us more, regarding what 
we are interested in, than the narrative that submits the phenomenon to the 
conditions of the transmissibility of discourse. The fact that its content lends 
itself to this so easily, and that it goes so far as to coincide with themes of myth 
and poetry, certainly raises a question, a question which can be formulated 
immediately, but which perhaps must be posed anew in a second moment, if 
only owing to the fact that we know at the outset that the simple solution is 
not sufficient here. 

For a fact is brought out in the narrative of the episode which is not at all 
necessary for its comprehension, quite the contrary: the fact that the subject 
felt it impossible to speak about at the time. Let us note that there is a rever- 
sal of the difficulty here in relation to the case of the forgetting of a name that 
we analyzed earlier. In that case the subject no longer had the signifier at his 
disposal, whereas here he is arrested by the strangeness of the signified — to 
so great an extent that he cannot communicate the feeling he has, even if only 
by crying out, whereas the person who is most suited to hear his call, his beloved 
Nania, is right nearby. 

Instead, he doesn't balk [moufie], if you'll allow me the term due to its expres- 
sive value. What he says about his attitude suggests that it is not simply that 



326 Ecrits 

he sinks into immobility but that he sinks into a kind of temporal funnel out 
of which he eventually rises without having been able to count how many times 
he has wound around during his descent and his reascent, and without his return 
to the surface of ordinary time having in any way occured in response to an 
effort on his part. 

Strangely enough, we find the feature of terrified mutism in another case, 
which is almost a carbon copy of this one, a case that is related to Freud by an 
occasional correspondent of his. 8 

This feature of a temporal abyss proves to have significant correlations. 

391 We shall find them in the current forms in which the recollection occurs. 
You know that the subject, at the moment of undertaking his narrative, at first 
believed that he had already recounted it, and that this aspect of the phenom- 
enon seemed worth considering separately to Freud, being the subject of one 
of his writings that is on our syllabus this year. 9 

The very way in which Freud comes to explain this illusion of memory — 
namely, by the fact that the subject had recounted several times an episode in 
which his uncle bought him a pocketknife at his request while his sister 
received a book — is of concern to us only in terms of what it tells us about the 
function of screen memories. 

Another aspect of the movement of the recollection seems to me to con- 
verge on an idea that I will propose. It is the correction that the subject adds 
secondarily, namely, that the walnut tree involved in the narrative — and which 
is no less familiar to us than to him when he mentions its presence in the anx- 
iety dream, the latter being in some sense the key piece of material in this case — 
is probably brought in from elsewhere, in particular, from another memory of 
an hallucination where it is from the tree itself that he makes blood seep. 

Doesn't all of this indicate to us, in the recollection's in some sense extra- 
temporal character, something like the seal of origin of what is remembered? 

And don't we find in this character something not identical but that we might 
call complementary to what occurs in the famous sense of deja vu which, since 
it constitutes the cross of psychologists, has not been clarified despite the num- 
ber of explanations it has received, and regarding which it is no accident and 
not simply out of a taste for erudition that Freud recalls them in the article I 
was just speaking about? 

One might say that the feeling of deja vu comes to meet the erratic hallu- 
cination, that it is the imagiary echo which arises as a response to a point of 
reality that belongs to the limit where it has been excised from the symbolic. 

392 This means that the sense that something is unreal is exactly the same phe- 
nomenon as the sense of reality, if we designate by this term the "click" [declic] 
that signals the resurfacing, which is hard to obtain, of a forgotten memory. 



Response to Jean Hyppolite 's Commentary on Freud 's " Verneinung" J27 

What allows the second to be felt as such is the fact that it is produced inside 
the symbolic text that constitutes the register of the recollection, whereas the 
first corresponds to the immemorial forms that appear on the palimpsest of the 
imaginary when the text, leaving off, lays bare the medium of reminiscence. 

To understand it in Freud's theory we need but listen to the latter all the 
way to the end, for if a representation is of value there only in terms of what 
it reproduces from the original perception, this recurrence cannot stop at the 
original perception, except mythically. This observation already led Plato to 
the eternal idea; today it presides over the rebirth of the archetype. As for 
me, I will confine myself to remarking that perception takes on its charac- 
teristic of reality only through symbolic articulations that interweave it with 
a whole world. 

But the subject has a no less convincing sense if he encounters the symbol 
that he originally excised from his Bejahung. For this symbol does not enter 
the imaginary, for all that. It constitutes, as Freud tells us, that which truly 
does not exist; as such, it ek-sists, for nothing exists except against a supposed 
background of absence. Nothing exists except insofar as it does not exist. 

This is what we see in our example. The content of the hallucination, which 
is so massively symbolic, owes its appearance in the real to the fact that it does 
not exist for the subject. Everything indicates, indeed, that the subject remains 
fixated in his unconscious in an imaginary feminine position that evacuates all 
meaning from his hallucinatory mutilation. 

In the symbolic order, the empty spaces are as signifying as the full ones; 
in reading Freud today, it certainly seems that the first step of the whole of 
his dialectical movement is constituted by the gap of an emptiness [la beance 
d'unvide]. 

This is what seems to explain the insistence with which the schizophrenic 
reiterates this step. In vain, however, since for him all of the symbolic is real. 

He is very different in this respect from the paranoiac whose predominant 393 

imaginary structures I laid out in my doctoral thesis, that is, the retroaction in 
a cyclical time that makes the anamnesis of his troubles so difficult, the anam- 
nesis of his elementary phenomena which are merely presignifying and which 
only attain that ever partial universe we call a delusion after a discursive organ- 
ization that is long and painful to establish and constitute. 10 

I will go no further today with these indications, which we will have to take 
up again in a clinical context, because I would like to provide a second exam- 
ple by which to put my thesis today to the test. 

This example concerns another mode of interference between the symbolic 
and the real, not that the subject suffers in this case, but that he acts on. Indeed, 



328 Ecrits 

this is the mode of reaction that we designate in analytic technique as "acting 
out,"* without always clearly delimiting its meaning. As we shall see, our con- 
siderations today can help us revamp the notion. 

The acting out* that we are going to examine, even though it apparently 
was of as little consequence for the subject as was the hallucination we have 
just discussed, may be no less demonstrative. If it will not allow us to go as 
far, it is because the author from whom I am borrowing it does not demon- 
strate Freud's investigative power and divinatory penetration and because we 
quickly run out of the material we would need to learn more from it. 

This example is recounted by Ernst Kris, an author who is nevertheless quite 
important because he is part of the triumvirate that has assumed responsibil- 
ity for giving the New Deal* of ego psychology its in some sense official sta- 
tus, and even passes for its intellectual leader. 

He does not give us a more assured formulation of ego psychology, for all 
that; and the technical precepts that the example he provides in his article, "Ego 
Psychology and Interpretation in Psychoanalytic Therapy," 11 is supposed to 
illustrate lead (in their vacillations, in which we can see the nostalgia of the 
old-school psychoanalyst) to wishy-washy notions that I will examine at some 
394 later date — ever hoping, as I am, that a half-wit will come along who, in his 

naivete, will keenly size up this infatuation with normalizing analysis and land 
Kris the definitive blow without anyone else having to get involved. 

In the meantime, let us consider the case that he presents to us in order to 
shed light on the elegance with which he, one might say, cleared it up, thanks 
to the principles whose masterful application his decisive intervention demon- 
strates — these principles being the appeal to the subject's ego, the approach 
"from the surface," the reference to reality, and all the rest. 

We have here a subject for whom Kris is serving as the second psychoan- 
alyst. The subject is seriously thwarted in his profession, an intellectual pro- 
fession which seems not so far removed from our own. This is couched by 
Kris in the following terms: although he holds a respected academic position 
he cannot rise to a higher rank because he is unable to publish his research 
[page 22]. The obstacle is a compulsion that he feels impels him to take other 
people 's ideas. He is thus obsessed with the idea of plagiarizing and even with 
plagiarism. Although he derived a pragmatic improvement from his first analy- 
sis, at present he is tormented by the constant effort not to take others' ideas, 
especially those of a brilliant scholar* he knows. In any case, the subject has 
a study that he is ready to publish. 

One fine day he arrives at his session with an air of triumph. He has found 
proof: he has just come across a book in the library that contains all the ideas 
in his own book. One might say that he did not know the book since he had 



Response to Jean Hyppolite's Commentary on Freud's "Verneinung" 329 

merely glanced at it some time ago. Nevertheless, he is a plagiarist in spite of 
himself. The (woman) analyst with whom he did his first analysis was cer- 
tainly right when she told him more or less the following, "he who has stolen 
once will steal again," since at puberty as well he pilfered books and sweets. 

It is here that Ernst Kris intervenes with his science and audacity, expect- 
ing us to appreciate their great merits, a wish we are likely to only half-satisfy. 
He asks to see the book from the library. He reads it. He discovers that noth- 
ing in it justifies what the subject thinks is in it. It is the subject alone who has 
attributed to the author everything the subject himself wanted to say. 

At this point, Kris tells us, the question "appeared in a new light. The emi- 
nent colleague, it transpired, had repeatedly taken the patient's ideas, and 
embellished and repeated them without acknowledgment" [page 22]. This was 395 

what the subject was afraid of taking from him, having failed to recognize his 
own property therein. 

An era of new comprehension begins. Were I to say that it was Kris' big 
heart that opened its doors, he probably would not agree. He would tell me, 
with the seriousness proverbially attributed to the Pope, that he followed the 
grand principle of approaching problems from the surface. Why not add that 
he approaches them from the outside and even that there is, unbeknown to 
him, something quixotic in the way he settles a question as delicate as that of 
plagiarism? 

The reversal of intention that Freud has taught us about again earlier today 
no doubt leads to something, but it does not lead to objectivity. In truth, if we 
can be sure that it is in no wise useless to alert the beautiful soul, who is revolt- 
ing against the disorder of his world, to the part he plays therein, the opposite 
is not at all true: we should not assure someone that he is not in the least bit 
guilty just because he accuses himself of bad intentions. 

It was, nevertheless, a fine opportunity to perceive that if there is at least 
one bias a psychoanalyst should have jettisoned thanks to psychoanalysis, it 
is that of "intellectual property." Perhaps this would have made it easier for 
Kris to take his bearings from the way in which the patient understood that 
notion himself. 

And, since we are crossing the line of a prohibition, which is actually more 
imaginary than real, in order to allow the analyst to make a judgment on the 
basis of documentary evidence, why not perceive that we would be adopting 
an overly abstract perspective were we not to examine the true content of the 
ideas at issue here, for that content cannot be indifferent? 

Furthermore, the impact of the inhibition on his vocation perhaps must not 
be altogether neglected, even if such effects obviously seem more significant 
in the success*-oriented context of American culture. 



330 Ecrits 

Now, although I have noticed some modicum of restraint in the exposition 
of the principles of interpretation implied by a form of psychoanalysis that has 
definitively reverted to ego psychology, we are certainly not spared anything 
in Kris' commentary on the case. 
396 Finding passing comfort in having come across formulations by the hon- 

orable Edward Bibring, and considering himself very fortunate to have done 
so, Kris exposes his method to us as follows: 

[T]here was ... an initial exploratory (sic) period, during which . . . typ- 
ical patterns of behavior, present and past, [were studied]. Noted first 
were his critical and admiring attitudes of other people's ideas; then the 
relation of these to the patient's own ideas and intuitions (page 24). 

Please excuse me for following the text step by step. I am doing this so that we 
will not be left with any doubt as to what the author thinks. 

At this point the comparison between the patient's own productivity and 
that of others had to be traced in great detail . . . Finally, the distortion 
of imputing to others his own ideas could be analyzed and the mecha- 
nism of "give and take" made conscious. 

One of my early and sorely missed teachers, whose every twist and turn in 
thought I did not follow for all that, long ago designated as "summaryism" 
["bilanisme"] what Kris describes to us here. We should not, of course, dis- 
dain the making conscious of an obsessive symptom, but it is something else 
altogether to fabricate such a symptom from scratch. 

Abstractly posited, this analysis, which is descriptive we are told, still does 
not strike me as very different from the approach adopted by the patient's first 
analyst, based on what we are told of it. No mystery is made of the fact that 
the analyst was Melitta Schmideberg, for Kris cites a passage from a com- 
mentary she apparently published of this case: 

A patient who during puberty had occasionally stolen . . . retained later 
a certain inclination to plagiarism. Since to him activity was connected 
with stealing, scientific endeavor with plagiarism, etc. [page 23]. 

I have been unable to check whether this sentence exhausts the part played 
in the analysis by the author mentioned, some of the psychoanalytic literature 
having unfortunately become very difficult to find. 12 

But we understand much better the emphasis of the author whose text we 



Response to Jean Hyppolite's Commentary on Freud's "Verneinung" 331 

do have, when he trumpets his conclusion: "It is now possible to compare the 
two types of analytic approach" [page 23]. 

For insofar as he has concretely indicated what his approach consists of, 397 

we clearly see that the analysis of the subject's behavior patterns* amounts to 
inscribing his behavior in the analyst's patterns. 

Not that nothing else is stirred up in this analysis. Kris sketches for us a 
situation involving three people, including the subject's father and grandfa- 
ther, which is quite attractive in appearance, all the more so in that the father 
seems to have failed, as sometimes happens, to rise to the level of the grand- 
father, a distinguished scientist in his homeland. Kris provides a few astute 
remarks here about the grandfather and the father who was not grand, 
whereas I might have preferred a few indications about the role of death in 
this whole game. I don't doubt but that the big [grand] and little fish caught 
on the fishing trips with his father symbolized the classic "comparison," which 
in our mental world has taken the place held in earlier centuries by other more 
gallant comparisons. But all that does not seem to me to be approached from 
the right "end," so to speak. 

I will provide no other proof of this than the corpus delicti promised in my 
example, in other words, precisely what Kris produces as the trophy of his vic- 
tory. He believes that he has arrived at his goal; he shares this with his patient: 

Only the ideas of others were truly interesting, only ideas one could 
take; hence the taking had to be engineered. At this point of the inter- 
pretation I was waiting for the patient's reaction. The patient was silent 
and the very length of the silence had a special significance. Then, as if 
reporting a sudden insight, he said: "Every noon, when I leave here, 
before luncheon, and before returning to my office, I walk through X 
Street (a street well known for its small but attractive restaurants) and I 
look at the menus in the windows. In one of the restaurants I usually 
find my preferred dish — fresh brains." 

These are the closing words of Kris' clinical vignette. I can only hope that 
my abiding interest in cases in which a mountain is made out of a molehill 398 

will convince you to pay attention for another moment as I examine this case 
more closely. 

We have here in every respect an example of an acting out*, which is no 
doubt small in size, but very well constituted. 

The very pleasure this acting out seems to give its midwife surprises me. 
Does Kris actually believe that the height of his art has managed to give rise 
to a valid way out for this id*? 13 



332 Ecrits 

I have no doubt but that the subject's confession has its full transferential 
value, although the author decided, deliberately as he stresses, to spare us any 
details regarding the link — I am stressing this myself — between "the 
defenses" (whose breakdown he has just described for us) and "the patient's 
resistance in analysis" [page 24]. 

But what can we make of the act itself if not a true emergence of a primor- 
dially "excised" oral relation, which no doubt explains the relative failure of 
his first analysis? 

But the fact that it appears in the form of an act which is not at all under- 
stood by the subject does not seem to me to be of any benefit to the subject, 
even if it demonstrates to us what an analysis of the resistances leads to when 
it consists in attacking the subject's world (that is, his patterns*) in order to 
reshape it on the model of the analyst's world, in the name of the analysis of 
defense. I don't doubt but that the patient feels quite good, on the whole, going 
on a diet of fresh brains in his analysis too. He will thus follow one more pat- 
tern*, the one that a large number of theoreticians ascribe quite literally to the 
process of analysis — namely, the introjection of the analyst's ego. We can only 
hope that, here too, they are referring to the healthy part of his ego. Kris' ideas 
about intellectual productivity thus seem to me to receive the Good House- 
keeping Seal of Approval for America. 

It might seem incidental to ask how he is going to deal with the fresh brains, 
the real brains, the brains that one fries in black butter, it being recommended 
to first peel the pia mater, which requires a great deal of care. It is not a futile 
question, however, for suppose that he had discovered in himself a taste for 
399 young boys instead, demanding no less refined preparations; wouldn't there 

ultimately be the same misunderstanding? And wouldn't this acting out*, as 
we would call it, be just as foreign to the subject? 

This means that by approaching the ego's resistance in the subject's 
defenses, and by asking his world to answer the questions that he himself should 
answer, one may elicit highly incongruous answers whose reality value, in terms 
of the subject's drives, is not the reality value that manages to get itself recog- 
nized in symptoms. This is what allows us to better understand the examina- 
tion made by Prof. Hyppolite of the theses Freud contributes in "Die 
Verneinung." 

Notes 

1. As an example of this simplistic perspec- and the all-purpose use he makes there of the 
tive, one can cite the paper given by Raymond frankly new notion, "hallucinated emotion"! 
de Saussure at the 1950 Congress of Psychiatry 2. (xJFXII, 103-21 ["From the History of 



Response to Jean Hyppolite's Commentary on Freud's "Verneinung" 333 



an Infantile Neurosis," chapter 7, "Anal Erotism 
and the Castration Complex," SE XVII, 
72-88]. 

3. Namely, in 1951-1952. 

4. GJTXII, 117 [5^ XVII, 84]. 

5. [Added in 1966:] As you know, having 
since weighed this term more carefully, I have 
gotten the term "foreclosure" accepted as the 
translation for it. 

6. GJTXII, 117 [SE XVII, 84, reads "He 
rejected castration, and held to his theory of 
intercourse by the anus. [. . .] This really 
involved no judgement upon the question of its 
existence, but it was the same as if it did not 
exist"]. 

7. G JTXII, 1 1 1 [SEXVll, 79-80, reads, "A 
repression is something very different from a 
condemning judgement"]. 

8. See "Uber fausse reconnaissance ('deja 
raconte') wahrend der psychoanalytischen 



Arbeit" in GJFX, 116-23, especially the pas- 
sage quoted on page 122 [5iTXIII, 20 1-7, espe- 
cially 206]. 

9. That is the article just cited. 

10. De la psy chose paranoi'aque dans ses rap- 
ports avec la personnalite (Paris: Le Francois, 
1932). 

1 1 . The article was published in PQ XX, 1 
(1951): 15-29 [and reprinted in Selected Papers 
of Ernst Kris (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1975), 237-51]. 

12. See, if you can find it, Melitta Schmide- 
berg, "Intellektuelle Hemmung und Ess- 
storung," Zeitschrift fiir Psychoanalytische 
Padagogik VIII (1934). [In English, see "Intel- 
lectual Inhibition and Disturbances in Eating," 
IJPXIX (1938): 17-22.] 

13. "Id" being the standard English transla- 
tion of Freud 's Es. 



40i 



The Freudian Thing 

or the Meaning of the Return to Freud 
in Psychoanalysis 



An expanded version of a lecture given at the 
Vienna Neuropsychiatric Clinic on November 7, 1955 

To Sylvia 



Situation in Time and Place of this Exercise 

At a time when Vienna, in making itself heard again through the voice of its 
Opera, is reassuming, in a moving variation, its age-old mission at a cross- 
roads of cultures from which she was able to create harmony, I have come 
here — not unfittingly, I think — to evoke the fact that this chosen city will 
remain, this time forever more, associated with a revolution in knowledge of 
Copernican proportions. I am referring to the fact that Vienna is the eternal 
site of Freud's discovery and that, owing to this discovery, the veritable cen- 
ter of human beings is no longer at the place ascribed to it by an entire human- 
ist tradition. 

Perhaps even prophets whose own countries were not entirely deaf to them 
must be eclipsed at some point in time, if only after their death. It is appro- 
priate for a foreigner to exercise restraint in evaluating the forces at work in 
such a phase-effect. 

The return to Freud, for which I am assuming here the role of herald, is 
thus situated elsewhere: where it is amply called for by the symbolic scandal 
which Dr. Alfred Winterstein, who is here with us today, rightly highlighted 
when it occurred during his tenure as president of the Vienna Psychoanalytic 
Society — namely, upon the inauguration of the commemorative plaque 
marking the house in which Freud pursued his heroic work — the scandal being 
not that this monument was not dedicated to Freud by his fellow citizens, but 



The Freudian Thing jj5 

that it was not commissioned by the international association of those who 
live off his patronage. 

This failure is symptomatic, for it indicates that he was disowned, not by 402 

the land in which, by virtue of his tradition, he was merely a temporary guest, 
but by the very field he left in our care and by those to whom custody of that 
field was entrusted — that is, the psychoanalytic movement itself, where 
things have come to such a pass that to call for a return to Freud is seen as a 
reversal. 

Since the time when the first sound of the Freudian message rang out from 
the Viennese bell to echo far and wide, many contingent factors have played 
a part in this story. Its reverberations seemed to be drowned out by the muf- 
fled collapses brought about by the first world conflict. Its propagation 
resumed with the immense human wrenching that fomented the second and 
was its most powerful vehicle. It was on the waves of hate 's tocsin and dis- 
cord 's tumult — the panic-stricken breath of war — that Freud's voice reached 
us, as we witnessed the Diaspora of those who transmitted it, whose persecu- 
tion was no coincidence. The shock waves were to reverberate to the very 
confines of our world, echoing on a continent where it would be untrue to say 
that history loses its meaning, since it is where history finds its limit. It would 
even be a mistake to think that history is absent there, since, already several 
centuries in duration, it weighs all the more heavily there due to the gulf traced 
out by its all-too-limited horizon. Rather it is where history is denied with a 
categorical will that gives enterprises their style, that of a cultural ahistoricism 
characteristic of the United States of North America. 

This ahistoricism defines the assimilation required for one to be recognized 
there, in the society constituted by this culture. It was to its summons that a 
group of emigrants had to respond; in order to gain recognition, they could 
only stress their difference, but their function presupposed history at its very 
core, their discipline being the one that had reconstructed the bridge between 
modern man and ancient myths. The combination of circumstances was too 
strong and the opportunity too attractive for them not to give in to the temp- 
tation to abandon the core in order to base function on difference. Let us be 
clear about the nature of this temptation. It was neither that of ease nor that 
of profit. It is certainly easier to efface the principles of a doctrine than the 
stigmata of one's origins, and more profitable to subordinate one 's function 403 

to demand. But to reduce one 's function to one 's difference in this case is to 
give in to a mirage that is internal to the function itself, a mirage that grounds 
the function in this difference. It is to return to the reactionary principle that 
covers over the duality of he who suffers and he who heals with the opposi- 
tion between he who knows and he who does not. How could they avoid regard- 



336 Ecrits 

ing this opposition as true when it is real and, on that basis, avoid slipping into 
becoming managers of souls in a social context that demands such offices? 
The most corrupting of comforts is intellectual comfort, just as the worst cor- 
ruption is corruption of the best. 

Thus Freud 's comment to Jung (I have it from Jung's own mouth) — when, 
having been invited by Clark University, they arrived in view of New York 
Harbor and of the famous statue illuminating the universe, "They don't real- 
ize we 're bringing them the plague" — was turned against him as punishment 
for the hubris whose antiphrasis and darkness do not extinguish its turbid bril- 
liance. To catch its author in her trap, Nemesis had merely to take him at his 
word. We would be justified in fearing that Nemesis added a first-class ticket 
home. 

Indeed, if something of the sort has happened, we have only ourselves to 
blame. For Europe seems rather to have faded from the concerns and style — 
if not the minds — of those who left, along with the repression of their bad 
memories. 

I will not pity you for having been forgotten since it leaves me freer to pres- 
ent to you the project of a return to Freud, as some of us teaching at the Societe 
Franchise de Psychanalyse conceive of it. We are not seeking to emphasize a 
return of the repressed here, but want to use the antithesis constituted by the 
phase that has passed in the psychoanalytic movement since Freud's death to 
show what psychoanalysis is not, and find with you a way to put back into 
force what has continued to sustain it, even in its very deviation — namely, the 
original meaning Freud preserved in it by his mere presence, which I should 
like to explain here. 

How could this meaning escape us when it is attested to in a body of writ- 
ten work of the most lucid and organic kind? And how could it leave us hes- 
404 itant when the study of this work shows us that its different stages and changes 

in direction are governed by Freud 's inflexibly effective concern to maintain 
its original rigor? 

His texts prove to be comparable to those that, in other times, human ven- 
eration has invested with the highest qualities, in that they withstand the test 
of the discipline of commentary, whose virtue one rediscovers in making use 
of it in the traditional way — not simply to situate what someone says in the 
context of his time, but to gauge whether the answer he gives to the questions 
he raises has or has not been superseded by the answer one finds in his work 
to current questions. 

Will I be telling you anything new if I say that these texts — to which for 
the past four years I have devoted a two-hour seminar every Wednesday from 
November to July, without having taken up more than a quarter of them, 



The Freudian Thing jj7 

although my commentary is based on the whole set of them — have surprised 
me and those who attend my seminars as only genuine discoveries can? These 
discoveries range from concepts that have remained unexploited to clinical 
details left to be unearthed by our exploration; they demonstrate how far the 
field investigated by Freud went beyond the avenues he left us by which to 
gain access to it, and how little his case studies, which sometimes give an impres- 
sion of exhaustiveness, were subordinated to what he intended to demonstrate. 
Who, among the experts in disciplines other than psychoanalysis whom I have 
guided in reading these texts, has not been moved by this research in action — 
whether it is the research he has us follow in the Traumdeutung [The Interpre- 
tation of Dreams], the case study of the Wolf Man, or Beyond the Pleasure 
Principle} What an exercise for the training of minds, and what a message to 
lend one 's voice to! And what better confirmation could there be of the method- 
ical value of this training and the truth effect this message produces than the 
fact that the students to whom you transmit them bring you evidence of a trans- 
formation, occurring sometimes overnight, in their practice, which becomes 
simpler or more effective even before it becomes more transparent to them. I 
cannot provide you with a detailed account of this work in my talk here, for 
which I am indebted to the kindness of Professor Hoff for the opportunity to 
give it in this place of noble memory, to the convergence between my views 
and those of Dr. Arnold for the suggestion to give this talk here, and to my 
excellent and long-standing relations with Mr. Igor Caruso for knowing how 405 

it would be received in Vienna. 

But I cannot forget that I owe part of my audience today to the indulgence 
of Mr. Susini, the director of the French Institute in Vienna. And this is why 
I must ask myself, coming now as I am to the meaning of the return to Freud 
that I am professing here, whether I am not running the risk of disappointing 
this part of my audience because it is less prepared than the specialists may be 
to understand me. 

The Adversary 

I am sure of my answer here — "Absolutely not" — assuming that what I am 
going to say is as it should be. The meaning of a return to Freud is a return to 
Freud's meaning. And the meaning of what Freud said may be conveyed to 
anyone because, while addressed to everyone, it concerns each person. One 
word suffices to make this point: Freud's discovery calls truth into question, 
and there is no one who is not personally concerned by truth. 

It must seem rather odd that I should be flinging this word in your faces — 
a word of almost ill repute, a word banished from polite society. But isn't it 



3j8 Ecrits 

inscribed in the very heart of analytic practice, since this practice is constantly 
rediscovering the power of truth in ourselves and in our very flesh? 

Why, indeed, would the unconscious be more worthy of being recognized 
than the defenses that oppose it in the subject, so successfully that the defenses 
seem no less real than it? I am not reviving here the shoddy Nietzschean notion 
of the lie of life, nor am I marveling at the fact that one believes one believes, 
nor do I accept that to will something one need but want it badly enough. But 
I am asking where the peace that ensues in recognizing an unconscious ten- 
dency comes from if the latter is not truer than what restrained it in the con- 
flict. For some time now this peace has, moreover, been quickly proving 
illusory, for psychoanalysts, not content to recognize as unconscious the 
406 defenses to be attributed to the ego, have increasingly identified the defense 

mechanisms — displacement of the object, turning back against the subject, 
regression of form — with the very dynamic that Freud analyzed in the ten- 
dency, which thus seems to persist in the defenses with no more than a change 
of sign. Haven't people gone too far when they submit that the drive itself may 
be made conscious by the defense so that the subject won't recognize himself 
in it? 

In order to try to explain these mysteries in a coherent discourse, I am, in 
spite of myself, using words that reestablish in that discourse the very duality 
that sustains them. But what I deplore is not that one cannot see the forest of 
the theory for the trees of the technique employed, but rather that it would 
take so little to believe that one is in the Bondy Forest, precisely because of 
the following notion, which is hiding behind each tree — namely, that there 
must be some trees that are truer than others, or, if you prefer, that not all trees 
are bandits. Without which, one might wind up asking where the bandits are 
who are not trees. Does this little, then, which can become everything on occa- 
sion, perhaps deserve an explanation? What is this truth without which there 
is no way of distinguishing the face from the mask, and apart from which there 
seems to be no other monster than the labyrinth itself? In other words, how 
are they to be distinguished, in truth, if they are all equally real? 

Here the big clodhoppers come forward to slip onto the dove 's feet — on 
which, as we know, truth is borne — and to swallow up the bird occasionally 
as well: "Our criterion," they cry, "is simply economic, you ideologist. Not 
all organizations of reality are equally economical." But at the point at which 
truth has already been brought to bear, the bird escapes unscathed when I ask, 
"Economical for whom?" 

Things have gone too far this time. The adversary snickers: "We get the 
picture. Monsieur has a philosophical bent. Plato and Hegel will be showing 
up any minute now. Their stamp suffices. Whatever they endorse should be 



The Freudian Thing S39 

discarded and, anyway, if, as you said, this concerns everyone, it's of no 
interest to specialists like us. It can't even be classified in our documentation." 

You think I'm joking here. But not at all: I subscribe to it. 

If Freud contributed nothing more to the knowledge of man than the ver- 
ity that there is something veritable, there is no Freudian discovery. Freud sim- 407 
ply belongs then to the line of moralists in whom a tradition of humanistic 
analysis is embodied, a milky way in the heavenly vault of European culture 
in which Balthazar Gracian and La Rochefoucauld are among the brightest 
stars, and Nietzsche is a nova as dazzling as it is short-lived. The latest to join 
them — and spurred on, like them, no doubt by a characteristically Christian 
concern for the authenticity of the stirrings of the soul — Freud was able to 
precipitate a whole casuistry into a map of Tendre, in which one couldn't care 
less about an orientation for the offices for which it was intended. Its objec- 
tivity is, in fact, strictly tied to the analytic situation, which, within the four 
walls that limit its field, can do very well without people knowing which way 
is north since they confuse north with the long axis of the couch, assumed to 
point in the direction of the analyst. Psychoanalysis is the science of the mirages 
that arise within this field. A unique experience, a rather abject one at that, but 
one that cannot be too highly recommended to those who wish to get to the 
crux of mankind's forms of madness, for, while revealing itself to be akin to 
a whole range of alienations, it sheds light on them. 

This language is moderate enough — I am not the one who invented it. I 
have even heard a zealot of supposedly classical psychoanalysis define the lat- 
ter as an experience whose privilege is strictly tied to the forms that regulate 
its practice, forms that cannot be altered one iota because, having been 
obtained by means of a miracle of chance, they provide access to a reality that 
transcends the phenomena of history, a reality in which a taste for order and 
a love of beauty, for example, find their permanent ground — namely, the 
objects of the preoedipal relation, shit and all that other crap. 

This position cannot be refuted since its rules are justified by their out- 
comes, and the latter are taken as proof that the rules are well founded. Yet 
our questions proliferate anew: How did this prodigious miracle of chance 
occur? Whence stems this contradiction between the preoedipal mess, to which 
the analytic relationship can be reduced, according to our modern analysts, 
and the fact that Freud wasn't satisfied until he had reduced it to the Oedipal 
position? How can the sort of hothouse auscultation on which this "new-look"* 
of analytic experience borders be the final stage in a development that 
appeared at the outset to open up multiple paths among all the fields of cre- 
ation? Or the same question put the other way round: If the objects discerned 408 
in this elective fermentation were thus discovered through some other path- 



34° Ecrits 

way than that of experimental psychology, is experimental psychology qual- 
ified to rediscover them through its own procedures? 

The replies we will receive from the interested parties leave no room for 
doubt. The motor force of analytic experience, even when explained in their 
terms, cannot simply be this mirage-like truth that can be reduced to the mirage 
of truth. It all began with a particular truth, an unveiling, the effect of which 
is that reality is no longer the same for us as it was before. This is what con- 
tinues to attach the crazy cacophony of theory to the very heart of worldly 
things, and to prevent practice from degenerating to the level of the wretched 
who never manage to leave them behind (it should be understood that I am 
using the term to exclude cynics). 

A truth, if it must be said, is not easy to recognize once it has become 
received. Not that there aren't any established truths, but they are so easily 
confused with the reality that surrounds them that no other artifice was for a 
long time found to distinguish them from it than to mark them with the sign 
of the spirit and, in order to pay them homage, to regard them as having come 
from another world. It is not the whole story to attribute to a sort of blindness 
on man's part the fact that truth is never to him a finer looking girl than when 
the light, held aloft by his arm as in the proverbial emblem, unexpectedly illu- 
minates her nakedness. And one must play the fool [la bete] a bit to feign know- 
ing nothing of what happens next. But stupidity remains characterized by 
bullheaded frankness when one wonders where one could have been looking 
for her before, the emblem scarcely helping to indicate the well, an unseemly 
and even malodorous place, rather than the jewelry box in which every pre- 
cious form must be preserved intact. 

The Thing Speaks of Itself 

But now the truth in Freud's mouth takes the said bull [bete] by the horns: "To 
you I am thus the enigma of she who slips away as soon as she appears, you 
men who try so hard to hide me under the tawdry finery of your proprieties. 
409 Still, I admit your embarrassment is sincere, for even when you take it upon 

yourselves to become my heralds, you acquire no greater worth by wearing 
my colors than your own clothes, which are like you, phantoms that you are. 
Where am I going, having passed into you? And where was I prior to that? 
Will I perhaps tell you someday? But so that you will find me where I am, I 
will teach you by what sign you can recognize me. Men, listen, I am telling 
you the secret. I, truth, speak. 

"Must I point out that you did not yet know this? Of course, some of you 
who proclaimed yourselves my lovers, no doubt because of the principle that 



The Freudian Thing 34 1 

one is never better served than by oneself in this kind of boasting, had 
posited — in an ambiguous manner, and not without revealing the clumsiness 
brought on by the vanity that they were really concerned about — that the errors 
of philosophy, that is, their own, could subsist only on my subsidies. Yet hav- 
ing embraced these daughters of their thought, they eventually found them as 
insipid as they were futile, and began associating anew with opinions consid- 
ered to be vulgar according to the moral standards of the sages of old; the lat- 
ter knew how to put such opinions — whether narrative, litigious, guileful, or 
simply mendacious — in their place, but also to seek them out in the home and 
in the forum, at the forge and at the fair. They then realized that, by not being 
my parasites, these opinions seemed to be serving me far better, and — who 
knows? — even to be acting as my militia, the secret agents of my power. Sev- 
eral cases observed in certain games of sudden transformations of error into 
truth, which seemed to be due only to perseverance, set them on the path of 
this discovery. The discourse of error — its articulation in action — could bear 
witness to the truth against the apparent facts themselves. It was then that one 
of them tried to get the cunning of reason accepted into the rank of objects 
deemed worthy of study. Unfortunately, he was a professor, and you were only 
too happy to listen to his teachings with the dunce caps you were made to wear 
at school and which have since served as ear- trumpets for those of you who are 
a bit deaf. Remain content, then, with your vague sense of history and leave it 
to clever people to found the world market in lies, the trade in all-out war, and 
the new law of self-criticism on the guarantee of my future firm. If reason is 
as cunning as Hegel said it was, it will do its job without your help. 

"But for all that, you haven't rendered what you owe me obsolete or end- 410 

lessly postponable. It falls due after yesterday and before tomorrow. And it 
hardly matters whether you rush ahead to honor or evade it, since it will grab 
you from behind in both cases. Whether you flee me in deceit or think you can 
catch me in error, I will catch up with you in the mistake from which you can- 
not hide. Where the most cunning speech reveals a slight stumbling, it doesn't 
live up to its perfidy — I am now publicly announcing the fact — and it will be 
a bit harder after this to act as if nothing is happening, whether in good com- 
pany or bad. But there is no need to wear yourselves out keeping a closer watch 
on yourselves. Even if the combined jurisdictions of politeness and politics 
declared that whatever claims to be associated with me is inadmissible when 
it presents itself in such an illicit manner, you would not get off so lightly, for 
the most innocent intention is disconcerted once it can no longer conceal the 
fact that one 's bungled actions are the most successful and that one 's failures 
fulfill one's most secret wishes. In any case, doesn't my escape — first from 
the dungeon of the fortress in which you think you are most sure to hold me 



S4 2 Ecrits 

by situating me not in yourselves, but in being itself — suffice to prove your 
defeat? I wander about in what you regard as least true by its very nature: in 
dreams, in the way the most far-fetched witticisms and the most grotesque 
nonsense* of jokes defy meaning, and in chance — not in its law, but rather in 
its contingency. And I never more surely proceed to change the face of the 
world than when I give it the profile of Cleopatra's nose. 

"You can therefore reduce the traffic on the roads that you strove so hard 
to prove radiate from consciousness, and which were the ego's pride and joy, 
crowned by Fichte with the insignias of its transcendence. The long-term trade 
in truth no longer involves thought; strangely enough, it now seems to involve 
things: rebus, it is through you that I communicate, as Freud formulates it at 
the end of the first paragraph of the sixth chapter, devoted to the dream work, 
of his work on dreams and what dreams mean. 

"But you must be careful here: the hard time Freud had becoming a pro- 
411 fessor will perhaps spare him your neglect, if not your deviation," the 

prosopopeia continues. "Listen carefully to what he says, and — as he said it 
of me, the truth that speaks — the best way to grasp it is to take it quite liter- 
ally. Here, no doubt, things are my signs, but, I repeat, signs of my speech. If 
Cleopatra's nose changed the world's course, it was because it entered the 
world's discourse; for in order to change it for the longer or the shorter, it was 
sufficient, but it was also necessary, that it be a speaking nose. 

"But it is your own nose that you must now use, albeit for more natural 
ends. Let a sense of smell surer than all your categories guide you in the race 
to which I challenge you. For if the cunning of reason, however disdainful it 
may have been of you, remained open to your faith, I, truth, will against you 
be the great Trickster, since I slip in not only via falsehood, but through a 
crack too narrow to be found at feigning's weakest point and through the 
dream's inaccessible cloud, through the groundless fascination with medioc- 
rity and the seductive impasse of absurdity. Seek, dogs that you become upon 
hearing me, bloodhounds that Sophocles preferred to put on the scent of the 
hermetic traces of Apollo's thief than on Oedipus' bleeding heels, certain as 
he was of finding the moment of truth with him at the sinister meeting at 
Colonus. Enter the lists at my call and howl at the sound of my voice. Now 
that you are already lost, I belie myself, I defy you, I slip away: you say that I 
am being defensive." 

Parade 

The return to darkness, which I think must be expected at this moment, is the 
signal for a "murder party"* that begins with an order forbidding everyone to 



The Freudian Thing 343 

leave, since anyone may now be hiding the truth under her dress, or even in 
her womb, as in the amorous fiction, The Indiscreet Jewels. The general ques- 
tion is: Who is speaking? And the question is not an irrelevant one. Unfortu- 
nately, the answers given are a bit hasty. First the libido is accused, which leads 
us in the direction of the jewels; but we must realize that the ego itself — although 
it fetters the libido, which pines for satisfaction — is sometimes the object of the 
libido's undertakings. One senses that the ego is about to collapse any minute, 
when the sound of broken glass informs everyone that it is the large drawing- 
room mirror that has sustained the accident, the golem of narcissism, hastily 412 
invoked to assist the ego, having thereby made its entrance. The ego is then 
generally regarded as the assassin, if not the victim, the upshot being that the 
divine rays of the good President Schreber begin to spread their net over the 
world, and the Sabbath of the instincts becomes truly complicated. 

The comedy, which I shall interrupt here at the beginning of its second act, 
is less mean-spirited than is usually believed, since — attributing to a drama of 
knowledge a buffoonery that belongs only to those who act in this drama with- 
out understanding it — it restores to such people the authenticity from which 
they had fallen away ever further. 

But if a more serious metaphor befits the protagonist, it is one that would 
show us in Freud an Actaeon perpetually set upon by dogs that are thrown off 
the scent right from the outset, dogs that he strives to get back on his tail, with- 
out being able to slow the race in which only his passion for the goddess leads 
him on. It leads him on so far that he cannot stop until he reaches the cave in 
which the chthonian Diana, in the damp shade that confounds the cave with 
the emblematic abode of truth, offers to his thirst, along with the smooth sur- 
face of death, the quasi-mystical limit of the most rational discourse the world 
has ever heard, so that we might recognize there the locus in which the sym- 
bol substitutes for death in order to take possession of the first budding of life. 

As we know, this limit and this locus are still far from being reached by his 
disciples, when they don't simply refuse to follow him there altogether, and 
so the Actaeon who is dismembered here is not Freud, but every analyst in 
proportion to the passion that inflamed him and made him — according to the 
signification Giordano Bruno drew from this myth in his Heroic Fren^es — 
the prey of the dogs of his own thoughts. 

To gauge the extent of this rending we must hear the irrepressible protests 
that arise from both the best and the worst, when one tries to bring them back 
to the beginning of the hunt, with the words that truth gave us as a viaticum — 
"I speak" — adding, "There is no speech without language." Their tumult 
drowns out what follows. 

"Logomachia!" goes the strophe on one side. "What do you make of the 



344 Ecrits 

413 preverbal, gestures and facial expressions, tone, melody, mood, and af-fec-tive 
con- tact?" To which others, no less vehement, give the antistrophe: "Every- 
thing is language: language when my heart beats faster as fear strikes and, if 
my patient faints at the roar of an airplane at its zenith, it is a way of telling me 
the memory she still has of the last bombing." Yes, eagle of thought, and when 
the plane 's shape cuts out your semblance in the night-piercing beam of the 
searchlight, it is heaven's response. 

Yet, in trying out these premises, people did not challenge the use of any 
of the forms of communication people might resort to in their exploits, nei- 
ther signals nor images, content nor form, whether man or woman, even if 
this content were one of sympathy, the virtue of any proper form not being 
debated. 

They began merely to repeat after Freud the key to his discovery: it [fa] 
speaks, precisely where it was least expected — namely, where it suffers. If there 
ever was a time when, to respond to it, it sufficed to listen to what it was say- 
ing (for the answer is already there in hearing it), let us assume that the great 
ones of the early days, the armchair giants, were struck by the curse that befalls 
titanic acts of daring, or that their chairs ceased to be conductors of the good 
word which they were vested to sit before. Be that as it may, since then, there 
have been more meetings between the psychoanalyst and psychoanalysis in 
the hope that the Athenian would reach his apex with Athena having emerged 
fully armed from Freud's head. Shall I tell you of the jealous fate, ever the 
same, that thwarted these meetings? Behind the mask where each of us was to 
meet his betrothed — alas! thrice alas! and a cry of horror at the thought of it, 
another woman having taken her place — he who was there was not him either. 

Let us thus calmly return and spell out with the truth what it said of itself. 
The truth said, "I speak." In order for us to recognize this "I" on the basis of 
the fact that it speaks, perhaps we should not have jumped on the "I," but should 
have paused at the facets of the speaking. "There is no speech without lan- 
guage" reminds us that language is an order constituted by laws, about which 
we could at least learn what they exclude. For example, that language is dif- 
ferent from natural expression and that it is not a code either; that language is 
not the same as information — take a close look at cybernetics and you'll see 

414 the difference; and that language is so far from being reducible to a super- 
structure that materialism itself was alarmed by this heresy — see Stalin's pro- 
nouncement on the question. 

Should you like to know more about it, read Saussure, and since a bell tower 
can hide even the sun, let me make it clear that I am not referring to the Saus- 
sure of psychoanalytic repute, but to Ferdinand, who may be said to be the 
founder of modern linguistics. 



The Freudian Thing 345 

The Thing's Order 

A psychoanalyst should find it easy to grasp the fundamental distinction 
between signifier and signified, and to begin to familiarize himself with the 
two networks of nonoverlapping relations they organize. 

The first network, that of the signifier, is the synchronic structure of the 
material of language insofar as each element takes on its precise usage therein 
by being different from the others; this is the principle of distribution that alone 
regulates the function of the elements of language [langue] at its different lev- 
els, from the phonemic pair of oppositions to compound expressions, the task 
of the most modern research being to isolate the stable forms of the latter. 

The second network, that of the signified, is the diachronic set of concretely 
pronounced discourses, which historically affects the first network, just as the 
structure of the first governs the pathways of the second. What dominates 
here is the unity of signification, which turns out to never come down to a 
pure indication of reality [reel], but always refers to another signification. In 
other words, signification comes about only on the basis of taking things as a 
whole [d* ensemble]. 

Its mainspring cannot be grasped at the level at which signification usually 
secures its characteristic redundancy, for it always proves to exceed the things 
it leaves indeterminate within it. 

The signifier alone guarantees the theoretical coherence of the whole as a 
whole. Its ability to do so is confirmed by the latest development in science, 
just as, upon reflection, we find it to be implicit in early linguistic experience. 

These are the foundations that distinguish language from signs. Dialectic 415 

derives new strength from them. 

For the remark on which Hegel bases his critique of the beautiful soul — 
according to which it is said to live (in every sense, even the economic sense of 
having something to live off of ) precisely off the disorder it denounces — escapes 
being tautological only by maintaining the "tauto-ontic" of the beautiful soul 
as mediation, unrecognized by itself, of this disorder as primary in being. 

However dialectical it may be, this remark cannot shake up the delusion of 
presumption to which Hegel applied it, remaining caught in the trap offered 
by the mirage of consciousness to the / infatuated with its own feeling, which 
Hegel turns into the law of the heart. 

Of course this "I" in Hegel is defined as a legal being, making it more con- 
crete than the real being from which people formerly thought it could be 
abstracted — as is clear from the fact that it implies both a civil status and an 
account status. 

But it was left to Freud to make this legal being responsible for the disor- 



346 Ecrits 

der manifest in the most tightly closed field of the real being — namely, in the 
organism's pseudo-totality. 

I explain this possibility by the congenital gap presented by man's real being 
in his natural relations, and by the reprising, in a sometimes ideographic, but 
also a phonetic and even grammatical usage, of the imaginary elements that 
appear to be fragmented in this gap. 

But we have no need for this genesis to demonstrate the symptom's signi- 
fying structure. Once deciphered, it is plain to see and shows the omnipres- 
ence for human beings of the symbolic function stamped on the flesh. 

What distinguishes a society grounded in language from an animal society, 
which even the ethnological standpoint allows us to see — namely, the fact 
that the exchange that characterizes such a society has other foundations than 
needs (even if it satisfies them), specifically, what has been called the gift "as 
total social fact" — can then be taken much further, so far as to constitute an 
objection to defining this society as a collection of individuals, since the 
immixing of subjects makes it a group with a very different structure. 

This reintroduces the impact of truth as cause from a totally different angle, 
416 and requires a reappraisal of the process of causality — the first stage of which 

would seem to be to recognize the degree to which the heterogeneity of this 
impact is inherent. 2 It is strange that materialist thought seems to forget that 
it derived its impetus from this recourse to the heterogeneous. More interest 
might then be shown in a feature that is much more striking than the resist- 
ance to Freud mounted by the pedants — namely, the connivance this resist- 
ance encountered in collective consciousness. 

If all causality evinces the subject's involvement, it will come as no surprise 
that every order conflict is attributed to him. 

The terms in which I am posing the problem of psychoanalytic interven- 
tion make it sufficiently clear, I think, that its ethics are not individualistic. 

But its practice in the American sphere has so summarily degenerated into 
a means of obtaining "success"* and into a mode of demanding "happiness"* 
that it must be pointed out that this constitutes a repudiation of psychoanaly- 
sis, a repudiation that occurs among too many of its adherents due to the pure 
and simple fact that they have never wanted to know anything about Freud's 
discovery, and that they will never know anything about it, even in the way 
implied by repression: for what is at work here is the mechanism of system- 
atic misrecognition insofar as it simulates delusion, even in its group forms. 

But had analytic experience been more rigorously linked to the general 
structure of semantics, in which it has its roots, it would have allowed us to 
convince [convaincre] them before having to vanquish [vaincre] them. 

For the subject of whom I was just speaking as the legatee of recognized 



The Freudian Thing S4J 

truth is definitely not the ego perceptible in the more or less immediate data 
of conscious jouissance or the alienation of labor. This de facto distinction is 
the same distinction found from the beginning to the end of Freud 's work: 
from the Freudian unconscious, insofar as it is separated by a profound gulf 
from the preconscious functions, to Freud's last will and testament in lecture 
thirty-one of his Neue Vbrlesungen [New Introductory Lectures], "Wo Es war, 
soil Ich werden." 

A formulation in which signifying structuration clearly prevails. 

Let us analyze it. Contrary to the form that the English translation — 417 

"Where the id was, there the ego shall be"* — cannot avoid, Freud said nei- 
ther das Es, nor das Ich, as was his wont when designating the agencies he had 
used to organize his new topography for the previous ten years; and, consid- 
ering the inflexible rigor of his style, this gives a particular emphasis to their 
use in this sentence. In any case — even without having to confirm, through a 
detailed examination of Freud's opus, that he in fact wrote Das Ich unddas Es 
[The Ego and the Id] in order to maintain the fundamental distinction between 
the true subject of the unconscious and the ego as constituted in its nucleus by 
a series of alienating identifications — it seems here that it is in the locus Wo 
(Where) Es (the subject devoid of any das or other objectifying article) war 
(was [etait] — it is a locus of being that is at stake, and that in this locus), soil 
(it is a duty in the moral sense that is announced here, as is confirmed by the 
single sentence that follows it, bringing the chapter to a close) 3 Ich (I, there 
must I — just as in French one announced "ce suis-je," "it is I," before saying 
"c'est moi," "it's me") werden (become [devenir] — not occur [survenir], or even 
happen [advenir], but be born [venir aujour] of this very locus insofar as it is a 
locus of being). 

Even though it runs counter to the principles of economy of expression that 
must dominate a translation, I would thus agree to force the forms of the sig- 
nifier a little in French in order to bring them into line with the weight of a 
still refractory signification, which the German tolerates better here; to do so 
I would play on the homophony between the German Es and the first letter 
of the word "subject." By the same token, I might feel more indulgent, at least 
momentarily, toward the first French translation that was provided of the word 
Es — namely, le soi (the self). The ca [the it or the id], which was eventually 
preferred, not groundlessly, does not seem to me to be much better, since it is 
rather to the German das, in the question, Was ist das?, that it corresponds in 
das ist (c'est [it is]). The elided c 'that appears if we stick to the accepted equiv- 
alence thus suggests to me the production of a verb, s'etre, which would express 
the mode of absolute subjectivity, insofar as Freud truly discovered it in its 
radical eccentricity: "Where it was" ["La ou c'etait"], one might say, "Where 



34$ Ecrits 

(it) was itself" [Id oiis 9 etaii\, as I would like it to be heard, "it is my duty that 

418 I come into being." 4 

You should realize that the point is not to analyze if and how the I [leje] 
and the ego [le moi] are distinct and overlap in each particular subject on the 
basis of a grammatical conception of their functions. 

What a linguistic conception, which must shape the analytic worker in his 
basic initiation, will teach him is to expect the symptom to prove its signify- 
ing function, that is, that by which it differs from the natural index commonly 
designated by the term "symptom" in medicine. And in order to satisfy this 
methodological requirement, he will oblige himself to recognize its conven- 
tional use in the significations brought out by analytic dialogue (a dialogue 
whose structure I shall try to articulate). But he will maintain that these very 
significations can be grasped with certainty only in their context, that is, in the 
sequence constituted for each one of them by the signification that refers back 
to it and the signification to which it refers in the analytic discourse. 

These basic principles can be easily applied in analytic technique and, in 
elucidating it, they dissipate many of the ambiguities which, being maintained 
even in the major concepts of transference and resistance, make the use that 
is made of them in practice exceedingly costly. 

Resistance to the Resisters 

To consider only resistance, whose use is increasingly confused with that of 
defense — and all the latter thus implies by way of maneuvers designed to elim- 
inate it, maneuvers whose coercive nature we can no longer ignore — it is worth 
recalling that the first resistance analysis faces is that of discourse itself, inso- 
far as it is first of all a discourse of opinion, and that all psychological objec- 
tification proves to be intimately tied to this discourse. This is, in effect, what 

419 motivated the remarkable simultaneity with which the psychoanalytic prac- 
tice of the burgraves of analysis came to a standstill in the 1920s: for by then 
they knew both too much and not enough about it to get their patients, who 
scarcely knew less about it, to recognize the truth. 

But the principle adopted at that time of granting primacy to the analysis 
of resistance hardly led to a favorable development. For the reason that giv- 
ing top priority to an operation doesn't suffice to make it reach its objective 
when one is unclear as to what that objective is. 

Now the analysis of resistance was designed precisely to reinforce the sub- 
ject 's objectifying position, to so great an extent, indeed, that this directive 
now permeates the principles that are supposed to be applied in the conduct 
of a standard treatment. 



The Freudian Thing 349 

Far from having to maintain the subject in a state of self-observation, there- 
fore, one must know that by inviting him to adopt such a position one enters 
a circle of misunderstanding that nothing in the treatment, or even in the ana- 
lytic literature, will be able to shatter. Any intervention that moves in this direc- 
tion can thus only be justified by a dialectical aim — namely, to demonstrate 
that it amounts to an impasse. 

But I will go further and say that you cannot both carry out this objectifi- 
cation of the subject yourself and speak to him as you should. And for a rea- 
son, which is not simply that you can't, as the English proverb has it, have 
your cake and eat it too — that is, adopt two different approaches to the same 
objects whose consequences are mutually exclusive. But for the deeper rea- 
son that is expressed in the saying "you can't serve two masters," that is, con- 
form your being to two actions that lead in opposite directions. 

For objectification in psychological matters is subject, at its very core, to a 
law of misrecognition that governs the subject not only as observed, but also 
as observer. In other words, it is not about him that you must speak to him, 
for he can do this well enough himself, and in doing so, it is not even to you 
that he speaks. While it is to him that you must speak, it is literally about some- 
thing else — that is, about some-thing other than what is at stake when he speaks 
of himself — which is the thing that speaks to you. Regardless of what he says, 
this thing will remain forever inaccessible to him if, being speech addressed 
to you, it cannot elicit its response in you, and if, having heard its message in 420 

this inverted form, you cannot, in re-turning it to him, give him the twofold 
satisfaction of having recognized it and of making him recognize its truth. 

Can't we then know the truth that we know in this way? Adcequatio rei et 
intellectus — thus has the concept of truth been defined since there were 
thinkers who lead us into the pathways of their thought. Intellects like ours 
will certainly measure up to the thing that speaks to us, nay, that speaks in us; 
and even when it hides behind a discourse that says nothing merely to make 
us speak, it would be shocking indeed if the thing did not find someone to 
speak to. 

I hope you will be so lucky; we must speak about it now, and those who put 
the thing into practice have the floor. 

Interlude 

But don't expect too much here, for ever since the psychoanalytic thing 
became an accepted thing and its servants started having their hands mani- 
cured, the housecleaning they have been performing makes do with sacrifices 
to good taste, which, as far as ideas — which psychoanalysts have never had 



jSo Ecrits 

in abundance — are concerned, is certainly convenient: ideas on sale for every- 
one will make up the balance of what each person is lacking in. We are suffi- 
ciently abreast of things to know that chosisme is hardly in good taste — which 
is our way of sidestepping the question. 

"Why go off in search of something other than the ego you distinguish, 
when you forbid us to see it?" it may be objected. "So we objectify it. What's 
wrong with that?" Here the delicate shoes move stealthily forward to deliver 
the following kick in the face: "Do you think, then, that the ego can be taken 
as a thing? We'd never entertain any such notion." 

From thirty-five years of cohabitation with the ego under the roof of the 
second Freudian topography — including ten years of a rather stormy rela- 
tionship, finally legitimized by the ministry of Miss Anna Freud in a marriage 
whose social credit has done nothing but grow ever since, so much so that peo- 
421 pie assure me it will soon request the Church's blessing — in short, from the 

most sustained work of psychoanalysts, you will draw nothing more than this 
drawer. 

It is true that it is chock-full of old novelties and new antiques, the sheer 
mass of which is at least entertaining. The ego is a function, the ego is a syn- 
thesis, a synthesis of functions, a function of synthesis. It is autonomous! That's 
a good one! It's the latest fetish introduced into the holy of holies of a prac- 
tice that is legitimated by the superiority of the superiors. It does the job as 
well as any other, everyone realizing that it is always the most outmoded, dirty, 
and repulsive object that best fulfills this function — this function being 
entirely real. That this object should gain for its inventor the veneration it does 
where it is in operation is just barely tolerable, but the most amazing thing is 
that in enlightened circles it has earned him the prestige of having returned 
psychoanalysis to the fold of the laws of general psychology. It is as if His 
Excellency the Aga Khan, not content with receiving his weight in gold — 
which in no way diminishes the esteem in which he is held in cosmopolitan 
society — were to be awarded the Nobel Prize for, in exchange, distributing to 
his followers the precise rules for pari-mutuel. 

But the latest find is the best: the ego, like everything else we have been 
handling of late in the human sciences, is an op-er-a-tion-al notion. 

At this point I appeal, before those in the audience, to this naive chosisme 
which keeps them sitting so properly in their seats, listening to me despite the 
barrage of calls to serve, so that they might, with me, agree to put a stop to 
this op [stopper c't o-pe\ 

In what respect does this op rationally distinguish what one makes of the 
notion of the ego in analysis from the common usage of any other thing, of 
this lectern, to take the first thing at hand? It distinguishes them so little that 



The Freudian Thing j5z 

I am confident I can show that the discourses about them — and that is what 
is at stake — coincide point for point. 

For this lectern, no less than the ego, is dependent on the signifier, namely 
on the word, which — generalizing its function compared to the pulpit of quar- 
relsome memory and to the Tronchin table of noble pedigree — is responsible 
for the fact that it is not merely a tree that has been felled, cut down to size, 
and glued back together by a cabinetmaker, for reasons of commerce tied to 422 

need-creating fashions that maintain its exchange value, assuming it is not led 
too quickly to satisfy the least superfluous of those needs by the final use to 
which wear and tear will eventually reduce it: namely, fuel for the fire. 

Moreover, the significations to which the lectern refers are in no way less 
dignified than those of the ego, and the proof is that they occasionally envelop 
the ego itself, if it is by the functions Heinz Hartmann attributes to the ego 
that one of our semblables may become our lectern: namely, maintain a posi- 
tion suitable enough for him to consent to it. An operational function, no doubt, 
that will allow the said semblable to display within himself all the possible val- 
ues of this lectern as a thing: from the hefty rent charged for its use that kept 
and still keeps the standing of the little hunchback of the rue Quincampoix 
above both the vicissitudes and the very memory of the first great speculative 
crash of modern times, through all the purposes of everyday convenience, of 
furnishing a room, of transfer for cash or assignment of interest, to its use — 
and why not? it has happened before — as firewood. 

But that isn't all, for I am willing to lend my voice to the true lectern so that 
it might deliver a lecture on its existence, which, even though it is instrumen- 
tal, is individual; on its history, which, however radically alienated it may seem 
to us, has left all the written traces a historian might require: documents, texts, 
and bills from suppliers; and on its very destiny, which, though inert, is dra- 
matic, since a lectern is perishable, is engendered by labor, and has a fate sub- 
ject to chance, obstacles, misadventures, prestige, and even fatalities whose 
index it becomes; and it is destined to an end of which it need know nothing 
for it to be the lectern's own, since we all know what it is. 

But it would be nothing more than sheer banality if, after this prosopopeia, 
one of you dreams that he is this lectern, whether or not it is endowed with 
the gift of speech. And since the interpretation of dreams has become a well 
known, if not a widespread, practice, there would be no reason to be surprised 
if — by deciphering the use as a signifier that this lectern has taken on in the 
rebus in which the dreamer immures his desire, and by analyzing the more or 
less equivocal reference implied by this use to the significations the lectern's 
consciousness has awakened in him, with or without its lecture — we reached 423 

what might be called the lectern's "preconscious." 



352 Ecrits 

At this point I hear a protest, which I am not sure how to name, even though 
it is totally predictable: for, in effect, it concerns that which has no name in 
any language [langue], and which, generally manifesting itself in the ambigu- 
ous mollifying motion of "the total personality," comprises everything that 
leads us to be publicly ridiculed in psychiatry for our worthless phenomenol- 
ogy and in society for our stationary "progressivism." The protest is that of 
the beautiful soul, no doubt, but in forms suited to the wishy-washy being, 
wry manner, and tenebrous approach of the modern intellectual, whether on 
the right or left. Indeed, it is in this quarter that the fictional protest of those 
that disorder causes to proliferate finds its noble alliances. Let us listen rather 
to the tone of this protest. 

The tone is measured but serious: neither the preconscious nor conscious- 
ness, we are told, belongs to the lectern, but to we who perceive the desk and 
give it its meaning — all the more easily, moreover, since we ourselves have 
made the thing. But even if a more natural being were at stake, we should never 
thoughtlessly debase in consciousness the high form which, however feeble 
we may be in the universe, assures us an imprescriptible dignity in it — look 
up "reed" in the dictionary of spiritualist thought. 

I must admit that Freud incites me to be irreverent here by the way in 
which, in a passing remark somewhere, as if without touching on it, he speaks 
about the modes of spontaneous provocation that are usual when universal 
consciousness goes into action. And this relieves me of any constraint about 
pursuing my paradox. 

Is the difference between the lectern and us, as far as consciousness is con- 
cerned, so very great then if, in being brought into play between you and me, 
the lectern can so easily acquire a semblance of consciousness that my sen- 
tences could allow us to mistake the one for the other? Being placed with one 
of us between two parallel mirrors, it will be seen to reflect indefinitely, which 
means that it will be far more like the person who is looking than we think, 
since in seeing his image repeated in the same way, he too truly sees himself 
424 through another's eyes when he looks at himself, since without the other, his 

image, he would not see himself seeing himself. 

In other words, the ego's privileged status compared to things must be 
sought elsewhere than in this false recurrence to infinity of the reflection which 
constitutes the mirage of consciousness, and which, despite its utter useless- 
ness, still titillates those who work with thought enough for them to see in it 
some supposed progress in interiority, whereas it is a topological phenome- 
non whose distribution in nature is as sporadic as the dispositions of pure exte- 
riority that condition it, even if it is true that man has helped spread them with 
such immoderate frequency. 



The Freudian Thing j5j 

How, moreover, can we separate the term "preconscious" from the affec- 
tations of this lectern, or from those which are potentially or actually found 
in any other thing and which, by adjusting themselves so exactly to my affec- 
tions, will become conscious along with them? 

I am willing to accept that the ego, and not the lectern, is the seat of per- 
ceptions, but it thus reflects the essence of the objects it perceives and not its 
own essence, insofar as consciousness is supposedly its privilege, since these 
perceptions are, for the most part, unconscious. 

It is no accident, moreover, that I have detected the origin of the protest 
that I must address here in the bastardized forms of phenomenology that cloud 
the technical analyses of human action, especially those required in medicine. 
If their cheap material, to borrow a term Jaspers uses in his assessment of psy- 
choanalysis, really is what gives his work its style, and its weight to him as the 
epitome of the cast-iron spiritual advisor and tin-plate guru, they are not use- 
less — indeed, their use is always the same, namely, to create a diversion. 

They are used here, for example, in order to avoid discussing the impor- 
tant point that the lectern does not talk, which the upholders of the false protest 
want to know nothing about, because my lectern, hearing me grant them the 
point, would immediately begin to speak. 

The other 's Discourse 425 

"In what way, then, is the ego you treat in analysis better than the lectern that 
I am?" it would ask them. 

"For if its health is defined by its adaptation to a reality that is quite frankly 
regarded as being measured against the ego, and if you need the alliance of 
'the healthy part of the ego' in order to eliminate discordances with reality (in 
the other part of the ego, no doubt) — which only appear to be discordances 
due to your principle of regarding the analytic situation as simple and innocu- 
ous, and concerning which you won't stop until you have made the subject see 
them as you see them — isn't it clear that there is no way to discern which is 
the healthy part of the subject's ego except by its agreement with your point 
of view? And, since the latter is assumed to be healthy, it becomes the meas- 
ure of all things. Isn't it similarly clear that there is no other criterion of cure 
than the complete adoption by the subject of your measure? This is confirmed 
by the common admission by certain serious authors that the end of analysis 
is achieved when the subject identifies with the analyst's ego. 

"Certainly, the fact that such a view can spread and be accepted so calmly 
leads one to think that, contrary to the commonly held view that it is easy to 
impress the naive, it is much easier for the naive to impress others. And the 



3S4 Ecrits 

hypocrisy revealed in the declaration — whose repentant tone appears with such 
curious regularity in this discourse — that we should speak to the subject in 
'his own language,' gives one still further pause for thought regarding the depth 
of this naivete. We still have to overcome the nausea we feel at the idea it sug- 
gests of employing baby talk, without which well informed parents would 
believe themselves incapable of inculcating their lofty reasons in the poor lit- 
tle guys that have to be made to keep quiet! These are simple attentions peo- 
ple consider necessary because, according to the notion projected by analytic 
imbecility, neurotics supposedly have weak egos. 

"But we are not here to dream between nausea and vertigo. The fact 
remains that, although I may be a mere lectern in speaking to you, I am the 
ideal patient; for not so much trouble has to be taken with me — the results are 
426 obtained immediately, I am cured in advance. Since the point is simply to replace 

my discourse with yours, I am a perfect ego, since I have never had any other 
discourse, and I leave it to you to inform me of the things to which my adjust- 
ment controls do not allow you to adapt me directly — namely, of everything 
other than your eyesight, your height, and the dimensions of your papers." 

Not a bad speech for a lectern, I'd say. I must be kidding, of course. In 
what it said under my command, it did not have its say. For the reason that it 
itself was a word; it was "me" [moi] as grammatical subject. Well, that's one 
rank achieved, one worth being picked up by the opportunistic soldier in the 
ditch of an entirely eristic claim, but which also provides us with an illustra- 
tion of the Freudian motto, which, expressed as "La ou etait 9a, leje doit etre," 
would confirm, to our benefit, the feeble character of a translation that sub- 
stantifies the Ich, by giving a "t" to doit translating soil, and fixes the price 
of the Es according to the rate of the 9. The fact remains that the lectern is 
not an ego, however eloquent it was, but a means that I have employed in my 
discourse. 

But, after all, if we envision its virtue in analysis, the ego, too, is a means, 
and they can be compared. 

As the lectern so pertinently mentioned, it has the advantage over the ego 
of not being a means of resistance, and that's precisely why I chose it to prop 
up my discourse and proportionately mitigate whatever resistance a greater 
interference of my ego in Freud's words might have given rise to in you — sat- 
isfied as I would already be if the resistance you must be left with, despite this 
effacement, led you to find what I am saying "interesting." It's no accident 
that this expression, in its euphemistic use, designates what interests us only 
moderately, and manages to come full circle in its antithesis, by which specu- 
lations of universal interest are called "disinterested." 

But were what I am saying to come to interest you personally — as they say, 



The Freudian Thing j55 

filling out an antonomasia with a pleonasm — the lectern would soon be in 
pieces for us to use as a weapon. 

Well, all of that applies to the ego, except that its uses seem to be reversed 
in their relation to its states. The ego is a means of the speech addressed to you 
from the subject's unconscious, a weapon for resisting its recognition; it is frag- 
mented when it conveys speech and whole when it serves not to hear it. 427 

Indeed, the subject finds the signifying material of his symptoms in the dis- 
integration of the imaginary unity that the ego constitutes. And it is from the 
sort of interest the ego awakens in him that come the significations that turn 
his discourse away from it. 

Imaginary Passion 

This interest in the ego is a passion whose nature was already glimpsed by the 
traditional moralists, who called it amour-propre, but whose dynamics in rela- 
tion to one 's own body image only psychoanalytic investigation could ana- 
lyze. This passion brings to every relation with this image, constantly 
represented by my semblable, a signification which interests me so greatly — 
that is, which makes me so dependent on this image — that it links all the objects 
of my desires to the other's desire, more closely than to the desire they arouse 
in me. 

I am talking about objects as we expect them to appear in a space structured 
by vision — that is, objects characteristic of the human world. As to the knowl- 
edge on which desire for these objects depends, men are far from confirming 
the expression that says they see no further than the end of their nose; on the 
contrary, their misfortune is such that their world begins at the end of their 
nose, and they can apprehend their desire only by means of the same thing 
that allows them to see their nose itself: a mirror. But no sooner has this nose 
been discerned than they fall in love with it, and this is the first signification 
by which narcissism envelops the forms of desire. It is not the only significa- 
tion, and the growing importance of aggressiveness in the firmament of ana- 
lytic concerns would remain obscure if we confined our attention to this one 
alone. 

This is a point I believe I myself have helped elucidate by conceptualizing 
the so-called dynamics of the "mirror stage" as the consequence of man's 
generic prematurity at birth, leading at the age indicated to the jubilant iden- 428 

tification of the individual who is still an infant with the total form in which 
this reflection of the nose is integrated — namely, with the image of his body. 
This operation — which is carried out in an approximate manner that might 
be off by a nose [faite a vue de ne^ an apt expression here, in other words, 



356 Ecrits 

falling more or less into the same category as the "aha!" that enlightens us 
about the chimpanzee 's intelligence, amazed as we always are to detect the 
miracle of intelligence on our peers' faces — does not fail to bring deplorable 
consequences in its wake. 

As a witty poet so rightly remarks, the mirror would do well to reflect a lit- 
tle more before sending us back our image. For at this point the subject has 
not yet seen anything. But let the same capture be reproduced under the nose 
of one of his semblables — the nose of a notary, for example — and Lord knows 
where the subject will be led by the nose, given the places such legal profes- 
sionals are in the habit of sticking theirs. And whatever else we have — hands, 
feet, heart, mouth, even the eyes — that is so reluctant to follow is threatened 
by a breaking up of the team, whose announcement through anxiety could 
only lead to severe measures. Regroup! — an appeal to the power of this image 
which made the honeymoon with the mirror so jubilant, to the sacred union 
of right and left that is affirmed in it, as inverted as it may appear to be should 
the subject prove to be a bit more observant. 

But what finer model of this union is there than the very image of the other, 
that is, of the notary in his function? It is thus that the functions of mastery, 
improperly called the ego's synthetic functions, institute on the basis of a libid- 
inal alienation the subsequent development — namely, what I formerly termed 
the "paranoiac principle of human knowledge," according to which man's 
objects are subjected to a law of imaginary reduplication, evoking ratification 
by an indefinite series of notaries, which owes nothing to their professional 
federation. 

But the signification that strikes me as decisive in the constitutive alien- 
ation of the ego's Urbild appears in the relation of exclusion that henceforth 
structures the dyadic ego-to-ego relationship in the subject. For should the 
imaginary coaptation of the one to the other bring about a complementary 
distribution of roles between, for example, the notary and the notarized party, 
an effect of the ego's precipitated identification with the other in the subject 
is that this distribution never constitutes even a kinetic harmony, but is insti- 
tuted on the basis of a permanent "it's you or me" form of war in which the 
429 existence of one or the other of the two notaries in each of the subjects is at 

stake. This situation is symbolized in the "So are you" of the transitivist quar- 
rel, the original form of aggressive communication. 

We can see to what the ego's language is reduced: intuitive illumination, 
recollective command, and the retorting aggressiveness of verbal echo. Let us 
add to this what the ego receives from the automatic scraps of everyday dis- 
course: rote-learning and delusional refrain, modes of communication per- 
fectly reproduced by objects scarcely more complicated than this lectern, a 



The Freudian Thing s5y 

feed-back* construction for the former, a gramophone record, preferably 
scratched in the right place, for the latter. 

It is, nevertheless, in this register that the systematic analysis of defense is 
proffered. It is corroborated by semblances of regression. The object-relation 
provides appearances of it, and this forcing has no other outcome than one of 
the three allowed by the technique currently in force. Either the impulsive 
leap into reality [reel] through the hoop of fantasy: acting out* in a direction 
that is ordinarily the opposite of suggestion. Or transitory hypomania due to 
ejection of the object itself, which is correctly described in the megalomania- 
cal intoxication which my friend Michael Balint, in an account so veracious as 
to make him a still better friend, recognizes as the index of the termination of 
an analysis according to current norms. Or in the sort of somatization con- 
stituted by mild hypochondria, discretely theorized under the heading of the 
doctor/patient relationship. 

The dimension of a "two body psychology,"* suggested by Rickman, is the 
fantasy in which a "two ego analysis"* hides, which is as untenable as it is coher- 
ent in its results. 

Analytic Action 

This is why I teach that there are not only two subjects present in the analytic 
situation, but two subjects each of whom is provided with two objects, the ego 
and the other, the latter beginning with a lowercase o. Now, due to the singu- 
larities of a dialectical mathematics with which we must familiarize ourselves, 
their union in the pair of subjects S and A includes only four terms in all, because 
the relation of exclusion that obtains between a and a reduces the two cou- 430 

pies thus indicated to a single couple in the juxtaposition of the subjects. 

In this game for four players, the analyst will act on the significant resist- 
ances that weigh down, impede, and divert speech, while himself introducing 
into the quartet the primordial sign of the exclusion that connotes the 
either/or of presence or absence which formally brings out death as included 
in the narcissistic Bildung. This sign is lacking, let it be noted in passing, in 
the algorithmic apparatus of the modern logic that is called symbolic, 
demonstrating the dialectical inadequacy that renders it still unsuitable for 
formalizing the human sciences. 

This means that the analyst concretely intervenes in the dialectic of analy- 
sis by playing dead — by " cadaver izing" his position, as the Chinese say — 
either by his silence where he is the Other with a capital O, or by canceling 
out his own resistance where he is the other with a lowercase o. In both cases, 
and via symbolic and imaginary effects, respectively, he makes death present. 



S58 Ecrits 

Still, he must recognize and therefore distinguish his action in each of these 
two registers to know why he is intervening, at what moment the opportunity 
is presenting itself, and how to act on it. 

The primordial condition for this is that the analyst should be thoroughly 
convinced of the radical difference between the Other to whom his speech 
should be addressed, and the second other who is the one he sees before him, 
about whom and by means of whom the first speaks to him in the discourse it 
pursues before him. For, in this way, the analyst will be able to be the one to 
whom this discourse is addressed. 

The fable of my lectern and the usual practice of the discourse of convic- 
tion will show him clearly enough, if he thinks about it, that no word [dis- 
course — whatever inertia it may be based on or whatever passion it may appeal 
to — is ever addressed to anyone except the wise to whom it is sufficient. Even 
what is known as an adhominem argument is only regarded by the person who 
uses it as a seduction designed to get the other, in his authenticity, to accept 
what the person says [parole^ this speech constitutes a pact, whether it is made 
explicit or not, between the two subjects, but it is situated in either case beyond 
the reasons furnished in the argument. 

In general, each person knows that others will remain, like himself, inac- 
cessible to the constraints of reason, failing an a priori acceptance of a rule of 
43 1 debate that cannot function without an explicit or implicit agreement as to what 

is called its ground [fonds], which is almost always tantamount to a prior agree- 
ment regarding the stakes. What is called logic or law is never anything more 
than a body of rules that were laboriously worked out at a moment of history, 
duly dated and situated by a stamp of origin — whether agora or forum, 
church, or even political party. Thus I won't expect anything from these rules 
without the Other's good faith and, as a last resort, will only make use of them, 
if I see fit or am forced to, in order to beguile bad faith. 

The Locus of Speech 

The Other is, therefore, the locus in which is constituted the I who speaks 
along with he who hears, what is said by the one being already the reply, the 
other deciding, in hearing [entendre] it, whether the one has spoken or not. 

But, in return, this locus extends as far into the subject as the laws of speech 
reign there, that is, well beyond the discourse that takes its watchwords from 
the ego, since Freud discovered its unconscious field and the laws that struc- 
ture it. 

It is not because of some mystery concerning the indestructibility of cer- 
tain childhood desires that the laws of the unconscious determine analyzable 



The Freudian Thing s5g 

symptoms. The subject's imaginary shaping by his desires — which are more 
or less fixated or regressed in relation to the object — is too inadequate and 
partial to provide the key. 

The necessary and sufficient reason for the repetitive insistence of these 
desires in the transference and their permanent remembrance in a signifier 
that repression has appropriated — that is, in which the repressed returns — is 
found if one accepts the idea that in these determinations the desire for recog- 
nition dominates the desire that is to be recognized, preserving it as such until 
it is recognized. 

Indeed, the laws of remembering and symbolic recognition are different in 
their essence and manifestation from the laws of imaginary reminiscence — 
that is, from the echo of feeling or instinctual imprinting (Pragung) — even if 
the elements organized by the former as signifiers are borrowed from the mate- 
rial to which the latter give signification. 

To grasp the nature of symbolic memory, it suffices to have studied once, 432 

as I had people do in my seminar, the simplest symbolic sequence, that of a lin- 
ear series of signs connoting the presence/absence alternative, each sign being 
chosen at random by whatever pure or impure means adopted. If this sequence 
is then elaborated in the simplest way, isolating three-term sequences to gen- 
erate a new series, syntactical laws arise that impose on each term of this new 
series certain exclusions of possibility until the compensations demanded by 
its antecedents have been satisfied. 

Freud's discovery went right to the heart of this determination by the 
symbolic law, for in the unconscious — which, he insisted, was quite different 
from everything that had previously been designated by that name — he rec- 
ognized the instance of the laws on which marriage and kinship are based, 
establishing the Oedipus complex as its central motivation already in the 
Traumdeutung. This is what now allows me to tell you why the motives of the 
unconscious are limited to sexual desire, a point on which Freud was quite 
clear from the outset and from which he never deviated. Indeed, it is essen- 
tially on sexual relations [liaison] — by regulating them according to the law 
of preferential marriage alliances and forbidden relations — that the first 
combinatory for exchanges of women between family lines relies, develop- 
ing the fundamental commerce and concrete discourse on which human soci- 
eties are based in an exchange of gratuitous goods and magic words. 

The concrete field of individual preservation, on the other hand, through 
its links with the division not of labor, but of desire and labor — already man- 
ifest right from the first transformation that introduced human signification 
into food and up to the most highly developed forms of the production of con- 
sumable goods — sufficiently shows that it is structured in the master/ slave 



360 Ecrits 

dialectic, in which we can recognize the symbolic emergence of the imaginary 
struggle to the death that I defined above as the ego's essential structure; it is 
hardly surprising, then, that this field is exclusively reflected in this structure. 

433 I n otner words, this explains why the other great generic desire, hunger, is not 
represented, as Freud always maintained, in what the unconscious preserves 
in order to get it recognized. 

Thus Freud 's intention, which was quite legible to anyone who didn't con- 
fine himself to merely parroting Freud 's texts, became increasingly clear when 
he promoted the topography of the ego; his intention was to restore, in all its 
rigor, the separation — right down to their unconscious interference — 
between the field of the ego and that of the unconscious he discovered first, 
by showing that the former is in a "blocking" position in relation to the latter, 
the former resisting recognition of the latter through the effect of its own sig- 
nifications in speech. 

Here lies the contrast between the significations of guilt, whose discovery 
in the subject 's action dominated the first phase in the history of psychoanalysis, 
and the significations of the subject's affective frustration, instinctual inade- 
quacy, and imaginary dependence that dominate its current phase. 

It isn't going very far to say that the latter significations, whose predomi- 
nance is now consolidating through a forgetting of the former significations, 
promise us a preparatory course in general infantilization; for psychoanaly- 
sis is already allowing large-scale practices of social mystification to claim legit- 
imacy by appealing to analytic principles. 

Symbolic Debt 

Will our action go so far, then, as to repress the very truth that it implies in its 
practice? Will it put this truth back to sleep — a truth that Freud, in the pas- 
sion of the Rat Man, forever offers up so that we may recognize it, should we 
increasingly turn our vigilance away from it — namely, that the stone guest 
who came, in symptoms, to disturb the banquet of his desires was fashioned 
out of acts of treachery and vain oaths, broken promises and empty words, 
whose constellation presided over a man's birth? 

For the sour [not green] grape of speech by which the child received the 
authentication of the nothingness of existence from a father too early, and the 
grapes of wrath that responded to the words of false hope with which his mother 
lured him in feeding him with the milk of her true despair, set his teeth on edge 

434 more than if he had been weaned from an imaginary jouissance or even 
deprived of some real attentions. 

Will we escape unscathed from the symbolic game in which the real mis- 



The Freudian Thing 361 

deed pays the price for imaginary temptation? Will we turn our attention away 
from what becomes of the law when, by virtue of having been intolerable to 
the subject's loyalty, it is misrecognized by him already when it is still 
unknown to him, and from what becomes of the imperative when, having pre- 
sented itself to him through imposture, it is challenged in his heart before being 
discerned? In other words, will we turn our attention away from the main- 
springs that, in the broken link of the symbolic chain, raise from the imagi- 
nary the obscene, ferocious figure in which the true signification of the 
superego must be seen? 

It should be understood here that my criticism of a kind of analysis that 
claims to be an analysis of resistance, and is reduced ever more to the mobi- 
lization of the defenses, bears solely on the fact that it is as disoriented in its 
practice as it is in its principles, and is designed to remind analysts of their 
legitimate ends. 

The maneuvers involving dyadic complicity that this form of analysis forces 
itself to implement to achieve happiness and success can have value in our eyes 
only if they reduce the resistance, stemming from the effects of prestige in 
which the ego asserts itself, to the speech that is owned [s 'avoue] at a certain 
moment of analysis, which is the analytic moment. 

I believe that it is in the owning [laveu] of this speech, of which transfer- 
ence is the enigmatic actualization, that analysis must refind its center along 
with its gravity; and let no one imagine from what I said earlier that I con- 
ceptualize this speech as some mystical mode reminiscent of karma. For what 
is striking in the moving drama of neurosis is the absurd aspects of a discon- 
certed symbolization whose case of mistaken identity seems more derisory the 
more one delves into it. 

Adcequatio rei et intellectus: the homonymic enigma that can be brought out 
in the genitive, rei — which without even changing accents can be the genitive 
of the word reus, meaning the party to the case in a lawsuit, specifically the 
accused, and metaphorically he who has incurred a debt — surprises us by pro- 
viding, in the end, a formulation for this singular correspondence [adequation] 
that I raised as a question for our intellect and that finds its answer in the sym- 
bolic debt for which the subject is responsible as a subject of speech. 

The Training of Analysts to Come 435 

In taking up anew my analysis of the ways in which speech is able to recover 
the debt it engenders, I will thus return to the structures of language that are 
so manifestly recognizable in the earliest discovered mechanisms of the 
unconscious. 



j62 Ecrits 

We need but thumb through the pages of Freud's work for it to become 
abundantly clear that he regarded a history of languages [langue] and institu- 
tions, and the resonances — whether attested to or not in human memory — 
of literature and of the significations involved in works of art, as necessary to 
an understanding of the text of our experience; indeed, Freud himself found 
his inspiration, ways of thinking, and arsenal of techniques therein. But he 
also believed it wasn't superfluous to make them a condition for instituting the 
teaching of psychoanalysis. 

The fact that this condition has been neglected, even in the selection of ana- 
lysts, cannot be unconnected with the results we see around us; it indicates to 
us that it is only by articulating Freud's requirements in terms of technique 
that we will be able to satisfy them. It is with an initiation into the methods of 
the linguist, the historian, and, I would add, the mathematician that we should 
now be concerned if a new generation of practitioners and researchers is to 
recover the meaning and motor force of the Freudian experience. This gen- 
eration will also find in these methods a way to avoid social-psychological 
objectification, in which the psychoanalyst seeks, in his uncertainty, the sub- 
stance of what he does, whereas it can provide him with no more than an inad- 
equate abstraction in which his practice gets bogged down and dissolves. 

Such reform will require an institutional undertaking, for it can only be 
sustained by means of constant communication with disciplines that would 
define themselves as sciences of inter subjectivity, or by the term "conjectural 
sciences," a term by which I indicate the kind of research that is now chang- 
ing the implication of the "human sciences." 

But such a direction can only be maintained by a true teaching, that is, teach- 
ing that constantly subjects itself to what is known as renewal. For the pact 
436 instituting analytic experience must take into account the fact that this expe- 

rience instates the very effects that capture it, diverting it from the subject. 

Thus, in exposing magical thinking, people don't see that it is magical 
thinking and, in fact, an alibi for thoughts about wielding power that are ever 
ready to bring about their own rejection in an action that is sustained only by 
its connection with truth. 

Freud is referring to this connection with truth when he declares that it is 
impossible to meet three challenges: to educate, govern, and psychoanalyze. 
Why are they impossible, if not for the fact that the subject can only be missed 
in these undertakings, slipping away in the margin Freud reserves for truth? 

For in these undertakings truth proves to be complex in its essence, hum- 
ble in its offices and foreign to reality, refractory to the choice of sex, akin to 
death and, on the whole, rather inhuman, Diana perhaps . . . Actaeon, too 



The Freudian Thing 



3<>3 



guilty to hunt the goddess, prey in which is caught, O huntsman, the shadow 
that you become, let the pack go without hastening your step, Diana will rec- 
ognize the hounds for what they are worth . . . 



Notes 



1. This text was first published in L'Evolu- 
tion psychiatrique 1 (1956): 225—52. 

2. (Added in 1966:) This rewritten para- 
graph predates a line of thought I have since 
explored. 

3. Namely, "Es ist Kulturarbeit etwa wie die 
Trockenlegung der Zuydersee." "It is a civiliz- 
ing task like the drying out of the Zuider Zee." 



4. One can but wonder what demon inspired 
the author of the extant French translation, 
whoever it was, to render it as "Le moi doit 
deloger le 9a" ("The ego must dislodge the 
id"). It is true that one can savor in it the tone 
of an analytic quarter in which people know 
how to carry out the sort of operation it evokes. 



437 Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching 



Talk given at the French Philosophical Society during the 
session held February 23, 1957 



As was customary, the following abstract was distributed to the members of 
the Society prior to the talk: 

Psychoanalysis and What It Teaches Us . . . 

I. In the unconscious, which is not so much deep as it is inaccessible to con- 
scious scrutiny, it speaks; the notion of a subject within the subject, transcending 
the subject, has raised questions for philosophers since Freud first wrote The 
Interpretation of Dreams. 

II. The fact that symptoms are symbolic is not the whole story. The author 
demonstrates: 

• that their use as signif iers distinguishes them from their natural meaning, thanks 
to the step of narcissism, in which the imaginary separates from the symbolic; 

• that the truth of the unconscious must be situated between the lines, since a 
broader metonymy encompasses their metaphors; 

• that, with his notion of the death instinct, Freud investigates the basis [sup- 
pot] of this truth. 

III. By challenging the propriety of Freud's investigation, contemporary 
psychoanalysts 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching j65 

• have arrived at a declared "environmentalism," which contradicts the 
contingency Freud assigned to the object in the vicissitudes of the ten- 
dencies, 

• and have returned to the most simplistic form of egocentrism, which sug- 
gests a misunderstanding of the dependent status Freud later assigned to 
the ego. 

And yet . . . 

How to Teach It 

IV. The vast literature in which this contradiction and misunderstanding are 
revealed can serve as useful casuistry by demonstrating where resistance, which 
is a dupe here of its own course, is situated — namely, in the imaginary effects 
of the dyadic relation. When shed light on by another source, its fantasies make 
people take the series [suite] of these effects to be consistent. 

And this impoverished path tries to legitimate itself on the basis of the fol- 
lowing condition of psychoanalysis: that the true work in it is, by its very nature, 
hidden. 

V. But the same is not true of the structure of analysis, which can be formal- 
ized in a way that is completely accessible to the scientific community, pro- 
vided one relies on Freud who truly constituted it. 

For psychoanalysis is nothing more than an artifice, the components of 
which Freud provided in positing that the whole set of these components 
encompasses the very notion of these components. 

Such that, while the purely formal maintenance of these components suf- 
fices for their overall structure to be effective, the incompleteness of the ana- 
lyst's conception of these components tends, depending on how great it is, to 
be confused with the limit that the analytic process cannot go beyond in the 
analysand. 

The theory currently in favor verifies this with its amazing confession: the 
analyst's ego, which must be said to be autonomous at the very least, is the meas- 
ure of reality and, for the analysand [Fanalyse], his own analysis constitutes 
the testing of that reality. 

Nothing of the kind could possibly be at stake within the confines of 
analysis; what is at stake is, rather, the restoring of a symbolic chain the three 
dimensions of which indicate the directions in which the author intends to 
trace out pathways for the training of analysts. Those dimensions are the 
dimension: 



438 



366 Ecrits 

• of history of a life lived as history; 

• of subjection to the laws of language, which alone are capable of overde- 
termination; 

• of the intersubjective game by which truth enters reality [reel]. 

VI. The locus described as that of truth serves as a prelude to the truth of the 
locus described. 

While this locus is not the subject, it is not the other (to be written with a 
lowercase o) who, giving soul to the ego's wagers and body to the mirages of 
439 perverse desire, brings about coalescences of the signifier with the signified 

onto which all resistance grabs hold and in which all suggestion finds its piv- 
otal point, without anything being sketched out there by way of some cun- 
ning of reason, if not that they are permeable to it. 

The cunning of reason that runs through them, violence being banished, 
is the refined rhetoric on which the unconscious offers us a handle [prise\ along 
with a surprise — introducing this Other (to be provided with a capital 0), 
faith in whom is invoked by anyone when he addresses an other (with a low- 
ercase o), even if only to lie to him. 

The analyst leaves room for this Other beyond the other by the neutrality 
with which he makes himself be ne-uter, neither the one nor the other of the 
two who are there; and if he remains silent, it is in order to let this Other speak. 

The unconscious is the Other's discourse in which the subject receives his 
own forgotten message in the inverted form suitable for promises. 

This Other is, nevertheless, only halfway from a quest that the unconscious 
betrays by its difficult art and whose ever-so-informed ignorance is revealed 
by the paradoxes of the object in Freud's work. For, if we listen to him, we 
learn that reality [reel] derives its existence from a refusal, that love creates its 
object from what is lacking in reality \reel\ and that desire stops at the curtain 
behind which this lack is figured by reality [reel]. 

The author will discuss one or two of the points outlined in this abstract, 
which will serve as a reference point for the discussion. 

The talk given was couched in the following terms: 

Without stopping to wonder whether the text of my abstract was based on an 
accurate assessment of my audience, I will indicate that in raising the question 
"how can we teach what psychoanalysis teaches us?" I was not trying to give 
an illustration of my mode of teaching. This abstract lays out — so that the dis- 
cussion may use it as a reference point, as I mentioned at the end of it — theses 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching 367 

concerning the order that institutes psychoanalysis as a science, and then 
extracts from them the principles by which we can maintain the program of its 
teaching in this order. Were such a statement applied to modern physics, no 
one would, I think, qualify the discreet use of an algebraic formula, in order to 
indicate the order of abstraction that it constitutes, as sibylline. Why then would 
we consider ourselves to be deprived of a more succulent experience here? 

Need I indicate that such a statement assumes that the moment is now behind 440 

us at which it was important to get the existence of psychoanalysis recognized 
and, as it were, to produce certificates of good conduct on its behalf? 

I take for granted that psychoanalysis' existence as a qualified discipline is 
more than adequately accepted by all legitimate thinkers. 

No one undergoing analysis today is taxed with being unbalanced when it 
comes to judging his social or legal competence. Rather, and despite the extrav- 
agance of this viewpoint, recourse to analysis is taken to involve a praisewor- 
thy attempt at self-criticism and self-control. At the same time, the very people 
who applaud such recourse are likely to prove far more reserved regarding its 
use on themselves or their loved ones. The fact remains that the psychoana- 
lyst is considered — rather thoughtlessly, in truth — to know a lot, and the least 
credulous of his psychiatric colleagues, for example, are quite happy to refer 
all kinds of cases to him that they themselves do not know how to handle. 

Nevertheless, I assume that the specialists in the widely varied disciplines 
to whom I am speaking today have come here, given the venue, in their 
capacity as philosophers in a large enough measure for me to begin my dis- 
cussion by raising the following question: What, in their view, does analysis 
teach us that is proper to analysis, or the most proper, truly proper, truly the 
most, the most truly? 

I would hardly be going out on a limb were I to presume that the answers 
I would receive here would be more varied than at the time of the challenge 
that analysis at first presented the world. 

The revolution constituted by the categorical predominance given to the 
sexual tendencies in human motivations became obscured due to the expan- 
sion of the theme of interpersonal relations, and even of social-psychological 
"dynamics." 

Although the libidinal instances could not altogether escape characteriza- 
tion, they could, it was thought upon closer examination, be broken down into 
existential relations whose regularity and normativeness show them to have 
reached a truly remarkable state of domestication. 

Beyond that, we would supposedly see sketched out a sort of positivistic 
analogism between morals and instincts. While its conformist aspects no 441 



368 Ecrits 

longer offend our sense of propriety, they can still provoke shame, by which 
I mean the shame that is sensitive to ridicule, and would bring down the cur- 
tain — to rely here on the evidence provided by anthropological studies. 

Here psychoanalysis' contributions would seem to be imposing, although 
perhaps all the more subject to caution the more directly they are imposed. 
This can be gauged by comparing the massive renewal that occurred in the 
analysis of mythologies, owing to psychoanalytic inspiration, with the for- 
mation of a concept like that of "basic personality structure,"* with which the 
American Procrusteans torment with their yardstick the mystery of suppos- 
edly primitive souls. 

Nevertheless, one of us would be justified in standing up and underscoring 
here just how much of what our culture propagates has Freud's name written 
on it, and in affirming that, regardless of its value, its order of magnitude is 
comparable to what our culture disseminates that, for better or for worse, has 
Marx's name written on it. 

But we would also have to place in the scales a more militant Freud, a Freud 
committed to relieving forms of servitude that are more confused than those 
addressed by his paragon. 

Then you would turn to practitioners to ask them to determine the sub- 
stance of Freud's message on the basis of their own experience. But were you 
to simply peruse the clearly abundant literature in which they address their 
problems of technique, you would be surprised to find no surer line, no more 
decided path of progress in it, than his. 

It would become clear to you, rather, that if a certain degree of wear and 
tear were not foreign to the acceptance of psychoanalysis in educated circles, 
a sort of strange side effect would meet it head-on, as if some mimesis 
[mimetisme\ subverting the effort to convince, had conquered the interpreters 
in their own compromises. 

And you would then have the malaise of wondering whether this "we" 
[on] — in which you would find yourself thrown in with technicians, leading 
you to recognize in the simple existence of this "we" what it is that would thus 
like to evade your question — is not itself too questionable in its indetermina- 
tion not to cast doubt on the very fact of this recognition, assuming that the 
recognition requires that one base oneself on a firmer alterity, even if only for 
an intellectual leader. 
442 It should be clear that I assume responsibility for this casting of doubt in 

raising my question and, in this respect, as an analyst, I distinguish myself from 
those who believe that the behind-closed-doors [huis clos] nature of our tech- 
nique and our tightly sealed lips regarding our knowledge are adequate expe- 
dients by which to deal with this failing alterity. But how can one remind 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching 369 

analysts that error finds safety in the rules with which the worries it engen- 
ders protect themselves, and to the very degree to which people consider those 
rules to be transparent? 

Let me pose my question again now so that we can marvel at the fact that 
no one dreams any longer of answering with the simple word "unconscious," 
because this word has not raised any questions for anyone for a long time. It 
has not raised any questions because people have endeavored to ensure that 
its use in Freud 's work appears only drowned in the midst of homonymous 
conceptions to which it owes nothing, even though they preceded it. 

These conceptions, far from overlapping, have the following feature in com- 
mon: they constitute a dualism in psychical functions, in which unconscious 
is opposed to conscious like instinctual to intellectual, automatic to controlled, 
intuitive to discursive, passionate to rationalized, and elementary to integrated. 
Such conceptions created by psychologists were, nevertheless, relatively 
impermeable to the accents of a natural harmony that the romantic notion of 
the soul had promoted regarding the same themes; for they preserved in the 
background an image of levels which, situating their object in the lower one, 
took it to be confined there and even contained by the upper agency, and which, 
in any case, imposed upon its effects — if they were to be accepted at the level 
of this agency — a filtering in which what they lost in energy they gained in 
"synthesis." 

The history of these presuppositions deserves attention in more than one 
respect, beginning with the political biases on which they are based and which 
accompany them; the latter refer us to nothing less than a social organicism, 
an organicism which — since the time of the unsurpassable simplicity with 
which it was articulated in the fable that earned the consul Menenius Agrippa 
an ovation — has hardly enriched its metaphor except on the basis of the con- 
scious role granted to the brain in the activities of psychological command in 
order to arrive at the now assured myth of the virtues of a "brain trust."* 

It would be no less curious to observe how the values masked here obliter- 443 

ate the notion of "automatism" in medical anthropology and pre-Freudian psy- 
chology, compared to its use by Aristotle, which is far more amenable to 
everything that has already been restored to it in the contemporary revolu- 
tion in machines. 

The use of the term "liberation," to designate the functions that are 
revealed in neurological disintegrations, clearly marks the values of conflict 
which preserve here — in other words, in a place where it has no business 
being — a truth of a different provenance. Is it this authentic provenance that 
Freud found anew in the conflict that he placed at the heart of the psychical 
dynamic that constitutes his discovery? 



370 Ecrits 

First, let us observe the locus in which the conflict is denoted, and then its 
function in reality [reel]. As for the first, we find it in symptoms that we 
approach only at the level at which we must not simply say that they are 
expressed but at which the subject articulates them in words — assuming it is 
important not to forget that this is the crux of the constant "chatting" to which 
analysis limits its means of action and even its modes of examination, a posi- 
tion which would render the entire technique inconceivable, including that 
applied to children, if it were not constitutive and instead merely manifest in 
the analysis of adults. 

This conflict is read and interpreted in the text [of this "chatting"], which 
must be enriched through the procedure of free association. In this sense, it is 
thus neither simply the obtuse pressure nor the static-like noise of the uncon- 
scious tendency that makes itself heard in this discourse, but the interferences 
of its voice, if I may introduce in this manner what I will have to elaborate on 
at length. 

What can we really say about this voice? Do we find anew here the imag- 
inary sources whose prestige romanticism incarnated in the Volksgeist, the spirit 
of the race? If that were the import of the symbolism by means of which Freud 
made headway in the analysis of symptoms while simultaneously defining their 
psychoanalytic meaning, we would be unable to see why Freud excommuni- 
cated Jung, or what authorizes Freud's followers to continue to anathematize 
Jung's followers. In fact, there is nothing more different than the reading that 
these two schools apply to the same object. What is funny here is that the 
Freudians proved unable to formulate such a clear difference in a satisfactory 
444 manner. Reveling in the words "scientific" and even "biological," which, like 

all words, can be spoken by all mouths, did not allow them to score any points 
along this pathway, even in the eyes of psychiatrists — their heart of hearts does 
not fail to warn them about the import of the use they themselves make of 
these words in such uncertain procedures. 

Here, however, the path was not simply traced out for us by Freud: he paved 
the whole road for us with the most sweeping, unvarying, and unmistakable 
assertions. Read his work, open his texts to any page, and you will rediscover 
the foundational stonework of this royal road. 

If the unconscious can be the object of a kind of reading that has shed light 
on so many mythical, poetic, religious, and ideological themes, it is not 
because it provides their genesis with the intermediary link of a sort of "sig- 
nificantness" [significativite] of nature in man, or even of a more universal 
signatura rerum that would be at the core of their possible resurgence in each 
individual. Psychoanalyzable symptoms, whether normal or pathological, can 
be distinguished not only from diagnostic indices but from all graspable forms 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching sji 

of pure expressiveness insofar as they are sustained by a structure that is iden- 
tical to the structure of language. By this I do not mean a structure that can 
be situated in some sort of supposedly generalized semiology which can be 
drawn from its limbo regions, but rather the structure of language as it man- 
ifests itself in what I will call "natural languages," those that are effectively 
spoken by human groups. 

This refers to the foundation of the structure, namely, to the duplicity that 
subjects the two registers that are bound together in it to different laws: the 
registers of the signifier and the signified. The word "register" here desig- 
nates two chains taken in their entirety; and the primary fact that they are dis- 
tinct aprioristically obviates any possibility of establishing a term-by-term 
equivalence between these registers, regardless of the size of the chains we 
examine. (In fact, such an equivalence turns out to be infinitely more com- 
plex than any one-to-one correspondence, the model of which is only con- 
ceivable between one signifying system and another signifying system, 
according to its definition as given in the mathematical theory of groups.) 

Thus, if symptoms can be read, it is because they themselves are already 445 

inscribed in a writing process. As particular unconscious formations, symp- 
toms are not significations, but their relation to a signifying structure that deter- 
mines them. If you will allow me this play on words, I would say that what is 
always at stake is the agreement between the subject and the verb. 

Indeed, what Freud's discovery brings us back to is the enormity of the 
order into which we have entered — into which we are, as it were, born a sec- 
ond time, in leaving behind the state which is rightly known as the infans state, 
for it is without speech — namely, the symbolic order constituted by language, 
and the moment of the concrete universal discourse and of all the furrows 
opened up by it at this time, in which we had to find lodging. 

For the main notion articulated here by my remarks goes well beyond the 
functional and even notional apprenticeship to which the narrow-minded hori- 
zon of pedagogues tried to reduce the relations between the individual and 
language. 

If man must truly find lodging in a "milieu" that has just as much a right 
to our consideration as the edges of reality \reel\ wrongly presumed to be the 
only ones that generate experience, Freud 's discovery shows us that the milieu 
of symbolism is consistent enough to even render inadequate the locution that 
would say of the lodging in question that it does not happen [va] all by itself, 
for what is serious is that it does happen all by itself, even when things are 
going [va] badly. 

In other words, the alienation that had been accurately described to us for 
some time, although on a somewhat panoramic level, as constitutive of the 



3J2. Ecrits 

relations among men on the basis of the relations between their labor and the 
forms assumed by their production — this alienation, as I was saying, now 
appears in some sense redoubled because it manifests itself in a particularity 
that joins with being in forms that must truly be qualified as unprogressive. 
However, this does not suffice to characterize this discovery as reactionary, 
regardless of the complicit uses to which it may have been put. One would do 
better to explain in this way the enraged sullenness of petit-bourgeois mores 
that seem to accompany a form of social progress that misrecognizes its main- 
spring in all cases: for presently, it is insofar as this progress is endured that it 
legitimates psychoanalysis, and it is insofar as it is put into action that it pro- 
scribes psychoanalysis. The result is that the effects of Freud's discovery have 
446 not yet gone beyond those that Diogenes expected from his lantern. 

There is nothing here, however, that contradicts the vast dialectic that makes 
us serfs of history by superimposing its waves on the brewing of our grand 
migrations, in what attaches each of us to a scrap of discourse that is more 
alive than his very life, if it is true that, as Goethe said, when "that which is 
without life is alive, it can also produce life." 1 

For it is also true that, having been unable to proffer this scrap of discourse 
from our throats, each of us is condemned to make himself into its living alpha- 
bet to trace out its fatal line. In other words, at every level of its marionette's 
game, it borrows some element so that the sequence of elements suffices to attest 
to a text without which the desire that is borne in it would not be indestructible. 

But this already overstates what we bring this attestation, whereas in its 
deportment it quite neglects us, transmitting, without our approval, its trans- 
formed cipher in our filial lineage. For even if there were no one to read it for 
as many centuries as was true of the hieroglyphics in the desert, it would remain 
as irreducible in its absolute nature as a signifier as the hieroglyphics would 
have remained amid the shifting sands and silence of the stars if no human 
being had come along to restore their signification. 

The following share in this irreducibility: the fragile smoke of dreams, like 
rebuses at the bottom of one 's dish (dreams and rebuses being considered by 
Freud to be similar in their elaboration); bungled actions, like typographical 
errors (both of which are successful in their signifierness rather than failed 
significations); and the frivolity of jokes — the specific joy of which, as Freud 
shows us on the basis of his technique, stems from the fact that they make us 
share in the dominance of the signifier over the significations of our fate that 
are the hardest to bear. 

Aren't these, in fact, the three registers that are taken up in the three pri- 
mordial works in which Freud discovered the laws of the unconscious? If you 
read them or reread them with this key, you will be surprised to note that Freud, 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching jj7j 

in enunciating these laws in detail, merely anticipated the laws that Ferdinand 

de Saussure was to bring to light several years later when he paved the way 447 

for modern linguistics. 

I would not dream of establishing a table of concordances here whose 
overly rapid construction would rightly be open to objection. I have indi- 
cated elsewhere what condensation, displacement, considerations of repre- 
sentability, and sequences (in which, interestingly enough, Freud at first 
sought the equivalent of a syntax) correspond to in the fundamental relation 
between the signified and the signifier. 

I simply want to indicate that the function of the signifier proves to pre- 
dominate in both the simplest and most complex symptoms, having an effect 
already at the level of puns. We see this, for example, in Freud's extraordinary 
analysis of the crux of the mechanism of forgetting (1898), in which the rela- 
tion between the symptom and the signifier seems to emerge fully armed from 
an unprecedented thought. 

Recall the broken tip of the memory's sword: the signor of the name Sig- 
norelli that Freud could not recall, Signorelli being the author of the famous 
fresco of the Antichrist in the Cathedral at Orvieto, even though the details 
of the fresco and the very self-portrait of the painter that is included in it seemed 
to present themselves all the more clearly to his mind. This is because signor^ 
along with Herr, the absolute Master, is aspirated and repressed by the apoc- 
alyptic breeze that blows in Freud 's unconscious in the echoes of the conver- 
sation he is in the process of carrying on: It is the disturbance, as he insists 
there, of a theme which has just emerged, by the preceding theme — which is, 
in fact, that of death for which one has assumed responsibility. 

Thus we find again here the constitutive condition that Freud imposes on 
a symptom in order for it to deserve to be called a "symptom" in the analytic 
sense of the term, which is that a memory element from a special, earlier sit- 
uation be taken up anew in order to articulate the current situation — in other 
words, that this memory element be unconsciously employed in it as a signi- 
fying element, with the effect of shaping the indeterminacy of the lived expe- 
rience into a tendentious signification. Doesn't that say it all? 

I will thus consider it sufficient to underscore the relationship between the 
effects of the unconscious and the twofold construction of synchrony and 
diachrony — which, as necessary as it is, it would be pedantic of me to elabo- 
rate on in such company — by providing a fable to bring out, through a sort 
of stereoscopy, both the style of the unconscious and the response that it is 
suitable to give it. 

If the unconscious indeed seems to give new support to the Biblical proverb 448 

which says that "The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth 



374 Ecrits 

are set on edge," it is on the basis of a readjustment that perhaps satisfies the 
nullity with which Jeremiah strikes it in citing it. 

For I will say that it is because it was said that "the sour grapes that were 
eaten by the fathers set the children's teeth on edge," that the child — for whom 
these grapes are indeed far too sour [Wtt], being those of the disappointment 
all too often brought him, as everyone knows, by the stork — dons anew his 
fox mask face. 

Of course, the lessons dispensed by a woman of genius who revolutionized 
our knowledge of the child's imaginary formations — the themes of which the 
initiated will recognize if I entertain the fanciful notion of calling her the tripe 
butcher — teach us to tell the child that he would like to rip those bad-object 
grapes out of the stork's guts and that this is why he is afraid of the fox. I am 
not saying no. But I have more confidence in La Fontaine 's fable to introduce 
us to the structures of myth, that is, to what necessitates the intervention of 
the frightening fourth party whose role, as a signifier in phobia, seems to be 
far more of a motor force to me. 

Leave this mechanism to our study and retain but the moral that this apo- 
logue finds in my wish that this reference to the holy text, Jeremiah 31.29, if 
it is not altogether inconceivable to encounter it in the unconscious, would not 
automatically (a serendipitous term here) make the analyst wonder about the 
person in the patient's "environment," as people have been putting it for some 
time now, whose telephone number it would be. 

Whether this joke* be good or bad, you will realize that I am not haphaz- 
ardly taking the risk of tying it so desperately to the letter, for it is through 
the mark of arbitrariness characteristic of the letter that the extraordinary con- 
tingency of accidents that give the unconscious its true face can be explained. 

This is why a slap — being passed down for several generations, born first 
of the violence of passion, but then becoming more and more enigmatic, being 
repeated in compulsive scenarios (the construction of which it seems to deter- 
mine in the manner of a story by Raymond Roussel) until it is no longer any- 
thing but an impulse punctuating with its syncopation an almost paranoiac 
449 distrust of women — will tell us more when it is inserted as a signifier into a 

context in which, to an eye glued to a peephole, figures who are less charac- 
terized by their real psychology than by profiles comparable to those of 
Tartaglia and Pantalone in the commedia dell'arte are found anew from one 
age to the next in a transformed framework, forming the figures of the tarot 
from which the choices (that were decisive in his destiny) of objects that are 
now charged for him with the most disconcerting of valences have really 
stemmed, albeit unbeknown to him. 

I will add that it is only in this way that these affinities, which are sources 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching sy5 

of disorders that cannot be mastered as long as they remain latent, can be 
recognized; and that a more or less decorative reduction of their paradox to 
object relations — prefabricated in the brains of twits who are better edu- 
cated in heartfelt letters to Dear Abby than in the law of the heart — can have 
no more effect on them than to attempt to subject them to the technique of 
providing corrective experiences for the emotions that are presumed to be 
their cause. 

For that is certainly what psychoanalysts came up with by the sole pathway 
of the shame that overcame them when — seeking recognition for their expe- 
rience, which is so completely spun, right from its very origins, from this so 
very veridical, fictional structure — they heard each other object, with the 
overblown gravity of the praetor, that it was not usual to impute such serious 
consequences to such minimal causes, and that even if one found general frame- 
works for them, one would all the more completely lose sight of the reason 
why only some suffer from them and not everyone. 

It is owing to their failure to explore the nature of the unconscious (even 
though the work was already prepared by Freud, simply by his having said 
that it is overdetermined, but who considers this term long enough to realize 
that it pertains only to the order of language?) that — the false shame of ana- 
lysts regarding the object of their activity begetting their aversion, this aver- 
sion begetting pretension, and pretension begetting both hypocrisy and 
impudence, whose proliferating lineage I will put a stop to here — they ended 
up confusing the apple of genital copulation with the orange of the oblative 
gift, and promoting the analyst's ego as the elective means by which to reduce 
the subject's straying from reality. This [reduction is supposed to be accom- 
plished] by no other means than through identification with an ego whose virtue 
can thus derive only from identification with another ego; but the latter, if it 
is that of another psychoanalyst, requires recurrence to some paragonized rela- 450 

tionship to reality [reel]. For nothing and no one, up until recently, it must be 
said, has ever emphasized or dreamt, regarding the selection of analysts and 
their training, of concerning himself with the glaringly obvious, conscious 
biases they have about the world they live in, or with their ignorance (which 
is manifest in this game of love [deduit]) of the rudiments of the classics that 
are required to orient them in the reality of their own operations. 

For the classics [humanites] sketch out the experience of man's relation to 
the signifier, and it is in this relation that the situations that generate what we 
call humanity are instituted. This is attested to by the fact that Freud, in the 
midst of full-scale scientism, was led not only to reconceptualize the Oedipus 
myth, but to promote in our time a myth of origin in the guise of a killing of 
the father that the primordial law is supposed to have perpetuated, according 



3J6 Ecrits 

to the formula with which I have connoted the entrance of symbolism into 
reality [reel]: "in giving it another meaning." 

With all the contingency that the instance of the signifier stamps in the uncon- 
scious, that instance merely sets out before us all the more surely the dimen- 
sion that no imaginable experience could enable us to deduce from the datum 
of a living immanence — namely, the question of being or, better stated, the 
question tout court, "why is one here?," by which the subject casts his sex and 
his existence as an enigma. 

This is what made me pen the following passage (on the same page on which 
I emphasized, "in the moving drama of neurosis [. . .], the absurd aspects of a 
disconcerted symbolization whose case of mistaken identity seems more 
derisory the more one delves into it"), restoring the import of paternal author- 
ity such as Jeremiah and Ezekiel in the above-cited passage show it to be at the 
core of the signifying pact, conjoining it as one must — in the Biblical terms 
used by the female author 2 of the American "Battle Hymn of the Republic" — 
with the curse of the mother: 

For the sour grape of speech by which the child received the authenti- 
cation of the nothingness of existence from a father too early, and the 
grapes of wrath that responded to the words of false hope with which 
his mother lured him in feeding him with the milk of her true despair, 
451 set his teeth on edge more than if he had been weaned from an imagi- 

nary jouissance or even deprived of some real attentions. 

Indeed, we will not be surprised to realize that both hysterical neurosis and 
obsessive neurosis presuppose in their structure the terms without which the 
subject cannot accede to the notion of his facticity with regard to his sex in the 
one and with regard to his existence in the other. Each of these structures con- 
stitutes a sort of response to this facticity. 

Responses which are subject, no doubt, to the condition that they be con- 
cretized in a behavior on the part of the subject that is a pantomime of it, but 
which do not, for all that, have any less right to the title "formed and articu- 
lated thoughts" that Freud gives to the following shorter-lasting unconscious 
formations: symptoms, dreams, and parapraxes. 

This is why it is a mistake to consider these responses to be simply illusory. 
They are imaginary only inasmuch as the truth brings out its fictional struc- 
ture in them. 

Asking why the neurotic "is deceived" [se trompe], even though the ques- 
tion is better oriented, all too often shows the flat-footed sliding in which 
analysts, in drifting toward the stupidity of some sort of reality [reel] func- 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching syy 

tion, have tumbled, along with Freud's predecessors, on a path that is 
designed instead for the hoof of a divine goat. 

Since, moreover, there is more wit in the written form of a word than in 
the use made of it by a pedant, the "se" in "se trompe" — which one would be 
wrong to isolate as representing the neurotic in a logical analysis of the verb 
that gives his passion a deponent form — warrants our stressing the fact that 
it indicates the path Freud did not back away from. It suffices to turn the ques- 
tion back on him by converting it into the following terms: "Who is the neu- 
rotic deceiving?" 

Let me repeat that this places us ten thousand leagues above the question 
"Who is the neurotic making fun of?" (a question whose target the impeni- 
tent neurologist cannot help but make himself). 

It must still be articulated that the other who is the partner of an intimate 
strategy here is not necessarily encountered among the individuals [in the neu- 
rotic's entourage], the only points currently accepted, since they are united by 
relational vectors on the maps onto which modern social psychology projects 
its schemas. 

This other can be the image that is more essential to the desire of the liv- 
ing being than the living being whom he must clutch [etreindre] in order to 452 
survive through struggle or love. For animal ethology confirms for us the order 
of lures by which nature proceeds in order to force its creatures into its path- 
ways. The fact that puppets, facsimiles, and mirrors can easily be substituted 
for the phenotype in order to catch desire in the trap of their emptiness speaks 
volumes about the function that can be played in man by this generic other, if 
one knows, moreover, that it is by subordinating his tendencies to it that man 
learns what it means to be what he calls their master. 

But whether a man or a woman, he may have nothing else to present to the 
real other than this imaginary other in which he has not recognized his being. 
How then can he attain his object(ive)? Through an exchange of places 
between his knights [cavaliers], I will say, therefore giving the queen [dame] 
responsibility for demonstrating the hysteric's step. 

For she can find this real other only in someone of her own sex, because it 
is in this beyond that she calls for what can incarnate her [lui donner corps], 
because she has not been able to take on a tangible form [prendre corps] any- 
where shy of it. In the absence of a response from this other, she will notify 
her of imprisonment for debt [contrainte par corps] by having her seized 
through the services of a straw man, the latter being a substitute for the imag- 
inary other in whom she has not so much alienated herself as she has remained 
in abeyance before him. 

This is how the hysteric comes to know herself [s 'eprouve] in the homage 



jy8 Ecrits 

paid to another woman, and offers up the woman in whom she adores her own 
mystery to the man whose role she takes without being able to enjoy it [en 
jouir]. In quest, without respite, of what it means to be a woman, she can but 
stave off [tromper] her desire, since this desire is the other's desire, never hav- 
ing achieved [satisfait a] the narcissistic identification that would have pre- 
pared her to satisfy the one and the other in the position of the object. 

Leaving the lady [dame] there now, I will return to the masculine as regards 
the subject of the obsessive strategy. Let me point out to you in passing that 
this game, which is so palpable in experience and that analysis makes mani- 
fest, has never before been articulated in the terms I will use. 

Here it is death that one must stave off [tromper] using a thousand ruses, 
and the other who is the subject's ego enters into the game as a prop for the 
challenge of the thousand feats which alone assure him of the success of his 
ruses. 

The assurance that the ruse derives from the feat turns against itself 
because of the confidence that the feat derives from the ruse. And this ruse — 
which is sustained by a supreme reason on the basis of a field outside of the 
453 subject that is called the unconscious — is also the ruse whose means and end 

escape him. For it is the ruse that holds the subject back, and even steals him 
away from the combat, as Venus did to Paris, making him always be elsewhere 
than where risks are run, and making him leave in his place but a shadow of 
himself; for he annuls in advance both gain and loss, by first abdicating the 
desire that is at stake. 

But the jouissance of which the subject is thus deprived is transferred to the 
imaginary other who assumes [assume] it like the jouissance of a spectacle: 
namely, the spectacle offered by the subject in the cage in which — with the 
participation of a few wild animals from reality [reel], that participation being 
obtained most often at their expense — he pursues the prowess of the classical 
equitation exercises by which he proves that he is alive. 

The fact that the point is nevertheless merely to prove himself, furtively 
conjures away death due to the challenge issued to it. But all the pleasure accrues 
to the other whom one cannot kick out of his place without death being let 
loose, all the while waiting for death to get the better of him. 

This is how death comes to take on the semblance of the imaginary other 
and how the real Other is reduced to death: a borderline figure who answers 
the question about [one 's] existence. 

The way out of these impasses is unthinkable, as I was saying, by any maneu- 
ver involving imaginary exchange, since that is what makes them impasses. 

The reintegration of the subject into his ego is certainly conceivable, and 
all the more so since, as opposed to the idea circulating in contemporary psy- 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching 379 

choanalysis, this ego is far from weak. We see this, moreover, in the assistance 
that the neurotic, whether hysteric or obsessive, obtains from his semblables 
who are presumed to be normal in these two tragedies — which are opposite 
in many respects, even though the second does not, it must be noted, exclude 
the first, since, even when elided, desire remains sexual (please excuse me for 
providing but these few indications here). 

But the path that this reintegration suggests we take is a mistake, since it 
can only lead the subject to an increased alienation from his desire, that is, to 
some form of inversion, insofar as his sex is in question. And insofar as his 
existence is in question, it can only lead the subject not to a destruction of the 
tendency (endlessly invoked in psychoanalysis since the author of the word 
"aphanisis" introduced its analytic nonsense, which was already palpable in 
its shamelessly scholarly form), but to a sort of stalemate of desire, which is 454 

not what people refer to as "ambivalence," but an impossibility to maneuver 
that stems from the very status of the strategy adopted. 

The result can be catastrophic here, even as it gives satisfaction. To illus- 
trate it, let us simply imagine what would happen if we treated a man with a 
limp by making him one-legged. In a society in which the rule is declared that 
one must hop everywhere, unless one has oneself carried by someone else 's 
legs, that might be appropriate and would leave the subject a good chance of 
winning group competitions like the human pyramid and centipede. 

But the solution must be sought elsewhere, that is, in the Other with a cap- 
ital 0, by which I designate a place that is essential to the structure of the 
symbolic. This Other is required in order to situate the question of the uncon- 
scious in truth, that is, in order to give it the structural term that makes the 
entire sequence of neurosis into a question and not a lure — a distinction which 
is highlighted in the fact that the subject uses his lures only in order to "skirt 
the question." 

As I have often said, this Other is merely the guarantor of Good Faith who 
is necessarily evoked, even by the Deceiver, as soon as what is at stake is no 
longer the ploys of struggle or desire but rather the pact of speech. 

It is only owing to the place of the Other that the analyst can receive the 
investiture of the transference that qualifies him to play his legitimate role in 
the subject's unconscious and to speak up there in interventions that are suited 
to a dialectic whose essential particularity is defined by the private realm. 

Any other place for the analyst leads him back to the dyadic relation, which 
has no other outcome than the dialectic of misrecognition, negation, and nar- 
cissistic alienation that Freud repeatedly indicates throughout his work to be 
the ego's doing. 

Now, contemporary psychoanalysis claims to inscribe its effects in the proj- 



380 Ecrits 

ect of strengthening the ego through a complete misunderstanding of the main- 
spring by which Freud introduced the study of the ego into his doctrine — 
namely, on the basis of narcissism and in order to expose therein the sum total 
of the subject's imaginary identifications. 

In a conception that is as diametrically opposed to this as it is retrograde, 

the ego is considered [by contemporary analysts] to constitute the apparatus 

of a relationship to reality, the static notion of which no longer bears any rela- 

455 tion to the reality principle that Freud instituted in a dialectical relationship 

with the pleasure principle. 

On that basis, people now aim only to eliminate the imaginary strayings 
[from reality] that are given rise to in the subject by the analytic situation, in 
the real terms of this situation which is considered to be "so simple." The fact 
that it provokes these strayings could make us doubt this simplicity, but it seems 
we must accept the idea that, from the real point of view, it is in effect sim- 
ple — simple enough, indeed, to appear somewhat closed, since there are no 
sacrifices that the analyst does not prove to be ready to make in order to keep 
it that way. 

Fortunately, these sacrifices are purely imaginary, but they run the gamut 
from offering oneself up as fodder to an imaginary fellatio — strange substi- 
tute for symbolic filiatio — to the abolition of the unfortunate distance from 
the object which creates all of the neurotic's problems. They go on to the 
pompous avowal of propitious complicities recognized in the countertrans- 
ference, on the basis of bemired erring concerning the conditions for the right- 
ing of dependency and the best pathway by which to compensate the patient 
for his frustration (a term that is not found in Freud's work). And let us not 
forget those still stranger excursions among the lost children, including a ref- 
erence to fear for example, which, in order to render any signifying elabora- 
tion of phobia null and void, would make do with an ideal anthropoid for its 
therapeutic distillation, if only the missing link of an adrenal discharge that 
strengthens the ego apparatus could manage to give it some verisimilitude. At 
this extreme of absurdity, the truth ordinarily manifests itself in a grimace — 
this is what, in fact, happens when one hears, in the same vein, a tearful appeal 
to goodness, oh my goodness! 

This frenzy in the theory manifests, in any case, analysis' resistance to the 
analyst, which one can merely advise the latter to take into account in order 
to make room for his own resistance in his analysands' experience. This, in 
praying heaven that he will be more clement toward them than toward analy- 
sis; for regarding the latter, he can say even today, like Anthony said of his 
mistress, she resisted me and so I assassinated her. 

His actual practice is, fortunately, not so somber. No one before whom the 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching 381 

phenomenon of the writing on the wall of the words "Mene, Tekel, Parsin" is 456 

constantly repeated at just the right moment, even if they are traced out in 
cuneiform characters, can indefinitely see in them but festoons and astragals. 
Even if he reads the phenomenon like one reads coffee grinds, what he reads 
will never be all that stupid, provided that he reads, even if he does so like 
Monsieur Jourdain, without knowing what reading is. 

For here there is no dearth of Mariette stones with which to rectify his read- 
ing, were it only in the "defenses," which are obvious, without seeking any 
further than the subject's verbalizations. Perhaps he will not know which way 
to turn in his attempt to account for these defenses; and he may get confused 
in his conception of the subtle bond that links the text of the palimpsest to the 
text which, underneath it, staining the ground, alters [reprend] its forms and 
shades. But he cannot stop a singular life of intentions from emerging from 
this exercise of discernment. He will thus be thrown, his reservations about it 
notwithstanding, into the heart of the perplexities of spiritual direction which 
have been elaborated over the centuries along the path of a demand for 
truth — a demand linked to a no doubt cruel personification of this Other, but 
which did a fairly good job of sounding the folds in striving to clear out every 
other affection from people 's loins and hearts. This suffices to force the psy- 
choanalyst to evolve in a region that academic psychology has never consid- 
ered except through a spy-glass. 

This is what makes it all the more enigmatic — and let us consider ourselves 
spared the effort — to question further, in the name of I know not what par- 
ody of social critique, a substructure that people take to be analogous to pro- 
duction but nonetheless natural; all the more enigmatic too that people then 
give themselves the task of bringing it all back into the fold of that psychol- 
ogy, qualified for the occasion as "general psychology," with the result of par- 
alyzing all research by reducing its problems to discordant terms, and even 
disfiguring analytic experience so thoroughly as to render it unutilizable. 

Psychoanalysis' responsibility for the sort of cancer constituted by the recur- 
rent alibis of psychologism is probably not very great, in a society that cov- 
ers over its irresponsibility with what the word "liberal" once signified. 

The real point is not that this sterilizing diversion of research and this 
degrading complicity of action are encouraged and sustained by chain reac- 
tion abdications of responsibility by critics in our culture. It is that they are 457 
maintained and protected in psychoanalysis, fed by the very institution which 
distinguishes, let us not forget, through Freud's express intention, the com- 
munity of analysts from a scientific society founded upon a common practice. 
I mean: the very international institution that Freud founded in order to pre- 
serve the transmission of his discovery and method. 



382 Ecrits 

Did he thus simply miss his target here? 

To answer that question, let me first point out that none of the "institutes" 
currently sponsored by this institution around the world has yet even tried to 
put together the curriculum of studies whose intention and extension Freud 
so often and in such detail defined as allowing for no substitute, even if it were 
tactically motivated — allowing for no integration into the official medical 
teaching, such as he could see it at his time, for example. 

The teaching in these institutes is merely professional teaching and, as such, 
fails to demonstrate in its programs either a plan or an aim that goes beyond 
those of a dental school, which are no doubt praiseworthy (this reference was 
not simply accepted but proffered by the interested parties themselves). 
Regarding the subject matter in question, however, this goes no further than 
the training of a qualified nurse or of a social worker, and those who offer 
training that is ordinarily and fortunately of a higher caliber, at least in 
Europe, always acquired it from a different origin. 

This much is undeniable. But the institutes are not the institution, and we 
should examine the history of the latter in order to grasp the authoritarian 
implications by which the extraordinary subjection to which Freud doomed 
his posterity is maintained — a posterity one hardly dares in this case to qual- 
ify as "spiritual." 

I have mentioned elsewhere the biographical documents that allow us to 
conclude that Freud deliberately wanted things to be this way; so much so that 
he approved in writing the structure by which those whom he charged with 
the highest responsibilities, by the mere fact of bequeathing his technique to 
them, would be censured by a secret college. 

It is not difficult to show how contemptuous Freud was of men whenever 
his mind confronted them with this task, which was considered by him to be 
beyond their capabilities. But his contempt was, at that time, consolidated by 
the fact that his first supporters repeatedly abandoned his views — a gauge in 
458 his eyes of their mental and moral inadequacies. Still, their minds and char- 

acters clearly far surpassed the best of the crowd that, since then, has spread 
throughout the world with his doctrine. Lack of faith, moreover, does not 
receive any sanction from this latter fact, since it necessarily occurs in the direc- 
tion of the effects that it presumes. 

Thus I believe that Freud got what he wanted here: a purely formal preser- 
vation of his message, which is manifest in the spirit of reverential authority 
in which the most obvious changes of that message are made. Indeed, even the 
slightest idiocy proffered in the insipid garbage constituted by the analytic lit- 
erature takes the trouble to base itself on a reference to Freud's work, such 
that, in many cases, if the author were not, in addition, an affiliated member 



Psychoanalysis and Its Teaching 3 S3 

of the institution, one could not find any other mark of analytic qualification 
in his work. 

It is thanks to this — and we must not doubt it, given the conditions of our 
historical era — that Freud 's fundamental concepts have remained unshakable. 
They owe their value as non-present signifiers to the fact of having remained 
largely misunderstood. 

I think that Freud wanted it to be this way until the day these concepts — 
whose considerable lead over the other human sciences I have already indi- 
cated — could finally be recognized in their ordering, which is flexible but 
impossible to destroy without detaching them from each other. 

This made inevitable both the repression that occurred of the truth they 
carried and the extraordinary cacophony that currently constitutes the dis- 
courses of the deaf to which groups give themselves over in one and the same 
institution, and to which individuals give themselves over in one and the same 
group. They do not agree among themselves about the meaning of a single 
one of the terms that they religiously apply to both the communication and 
direction of their experience. Their discourses nevertheless harbor those sorts 
of shameful manifestations of the truth that Freud referred to as the return of 
the repressed. 

A return to Freud, which provides the material for a teaching worthy of 
the name, can only be produced by the pathway by which the most hidden 
truth manifests itself in the revolutions of culture. This pathway is the only 
training that I can claim to transmit to those who follow me. It is called: a style. 

Notes 

1. Goethe, Wilhelm Meister (Hamburg: 2. Julia Ward Howe. 

Christian Wegner Verlag), vol. 2, Wilhelm 
Meisters Wanderjahre [Wilhelm Meister's Trav- 
els], 1, 2, p. 15. 



459 The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the 

Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 



For some . . . and "to others. 



We rarely celebrate the hundred-year anniversary of someone 's birth. To do 
so assumes that the work provides a continuation of the man, suggesting his 
survival. I will have to point to [denoncer] the appearances of this in my twofold 
subject here. 

Being a psychoanalyst myself and having long been confined to practicing 
analysis, I have seen that the latter can be elucidated by using the terms with 
which Freud defined it not as precepts but as concepts that are appropriate to 
these terms. 

Being thus engaged as much as possible, and certainly more than I planned, 
in psychoanalysis' history in action, I will say things here that will only appear 
daring if one confuses bias with perspective. 

My title is also, as I know, such as to put off people whom these things might 
touch, stopping them from reading on any further. Please excuse this malice: 
What I have become accustomed to discussing with these terms is the true sit- 
uation and valid training. Here [on the other hand] it is the real situation and 
the training actually provided that I would like to account for to a broader 
audience. 

Oh, how universally people would agree if I were to collapse psychoanalysis 
and training into each other in order to study the situation of the psychoana- 
lyst himself! And how edifying it would be to extend that study to his very 
lifestyle! I will simply touch on his relation to the world for an instant in order 
to introduce my topic. 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 s85 

We are aware of the question "How can anyone be a psychoanalyst?" — 
that still occasionally, when spoken by people of the world, makes us seem like 
Persians — to which are soon added the words "I wouldn't like to live with a 460 

psychoanalyst," the dear pensive woman reassuring us with them of what fate 
spares us. 

This ambiguous reverence is not as far removed as it may seem from the 
credence, which is no doubt more serious, that science lends us. For although 
scientists willingly note the relevance of certain facts that are supposed to con- 
cern us, it is from the outside and with a caveat related to the foreignness of our 
mental customs that they are willing to allow us. 

How could we not but be satisfied with this intellectual segregation, which 
is the fruit of the distance that we ourselves maintain on the basis of the incom- 
municability of our experience? 

Too bad that such segregation stymies a need for reinforcements, which is 
all too manifest in that it looks more or less anywhere; one can gauge in our 
discouraging literature the crumbs with which it contents itself. It will suffice 
here for me to mention the shudder of ease that went through the ranks of my 
elders when a disciple of the School, 1 having anointed himself with Pavlovism 
for the occasion, came to give them his licet. The prestige of the conditioned 
reflex and even of animal neurosis has not ceased since that time to wreak havoc 
in our reveries . . . Should some of them come to hear about what are known 
as the "human sciences," they will take to shouting and zealots on the stage 
conform to the commandments of intelligent figuration. 

Assuredly, this gesture — holding out one's hand but never shaking 
hands — can only have an internal reason, by which I mean that the explana- 
tion for it must be sought out in the situation of psychoanalysis rather than of 
psychoanalysts. For if I have ironically defined psychoanalysis as the treat- 
ment one expects from a psychoanalyst, it is nevertheless certainly psycho- 
analysis that determines the quality of the psychoanalyst. 

As I have said, there is in analysis a real situation that can be indicated if 
we relate the most common cliche that is produced in it — namely, that no new 
notion has been introduced in psychoanalysis since Freud — to the fact that 
one is so utterly obliged to resort to the notion of "frustration" as an expla- 
nation for everything that it has now become trivial. Yet one would be hard 
pressed to find the slightest trace of this term in all of Freud's work: for one 
only finds therein an opportunity to rectify it with the term Versagung, which 461 

implies renunciation. Versagung is thus distinguished from "frustration" by 
the entire difference between the symbolic and reality \reel\ a difference which 
I will assume I can take for granted with my readers. Freud 's work can be under- 
stood as giving it the weight of a new instance. 



386 Ecrits 

It is central here to point out this protruding sign of a diffuse discordance, 
which is in fact such that since Freud's terms are — so to speak, and we will 
see that this is not insignificant — left in place, each person designates some- 
thing different by them when he uses them. 

Indeed, there is nothing that better satisfies the requirements of the concept 
than Freud's terms — in other words, that is more identical to the structure of 
a relationship, namely, the analytic relationship, and to the thing that is 
grasped therein, namely, the signifier. This means that these concepts, which 
are powerfully interrelated, do not correspond to anything that is immedi- 
ately given to our intuition. Now this is precisely what is substituted for them 
point for point through an approximation which can only be gross, and which 
is such that one can compare that approximation to what the idea offeree or 
waves means to someone who has no knowledge of physics. 

This is why "transference" — regardless of one 's reservations about it and 
of what each person professes about it — remains, with the sticking power of 
common consent, identified with a feeling or a constellation of feelings felt 
by the patient, whereas by simply defining it as the kind of reproduction that 
occurs in analysis, it becomes clear that the greater part of it must remain unno- 
ticed by the subject. 

Similarly, and more insidiously still, "resistance" is associated with the oppo- 
sitional attitude that the word connotes in its ordinary usage, whereas Freud 
does not allow for equivocation here, qualifying, as he does, the most acci- 
dental events of the subject's life as resistance inasmuch as they pose obsta- 
cles to the analysis, if only by obviating his physical presence at his sessions. 

Of course, these trivial reminders remain opaque in this form. To know 
what transference is, one must know what happens in analysis. To know what 
happens in analysis, one must know where speech comes from. To know what 
resistance is, one must know what blocks the advent of speech, and it is not 
some individual disposition, but rather an imaginary interposition which goes 
462 beyond the subject's individuality, in that it structures his individualization as 

specified in the dyadic relation. 

Please excuse such an abstract formulation designed to orient our think- 
ing. It merely indicates, thus, like the general formula for gravitation in a text 
on the history of science, the foundations of our research. One cannot require 
psychoanalytic popularization to abstain from all such references. 

It is not, in fact, that conceptual rigor and developments in technique are 
lacking in psychoanalytic works. If they remain so sporadic and even ineffi- 
cient, it is because of a more profound problem that is due to a singular con- 
fusion in the precepts of practice. 

We know the asystematic attitude that is laid down as the crux of both the 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 383 

so-called fundamental rule of psychoanalysis, which requires the patient not 
to omit to mention anything that comes to mind — and, in order to do so, to give 
up all criticism and selection [of what comes to mind] — and of so-called free- 
floating attention, which Freud expressly recommends to the psychoanalyst 
as the attitude that simply corresponds to the fundamental rule. 

These two precepts, between which the fabric of psychoanalytic experi- 
ence is, as it were, stretched taut, bring out, it seems, clearly enough the fun- 
damental role of the subject's discourse and of its being listened to [son e'coute]. 

This is what psychoanalysts devoted themselves to in the golden age of psy- 
choanalysis, and it bore fruit. It was no accident that the crop they harvested — 
both from the ravings never before so permitted to roll off the tongue and 
from the slips never so offered up to an open ear — was so bountiful. 

But this very abundance of data, which were sources of knowledge, quickly 
led them to a knot that they managed to turn into an impasse. Having acquired 
these data, could they stop themselves from taking their bearings from them 
in navigating what they heard thereafter? In fact, the problem only arose for 
them once patients, who soon became just as familiar with this knowledge as 
they themselves were, served up to them pre-prepared interpretations that it 
was the analysts' task to provide — which is, it must be admitted, certainly the 
worst trick one can play on a soothsayer. 

No longer believing their two ears, they wanted to find anew the beyond 
that discourse had, in fact, always had, but they did not know what it was. This 
is why they invented for themselves a third ear, supposedly designed to per- 
ceive that beyond without intermediary. And to designate this immediacy of 463 
the transcendent, all the metaphors involving something compact were 
invoked — affect, lived experience, attitude, discharge, need for love, latent 
aggressiveness, character armor, and the system of defenses, let us leave aside 
the magician's shaker and engage in sleight of hand — the recognition of which 
was no longer accessible henceforth except to this je-ne-sais-quoi of which a 
clicking of the tongue is the last probation and which introduces into teach- 
ing an utterly new requirement: that of the inarticulate. 

After that, psychological fancies could be given free rein. This is not the 
place to write the history of the vagaries of fashion in psychoanalysis. They 
are hardly noticed by their supporters who are always captivated by the latest 
one: exhaustion of fantasies, instinctual regression, outwitting of defense, mop- 
ping up of anxiety, freeing up of aggression, identification with the analyst's 
strong ego, imaginary incorporation of his attributes, the dynamic, oh!, the 
dynamic in which the object-relation is reconstructed, and — according to the 
most recent echoes, the objective in which a discipline grounded in the sub- 
ject's history culminates — the hie etnunc couple. The latter's twin croaking is 



388 Ecrits 

ironic not simply because it makes us consult anew the pages of our forgotten 
Latin, but because it touches on a better brand of humanism by resuscitating 
the crows we are once again wasting our time gawking at [les corneilles aux- 
quelles nous revoild bayant\ no longer having anything but the itchings of our 
countertransference with which to deduce our auspices from the defiance of 
their oblique fluttering and the mocking shutter of their winks. 

This domain of our erring is not, however, pure smoke and mirrors: Its 
labyrinth is clearly the one whose thread we were given, but through a fluke 
this lost thread has dissipated the labyrinth's walls into reflections and — mak- 
ing us skip twenty centuries of mythology in breaking — has changed the cor- 
ridors of Daedalus into Ariosto's palace in which everything in your beloved 
or in the rival who defies you is but a lure. 

Freud is crystal clear here as he is everywhere else: All his efforts from 1897 
to 1914 2 were designed to distinguish between the imaginary and reality [reel] 
in the mechanisms of the unconscious. It is odd that this led psychoanalysts, 
at two different stages, first to make the imaginary into another reality [reel] 
and then, in our times, to find in the imaginary the norm of reality [reel]. 
464 Of course, the imaginary is not illusion and it gives food for thought. But 

what allowed Freud to track down the treasure in it, treasure that made his fol- 
lowers rich, is the symbolic determination to which the imaginary function is 
subordinated and which in Freud's work is always powerfully recalled, 
whether in discussions of the mechanism of forgetting a word or the structure 
of fetishism. 

By insisting that the analysis of neurosis always be brought back to the knot 
of the Oedipus complex, it can be said that Freud was precisely aiming to assure 
the imaginary in its symbolic concatenation, for the symbolic order requires 
at least three terms, and this forces the analyst not to forget the Other that is 
present between the two who, since they are there, do not envelop the one who 
speaks. 

But despite what Freud adds to this warning with his theory of the narcis- 
sistic mirage, psychoanalysts keep going ever further into the dyadic relation 
without being struck by the extravagance of the "introjection of the good 
object," by which they offer themselves up as a new kind of pelican, fortu- 
nately in a fantasmatic form, to the appetite of the consumer; nor are they 
stopped, in their texts celebrating this conception of analysis, by the doubts 
our nephews will form when wondering about the obscenities proffered by 
the Obscurantin brothers who found favor and faith in our novecento. 

In truth, the very notion of preoedipal analysis summarizes the disbanding 
of the necklace whereby one casts one's swine before pearls. Curiously 
enough, as the objectives of analysis lose their importance, ritual forms of tech- 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 j<%? 

nique become more highly valued. The coherence of this twofold movement 
in the new psychoanalysis is sensed by its zealots. And one of them — who, in 
pages by Michelet where the commode [chaise percee] is considered to be the 
centerpiece of the mores of the seventeenth century, found grist for his mill 
and material about which to wax strident right up to the no-holds-barred pro- 
fession that beauty is either scatophagous or is not at all — mustered no less 
courage when he announced that the conditions in which Freud 's final truth 
was produced were miraculous, and that we must not change one line of them: 
hence the counting of the minutes that the analyst spends in his seat, to which 
the subject's unconscious can adjust its habits. 

One could have foreseen the results, in which the imaginary, in order to 
rejoin reality \reel\ must find the no man's land* that provides access to it by 
effacing the border between them. Nonspatializing sensoriums indicate them, 
in which hallucination itself leads to difficulties at its limit. But an inventive 465 

emergence always anticipates man's calculations, and it was to everyone's 
pleasant surprise that a novice once recounted to us, in several modest and 
unembellished pages that were a great success for him, the elegant solution he 
had found to a recalcitrant case: "After so many years of analysis, my patient 
still could not smell me; one day my no-less-patient insistence prevailed: he 
perceived my odor. The cure lay there." 

We would be wrong to steer clear of such audacious moves, since they have 
their letters patent of nobility. "The Ingenious Dr. Swift" would not withhold 
his patronage here. By way of proof, consider The Grand Mystery, or Art of 
Meditating over an House of Office, Restored and UnveiUd, of which I will cite 
a passage on pages 5 and 6, not altering anything in it, where he praises the 
enlightenment one can draw from 

fecal Matter [which] (while the Excrement remains fresh) [provides] an 
exhalation of like Particles, which ascending through the Optic and Olfac- 
tory Nerves of any Person standing over it, excite by Sympathy, the like 
Affections in him, and inform him (if first duly instructed, in these pro- 
found Mysteries) of all that he can desire to know, concerning the Tem- 
per, Thoughts, nay Actions and Fortunes, of the Author of the Excrement. 

Swift continues, "I hope therefore, it will be no Offence to my Superiors," 
and we learn on page 10 that these are the "Doctors and Fellows of the Royal 
Society 9 who try to make this science a secret, 

that I propose, at the end of this little Treatise, to lodge the supreme 
Inspection of Necessary Houses, in Persons of more Learning and bet- 



390 Ecrits 

ter Judgment, than those who are now in possession of that Office. The 
Dignity of it is evident, [. . .] but it will be in much higher esteem, when 
occupied by Philosophers and Statesmen, who will be able, from the 
Taste, Smell, Tincture and Substance of the issue of our Body's Natural, 
to guess at the Constitution of the Body Politic, and to inform and warn 
the Government of all Plots, design'd Revolutions, and intestine Grum- 
blings of restless and aspiring Men. 

It would be vain of me to indulge in the Dean's cynical humor toward the 
end of his life, if not of his thought. But I would like to recall in passing, in a 
way that will be perceptible even to olfactory minds, the difference between 

466 a naturalist materialism and Freudian materialism; the latter, far from strip- 
ping us of our history, assures us of its permanence in its symbolic form, inde- 
pendently of the whims of our assent. 

This is not insignificant assuming it suitably represents the traits of the 
unconscious, which Freud asserted ever more strongly instead of softening 
them. Then why avoid the questions that the unconscious raises? 

If so-called free association gives us access to the unconscious, is it through 
a liberation that can be compared to a liberation from neurological automa- 
tisms? 

If the drives that are discovered there are located at the diencephalic level, 
or even at the rhinencephalic level, how can we understand the fact that they 
are structured in terms of language? 

For while their effects made themselves known in language from the out- 
set, their ruses, which we have since learned to recognize, nonetheless denote 
a linguistic procedure, in both their triviality and their finesse. 

The drives, which in dreams are acted out in almanac-type puns, also exude 
an air of Witi which touches even the most naive readers of the Traumdeu- 
tung [The Interpretation of Dreams']. For they are the same drives whose pres- 
ence separates witticisms from comedy, asserting themselves in them in a loftier 
alterity [aider e alterite\? 

But defense itself, whose negation suffices to indicate unconscious ambi- 
guity, makes use of forms that are no less rhetorical. Its modes are hard to con- 
ceptualize without resorting to the tropes and figures, those of speech or words 
that are as true as in Quintilian, 4 and which run the gamut from accismus and 
metonymy to catachresis and antiphrasis, and on to hypallage and even under- 
statement (recognizable in what Fenichel describes); the more the defense 
seems to us to be unconscious, the clearer this is. 

This obliges us to conclude that there is no stylistic form, however elabo- 

467 rate (and the unconscious abounds in such forms) — not excepting erudite, con- 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1 956 391 

cettist, and precious forms — that is disdained by the unconscious, any more 
than by the author of these lines: the Gongora of psychoanalysis, as people 
call him, at your service. 

Should this be such as to discourage us from rediscovering the uncon- 
scious in the peristalsis of a dog, however "Pavlovized" we may assume it to 
be, it is not designed to require analysts to immerse themselves in macaronic 
poetry or lessons in tablature for the courtly arts, even though it would make 
their debates far more pleasant. Still we could require them to be trained in a 
linguistic problematic, enough to allow them to distinguish symbolism from 
natural analogy, with which they habitually confuse it. 

Such training would cover the distinction between the signif ier and the sig- 
nified, rightly credited to Ferdinand de Saussure, because it is thanks to his 
teaching that it is now included in the foundations of the human sciences. Let 
us simply note that, apart from precursors like Baudouin de Courtenay, this 
distinction was perfectly clear to the ancients, and was attested to in the works 
of Quintilian and St. Augustine. 

In their texts, the primacy of the signifier over the signified already seems 
inescapable in any discourse on language, even if this idea is so utterly dis- 
concerting that it has not been braved by linguists in our own times. 

Only psychoanalysis is capable of forcing us to recognize this primacy in 
our thinking, by demonstrating that the signifier does without any cogitation, 
even the least reflexive, in creating indubitable groupings in the significations 
that enslave the subject and, furthermore, in manifesting itself in him in this 
alienating intrusion through which the notion of "symptom" in analysis takes 
on an emergent meaning: the meaning of the signifier that connotes the sub- 
ject's relation to the signifier. 

Thus I will say that Freud 's discovery is the truth that the truth never loses 
its rights, and that, although it may hide its claims even in the domain destined 
to the immediacy of instincts, its register alone allows us to conceptualize the 
inextinguishable duration of desire, a feature of the unconscious which is hardly 
the least paradoxical, even though Freud never gives it up. 

But in order to obviate any misunderstanding, let me make it clear that this 
register of truth must be followed to the letter [a la lettre]; in other words, sym- 
bolic determination, which Freud calls overdetermination, must be consid- 468 
ered first as a product of syntax, if one wishes to grasp its analogical effects. 
For these effects occur from the text to meaning, rather than imposing their 
meaning on the text. This can be seen in the truly senseless desires that are the 
least twisted of these effects. 

Combinatory logic gives us the most radical form of this symbolic deter- 
mination, and we must learn how to give up the naive requirement that would 



39* Ecrits 

have us locate its origin in the vicissitudes of the cerebral organization that 
occasionally reflects it. 

This is a healthy rectification, however offensive it may be to psychologi- 
cal bias. And to defend it, it does not seem excessive to recall all the loci in 
which the symbolic order finds its vehicle, were it only in the peopled silence 
of the universe that has arisen from physics. Human industry, which the sym- 
bolic order determines far more than it serves, exists not merely to preserve 
it but already visibly extends it beyond that part of it that man masters; and 
the two kilos of language whose presence I can point to here on the table seem 
less inert when we find them carried on the crisscrossing airwaves of our broad- 
casts — to open the very ears of the deaf to the truth that Rabelais was able to 
encompass in his apologue of the frozen words. 

A psychoanalyst should find assurance in the obvious fact that man is, prior 
to his birth and beyond his death, caught up in the symbolic chain, a chain that 
founded his lineage before his history was embroidered upon it. He must work 
at the idea that it is in his very being — in his "total personality," as it is com- 
ically put — that man is in fact considered to be a whole, but like a pawn, in 
the play of the signifier, and this is so even before its rules are transmitted to 
him, insofar as he ends up discovering them; this order of priorities must be 
understood as a logical order, that is, as forever current. 

No prehistory allows us to efface the cut brought about by the heteronomy 
of the symbolic. On the contrary, everything it gives us merely deepens the 
cut: tools whose serial form directs our attention more toward the ritual of 
their fabrication than toward the uses to which they were put; piles that show 
nothing other than the symbol anticipating the symbolic's entry into the 
world; and graves which, beyond any explanation that we can dream up for 
them, are edifices unknown to nature. 
469 The fact that the symbolic is located outside of man is the very notion of 

the unconscious. And Freud constantly proved that he stuck to it as if it were 
the very crux of his experience. 

This is witnessed by the point at which he made a clean break with Jung, 
in other words, when the latter published his Study of the Transformations and 
Symbolisms of the Libido. For the archetype makes the symbol into the blos- 
soming of the soul, and that is that; the fact that the unconscious may be both 
individual and collective had little importance to the man who, explicitly in 
his Moses and Monotheism, and implicitly in his Totem and Taboo, admits that 
a forgotten drama comes down through the ages in the unconscious. But what 
we must say, following Aristotle 's lead, is that it is not the soul that speaks but 
man who speaks with his soul, on the condition that we add that he receives 
the language he speaks and that, in order to bear it, he sinks more into it than 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 jipj 

his soul: he sinks into it his very instincts whose ground resonates in the depths 
only to throw back the signifier's echo. And when this echo comes back to the 
surface, the speaker marvels at it and raises up the praise of eternal romanti- 
cism. "Spricht die Seek, so spricht . . ." "The soul speaks, listen to it . . ." "ach/ 
schon die Seele nicht mehr . . ." 5 You can listen to it; the illusion will not last 
long. You can ask Ernest Jones about it instead, one of the rare disciples who 
attempted to articulate something about symbolism that held water: he will 
tell you the fate of the special Commission instituted to give body to his study 
at the 1910 Congress. 6 

If, moreover, we consider Freud's enduring preference for his Totem and 
Taboo and the fact that he obstinately opposed every attempt to relativize the 
killing of the father, which he considered to be the inaugural drama of 
humanity, we can see that what he maintained thereby was the primordial 
nature of the signifier that is represented by paternity beyond the attributes 
that it accumulates, the link of generation being but one part of it. Its import 
as a signifier appears unequivocally in the assertion produced in this way that 
the true father — that is, the symbolic father — is the dead father. And the 
connection between paternity and death, which Freud explicitly highlights in 
many case discussions, allows us to see from whence this signifier garners its 
primordial rank. 

Hammering away like this in order to reestablish a perspective will not, 470 

however, give the psychoanalyst the mental means with which to operate in 
the field this perspective delimits. Of course, it is not a question of mental 
level, but rather of the fact that the symbolic order can be approached only 
through its own apparatus. Just as you cannot do algebra without knowing 
how to write, you cannot handle or parry even the slightest signifying effect 
without at least suspecting what is implied by writing. 

Must it be the case that the views of those that the Traumdeutung 1 led to 
analysis were so short-sighted, or that the hair on the Medusa's head that it 
presented to them was too long? What is this new interpretation of dreams if 
not an attempt to redirect the oneiromancer to the sole but irrefutable foun- 
dation of all mantic — namely, the battery of its material? I do not mean the 
matter of the said battery, but rather its ordinal finity. Sticks thrown on the 
ground or the illustrious swords of the Tarot, the simple game of odds or evens 
or the supreme kouas of the / Ching — in you every possible fate, every con- 
ceivable debt, can be summarized, for nothing in you is worthwhile except the 
combinatory in which the giant of language takes on anew his stature by being 
suddenly delivered from the Gulliverian bonds of signification. If dreams are 
still more suitable to it, it is because the elaboration produced by your games 
is at work in their development: "Only the dream's elaboration interests us," 



394 Merits 

Freud says, and again, "A dream is a rebus." What would he have had to add 
so that we would stop expecting dreams to deliver up the words of the soul? 
Have the sentences of a rebus ever had the slightest meaning, and does its inter- 
est — that is, the interest we take in its deciphering — not derive from the fact 
that the signification manifest in its images falls away, having no other scope 
than that of conveying the signifier that is disguised in it? 

This would even warrant that I shed psychoanalysis' reflected light back 
onto the sources that have illuminated my discussion here, by inciting linguists 
to strike from their papers the illusory locution which makes them speak, 
pleonastically moreover, of "ideographic" writing. Writing, like dreams, can 
be figurative, but, like language, it is always symbolically articulated — 
namely, just like language, it is phonemic, and indeed phonetic as soon as it is 
read. 

Will, lastly, slips of the tongue, when they are stripped bare, make us grasp 
471 what is meant by the fact that they allow themselves to be summed up in the 

following formulation: that in slips discourse manages to overcome feigned 
significations? 

Will we manage thereby to rip the soothsayer away from his desire for 
entrails and bring him back to the goal of free-floating attention? Even after 
analysts have spent some fifty million hours finding both their ease and dis- 
ease in it, it seems that no one has wondered what free-floating attention is. 

For although Freud proposed this sort of attention as the counterpart 8 
(Gegenstiick) of free association, the term "free-floating" does not imply fluc- 
tuation, but rather evenness of level — this is emphasized by the German term, 
" gleichschwebende" 

Let us note, moreover, that the third ear, which I used to deny the existence 
of the uncertain beyonds of an occult sense, is nevertheless in fact the inven- 
tion of an author, Theodor Reik, who is rather sensible in his tendency to adapt 
himself to a realm that is shy of speech. 

But what need can an analyst have for an extra ear, when it sometimes seems 
that two are already too many, since he runs headlong into the fundamental 
misunderstanding brought on by the relationship of understanding? I repeat- 
edly tell my students: "Don't try to understand!" and leave this nauseating 
category to Karl Jaspers and his consorts. May one of your ears become as 
deaf as the other one must be acute. And that is the one that you should lend 
to listen for sounds and phonemes, words, locutions, and sentences, not for- 
getting pauses, scansions, cuts, periods, and parallelisms, for it is in these that 
the word-for-word transcription can be prepared, without which analytic intu- 
ition has no basis or object. 

It is in this way that the speech that offers itself up to your agreement — as 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 395 

the commonplace belief would have it and with an obviousness that is as fal- 
lacious as its truth is attractive, delivering itself up only at a second moment 
in the following form, "the number two rejoices in being odd" (and it is quite 
right to rejoice in it, but it can be faulted for not being able to say why) 9 — 
finds at the unconscious level its most signifying import, purified of its equiv- 472 

ocations, when it is translated as: "the two numbers that have no equal are 
waiting for Godot." 

I think I have gotten my point across, and it should be clear that the inter- 
est I am showing here in mantic is not designed to approve of the fortune- 
teller style that sets the tone in the theory of instincts. 

On the contrary, the study of symbolic determination would allow us to 
reduce, if not simultaneously isolate, what psychoanalytic experience provides 
in the way of positive data: and this is not insignificant. 

The theory of narcissism and that of the ego, in the way in which Freud 
oriented the latter in his second topography, are data that extend the most mod- 
ern research in natural ethology (under the very heading of the theory of 
instincts). 

But even their solidarity, in which they are grounded, is misrecognized, and 
the theory of the ego is no longer anything but an enormous error: a return 
to what intuitive psychology itself rejected. 

For the lack of theoretical sophistication that I am pointing to in analytic 
doctrine brings us to the chink in our teaching — which reciprocally corre- 
sponds to that lack of theoretical sophistication — namely, to the second topic 
of my talk to which I shifted a moment ago. 

Because psychoanalytic technique concerns the subject's relation to the 
signifier, the knowledge it has conquered can only be situated as organized 
[s'ordonner] around that. 

This gives it its place in the grouping that is asserting itself as the order of 
the conjectural sciences. 

For conjecture is not the improbable: strategy can order it into certainty. 
Similarly, the subjective is not the value of feeling with which it is often con- 
fused: the laws of inter subjectivity are mathematical. 

It is in this order that the notions of structure are edified, failing which the 
view from the inside of the neuroses and the attempt to deal with the psychoses 
remain fruitless. 

The perspective of such research requires training that reserves a very sub- 473 

stantial role for language. This is what Freud expressly formulated in his pro- 
gram for an ideal Institute. After what I have been saying here, one should not 
be surprised that this program includes the whole set of philological studies. 10 

Here, as earlier, we can begin with a brutal contrast, by noting that noth- 



396 Ecrits 

ing in any of the Institutes affiliated with his name has ever even been sketched 
out in this direction. 

Since our agenda here is to discuss Freud's legacy, let me turn to what has 
become of it in the present state of affairs. 

History shows us the concern that guided Freud in organizing the IPA, or 
International Psychoanalytical Association, especially starting in 1912, as he 
supported the form of authority that was to prevail in it, when, in spelling out 
the details of the institutions, he determined how powers would be exercised 
and transmitted. It was the concern, which is clearly avowed in his corre- 
spondence, to ensure that his thought would be maintained in its complete- 
ness when he himself would no longer be there to defend it. Jung's defection, 
which was more painful to Freud than all the others it followed, posed an 
anxiety-provoking problem related to such maintenance. In order to deal 
with it, Freud accepted what was offered to him at that moment: namely, the 
idea, which came to a sort of young guard who aspired to veteran status, of 
overseeing the said maintenance of Freud's thought at the heart of the IPA not 
only through a secret solidarity but through an unknown action. 

The carte blanche that Freud granted this project, 1 ] and the security he found 
474 in it that calmed him, 12 are attested to in documents by his biographer, him- 

self the last survivor of this secret Committee called the Committee of the Seven 
Rings, whose existence had been announced by the late Hanns Sachs. Their 
theoretical import and their actual consequences cannot be veiled by the 
amused qualification of romanticism 13 with which Freud sweetens the pill of 
one of these consequences, and the striking incident that Jones rushes to pin 
on the others, namely, the letter written behind Jones' back to Freud by Fer- 
enczi, which read as follows: Jones, not being Jewish, will never be liberated 
enough to be sure in this game; "you must keep Jones constantly under your 
eye and cut off his line of retreat." 14 

The secret history of the IPA has not been written nor should it be. Its effects 
are of no interest to those who are in on history's secret. And history's secret 
must not be confused with the conflicts, violence, and aberrations that con- 
stitute its fable. The question that Freud raised, whether analysts as a whole 
live up to the standard of normality that they demand of their patients, is reg- 
ularly cited in this context and gives analysts an opportunity to show their 
bravery. It is surprising that the authors of these jibes do not see the ruse in it 
themselves: anecdote, here as elsewhere, dissimulates structure. 

The clearest characteristics of [the IPA's] structure are the very ones that 
make it invisible, and not only to those who are immersed in it: This is true of 
the initiation which marks one's access to it, and which, being in our time 
"rather unique," as they say, is actually flaunted; it is also true of the "Com- 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1 956 3.97 

internism" whose features are shown by its internal style and whose more ordi- 
nary prestige is not disavowed there. 

And the steering wheel, which is more or less weighed down with worldly 
goods that determine its direction, is a fact of reality which does not in itself 
have to find a remedy; only the spiritual extraterritoriality it embodies 
deserves sanction. The paradox of the idea that came to me on this point is 
better kept until later. 15 

Given my aim, we must begin with the remark, which has never before 
been made, to the best of my knowledge, that Freud started the IPA along its 
path ten years before he became interested, as we see in Group Psychology and 
the Analysis of the Ego, in the mechanisms that make an organic group, such 475 

as the Church or the army, like a crowd. The clear partiality of his exploration 
there is justified by his fundamental discovery of the identification of each 
individual's ego with the same ideal image, the mirage of which is borne by 
the personality of the leader. A sensational discovery, which slightly antici- 
pated the fascistic organizations that rendered it obvious. 

Had he become attentive to these effects earlier on, 16 Freud would no doubt 
have wondered about the field left to the dominance of the function of the 
boss*, in an organization which, in order to sustain his very speech, certainly 
could, as in the models he studied, strike a balance by resorting to a symbolic 
link — that is, to a tradition and a discipline — but not in the same manner, since 
the objective of tradition and discipline in psychoanalysis is to call into ques- 
tion their very crux, along with man's relation to speech. 

Indeed, what is at stake here is nothing less than the problem of the ego's 
relations to truth. For this effect of imaginary identification (by which can be 
gauged, in passing, the distance at which the outmoded usages remain from it 
in which the notion of the ego is debased in psychoanalysis) boils down to the 
structure of the ego in its greatest generality. Here Freud provides us with the 
positive mainspring of the moment of consciousness whose dialectical struc- 
ture Hegel deduced as a phenomenon of infatuation. 

This is why I will give the name "Sufficiency" \Suffisance\ to the sole [unique] 
rank in the psychoanalytic hierarchy. For, as opposed to what a foolish peo- 
ple imagines on the basis of appearances, this hierarchy has only one rank and 
it is in this respect that it can legitimately call itself democratic — at least if we 
refer to the meaning this term took on in Antiquity's city states, in which 
democracy included only the masters. 

Sufficiency thus is in itself beyond all proof. It need not suffice for any- 
thing since it suffices unto itself. 

In order to be passed on — and not having at its disposal the law of blood 
that implies generation or the law of adoption that presupposes marriage — it 



398 Ecrits 

has at its disposal only the pathway of imaginary reproduction which, through 

476 a form of facsimile analogous to printing, allows it to print, as it were, a cer- 
tain number of copies whereby the one [unique] becomes plural. 

This form of multiplication finds favorable affinities in this situation. For 
let us not forget that entry into the community of analysts is subjected to the 
condition of undergoing a training analysis; and there surely must be some 
reason why the theory of the end of analysis as identification with the ana- 
lyst's ego first saw the light of day in the circle of training analysts. 

But once the Sufficiencies have constituted an analytic Society, and new 
members are chosen through nomination by the existing members, the notion 
of class forces itself upon us; it can only appear in the class from which their 
choice of new members is made by defining it in opposition to their own class. 

The opposition of insufficiency, which is suggested by a pure formalism, 
is dialectically untenable. The slightest taking on [assomption] of sufficiency 
ejects insufficiency from its field, but the thought of insufficiency as a cate- 
gory of being thus radically excludes Sufficiency from all the others. It is the 
one or the other, incompatibly. 

We need a category that, while not implying a lack of dignity, indicates that 
its place is outside of sufficiency, and that one becomes qualified to occupy it 
by staying there. The name "Little Shoes," for those who situate themselves 
there, thus seems appropriate to me; for, apart from the fact that it provides 
enough of an image so that one can distinguish them easily in an assembly, it 
defines them by this very staying: they are always in their little shoes and they 
manifest a sufficiency veiled in its opposition to Sufficiency in the very fact 
that they make do with this. 

There nevertheless remains a hiatus between the position thus designated 
and Sufficiency that no transition can fill. And the rank that simulates it in the 
hierarchy is nothing but trompe l'oeil there. 

For however little we think about it, we will see that there are not lesser or 
greater degrees of Sufficiency. Either one suffices or one does not; this is already 
true when it is a question of sufficing for this or that, but is even truer when one 
must suffice for sufficiency. Thus Sufficiency cannot be attained, either de facto 
or dejure^ without one having already attained it. But one must nevertheless get 
there, and that itself supplies us with the intermediate category. 

477 Yet it is a category that remains empty. Indeed, it cannot be filled but merely 
inhabited: it is a station in which one sometimes does what one has to, and 
about which one can even say that on the whole one does what needs to be 
done — but these very locutions betray the irreducible limit to which one's 
approach to it is doomed. I will label this approximation by calling those who 
occupy it, not the necessary, but the "Truly Necessary "[Bien-Necessaires\. 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1 956 j,29 

What is the purpose of the Truly Necessary in the organization? To 
highlight the use of speech, about which, as you can see, I have not yet spo- 
ken. Indeed, I have thus far left aside the paradox — which is difficult to 
understand in a community whose responsibility it is to maintain a certain 
discourse — that in the community's core classes, including Sufficiencies 
and Little Shoes, silence is the true master and its temple rests on two taci- 
turn columns. 

What could the Little Shoes in fact say? Ask questions? They do not ask 
them for three reasons, two of which they are aware of. 

The first reason is that they are in analysis and a good analysand [analyse] 
does not ask questions — a formulation which must be understood at the same 
preemptory level at which the proverb "a penny saved is a penny earned" ends 
the reply to a demand for an accounting considered to be importunate in a 
famous pastiche by Claudel. 

The second reason is that it is strictly impossible to pose a sensible question 
in the language that has currency in this community, and one would have to 
have the shamelessness of the Huron or the monstrous gumption of the child 
to whom the Emperor is naked to point this out; this would, nevertheless, be 
the only way to open things up for discussion there. 

The Little Shoes are unaware of the third reason, under ordinary condi- 
tions, and I will only present it at the end of my paper. 

Of what use could it be to the Sufficiencies to speak? Sufficing unto them- 
selves, they have nothing to say to each other, and faced with the silence of 
the Little Shoes, they have no one to answer. 

This is why it is left to the Truly Necessary to lodge an appeal against this 
silence by filling it with their discourse. They do not fail to do so, still less 
because virtually nothing can impede this discourse once it is set in motion. 
Freed, as I have said, from its own logic, what is found there does not shock 478 

anyone, what is encountered does not offend anyone, and what is excluded is 
not done so conclusively. "Yes" has a compatibility with "no" there which is 
not that of balance but of superfluousness. We might as well say that the two 
go hand in hand, or, on the other hand, since that goes without saying, we 
might as well not say it. 

This dialectic is of the same ilk as the prose by the would-be gentleman — 
it is a dialectic unknown to itself — but it answers to an aspiration, that of the 
prestidigitator who becomes worried when he is applauded for having pulled 
a rabbit out of his hat, for he himself was surprised to find the rabbit in it. He 
wonders why [pourquoi] he succeeded in his trick, and, looking for the answer 
in the possible reasons that could be given for the rabbit's presence, he finds 
them equally worthy explanations and lets them all stand, in an indifference 



400 Ecrits 

born of the presentiment he has that they do not get at what concerns him, 
which is to determine in what way [en quoi\ his trick was successful. 

Thus the Truly Necessary discourse does not suffice to render questions 
superfluous, but proves to be superfluous in being sufficient for the task. 

The superfluousness that translates this [station] shy of sufficiency cannot 
go to the crux of its chink if Sufficiency itself does not answer it with the super- 
fluousness of its excess. 

This is the function of the members of the organization whom I will call 
"Beatitudes," borrowing this name from the Stoic and Epicurean sects that, 
as we know, strove to attain the satisfaction of sufficiency. 

The Beatitudes are the spokesmen for the Sufficiencies, and this very del- 
egation of power suggests that it is important for us to reconsider the silence 
of the Sufficiencies, having considered we were done with them a bit hastily. 

The Sufficiencies, as I said without insisting, have nothing to say to each 
other. This is worth explaining. 

The ideal of sufficiency, in associations that are commanded by this ideal, 
hardly encourages speech, but it imposes on them a constraint [sujetion] whose 
effects are uniform. 17 Contrary to what people imagine, in collective identifi- 
cation it is by an individual thread that subjects are informed; this informa- 
tion is shared only because it comes from the same source. Freud emphasized 
479 that what is at stake is the identity that narcissistic idealization carries in itself, 

and allows us thus to complete the image that serves the function of the object 
there with a schematic trait. 

But one can foresee the kind of relations on which such a group will rest in 
the effects produced by narcissistic identification in couples, whether frater- 
nal jealousy or conjugal acrimony. Regarding the conquest of power, ample 
use has been made of the Schadenfreude garnered by the oppressed party 
through identification with the Filhrer. In a quest for knowledge, a certain 
refusal on the scale of being, beyond the object, is the feeling that most solidly 
ties the troop together: this feeling is knowledge in a pathetic form; people 
commune in it without communicating, and it is called hatred. 

Of course, a "good object," as they put it, can be promoted to such subjec- 
tion functions, but this image, which makes dogs faithful, makes men tyranni- 
cal — for it is Eros, whose true face Plato showed in the phasmid that extends 
its wings over the destroyed polis, by which the hounded soul is panic-stricken. 

To bring this talk back to its present proportions, I will take the hand that 
Valery holds out to Freud when, speaking of these "uniques" who people what 
he calls the "delusional professions," 18 Valery spins a metaphor of two elec- 
trons whose edifying music he hears buzzing in the atom of their unicity: the 
one who sings, "There is only me, me, me," and the other who shouts, "But 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 401 

there is this one, that one . . . and this Other too." For, as the author adds, "the 
name changes often enough." 

This is why the "number ones"* that proliferate here turn out, to an expert 
gaze, to be so many number twos. 

Which is to say that the trap [godant] they fall into as such, the strangeness 
of which I mentioned earlier, is carried to a degree of exultation here which is 
not rendered any more convincing just because it is general, but which will 
perhaps be clarified by its repercussion. 

Where will the fact that the number two rejoices in being odd lead it in this 480 

meeting [reunion] — that we can legitimately arrange in a single [unique] row 
on the sole condition of connecting each of them in single file to the one that 
precedes it? 

It is plain to see that the number three must descend like God from the 
machine in order to engender the alternation that will give birth to the odd, 
before the latter can exercise its seductive powers on the number two. 

This remark already indicates the crux of the matter, but we will see it more 
clearly in a developed form. 

In the series thus constituted, we can in fact say that an odd place is occupied 
by half of the number twos, but since the series has no head, closing on itself 
instead like a crown, nothing and no one can designate which half it is. Thus the 
number twos, every man for himself and God for us all, can rightfully claim to 
be odd, although everyone is sure that half of them cannot be odd. But is this 
necessarily true? No, it is not, for if half plus one of the number twos can say 
they are of odd rank, that suffices for, having gone too far, there to be no more 
limits, and for all the number twos, no matter which one we use to begin the 
series, to be indisputably caught in the counted odd [impair denombre]. 

Here we see the function of the "One Extra" [Un En Plus], but we also see 
that it must be "Just a One" [Un Sans Plus], for every "One More" [UnEncore] 
would be "One Too Many" [Un De Trop], making all the number twos fall 
back into a presumption that remains without remission, it being known to be 
irremediable. 

This One Extra was already in the number three, as a preliminary condi- 
tion of the series in which it got us to see it more clearly. And this demon- 
strates that the joy of Sufficiency's number two requires that its duality exceed 
itself in this One Extra, and that Beatitude, being the excess of Sufficiency, 
thus has its place outside of it. 

But this One Extra that each of the Beatitudes thus is, only being able to be 
Just a One, is doomed by its position to monologue. And that is why, unlike 
the Sufficiencies who have nothing to say to each other, the Beatitudes speak 
to each other, but not in order to say more about it to each other. 



402 Ecrits 

For this One Extra, with which the number three joins [se re'unit], is 
assuredly the mediation of Speech, but by maintaining itself in the Other from 

481 which it should detach itself in order to return to the Same, it does not form 
in its mouth anything but this form which trumpets: the O of an Oracle, that 
only the appetite of the Truly Necessary can eat away at so as to make of it 
the Uof a Verdict. 

But the two superfluities that are conjugated here — by the connivance of 
the chink in the Inconsistent Discourse with the excess of the Unexplained 
Discourse — still do not correspond to each other. No more than can as many 
marbles as one might posit make a strainer that is apt for serving soup. 

This is why analytic teaching has been able to retain almost nothing in its 
sieve of the enormous quantity of experience that has traversed psychoanaly- 
sis (for here we cannot say that people have gotten nothing out of its milk billy 
goat). 19 An observation that anyone who knows anything about analysis will 
agree with, deep down inside, even if he feels the need, when confronted with 
my diatribe, to seek the refuge taken by one of those natures whose spine- 
lessness teaches and leads him in equal measures, when in my company he 
came out one day with the following conclusion: "There is no field in which 
one exposes oneself 'more totally than in speaking about psychoanalysis." 

Such is the organization that constrains Speech to wind its way between 
two walls of silence, in order to conclude a marriage between confusion and 
arbitrariness. Speech adapts to this for reasons of advancement: the Suffi- 
ciencies regulate the entrance of the Little Shoes into their periphery, and the 
Beatitudes tell them which of the Little Shoes will become the Truly Neces- 
sary; conversely, it is by addressing the Beatitudes that the Truly Necessary 
will arrive at Sufficiency, and the Sufficiencies respond to them by drawing 
new Beatitudes from their bosom. 

An attentive observer here would count all the forms of indirect fire or of 
this type of winding one 's way known as zigzagging, I might as well say those 
that provoke the assailant to act invisible. 

This is the flaw in the system as a means of selecting subjects, and people 
should not be surprised that this flaw, when combined with the muzzle it 

482 imposes on speech, leads to a few paradoxical results, only two of which I will 
mention, the one having a permanent effect, the other being based on singu- 
lar cases. 

1 . The fact that the curriculum imposed in the lecture courses essentially 
covers what I call "fictional matters," there being nothing positive taught 
there but medicine, which is superfluous since it covers the same ground as 
the public medical schools do — indeed, the fact that it is tolerated warrants 
admiration. 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 403 

2. The fact that, since a policy of tenacious silence has to find its way toward 
Beatitude, illiteracy in its congenital state actually has some chance of suc- 
ceeding. 20 

But we must still indicate what the conjunction of these two effects can 
produce in this case, for we will see in it the way in which this system, by lim- 
iting itself to this, finds a way to gain strength from it. 

It so happened that a Beatitude of type 2 believed he was required by cir- 
cumstances to prove himself in a teaching of type 1, the promotion to which 
should have been a great boon to him. 

And a fine mess it was, indeed. Certain people clamored for a license to 
teach, meaning a degree in psychology, the exam for which the Beatitude in 
question could not have passed, according to them. 

But those who were better informed were able to learn something from the 
great lesson that was thus offered up to them, in which they could suddenly 
read the supreme Law, an unwritten Law, on which the association was 
founded — a Law by which each of us finds in his heart his intellectual base 
and usual morals already laid down, a Law that the long-term observation to 
which he has been subjected should have, above all, shown he is apt for, a Law 
whose simple and sure commandment he will hear in himself at grave 
moments: one must not bother the Beatitudes. 

This is the reason — which the Little Shoes are unaware of, even though 
they have a presentiment of it — for their own silence, and a new generation, 
having seen the veil ripped away, left the place all the stronger for it, and they 
rallied around the person who had revealed that reason to them. 

But, in all of that, who thinks about the fate of the Beatitudes themselves? 483 

Can we imagine the disgrace of a solitary Beatitude when he realizes that, 
whereas the remarks of the Truly Necessary are mostly superfluous, those of 
the Truly Fortunate [Bienheureux] are usually unfortunate . . . and what his 
Beatific Solitude can, in this misfortune, become? Will his just barely achieved 
Sufficiency whisper in his ear that it itself is nothing but a Necessary Evil? 

Oh! May the Little Shoes be spared this anxiety! At least, let them be pre- 
pared for these dangers. But people do prepare them. As a Beatitude myself, 
for years I have, in the ceremony referred to as the Second Little Tour, heard 
from the very lips of the Little Shoes how much good their personal analysis 
did them; I will indicate here the most frequent, major benefit they mentioned 
in the homage they paid their training analyst — it can be summarized in one 
word: disintellectualization. 

Oh! How these dear children finally felt free, almost all of whom attrib- 
uted their decision to study psychiatry to the endless torments of that accursed 
year which the academic course of French studies inflicts upon you in the com- 



404 Ecrits 

pany of ideas! No, that was not, as they now knew, what had guided them: 
What a relief and what a boon to be free of it at so little cost, for once this mis- 
take was cleared up and replaced with the conviction that this damned intel- 
lectualism was, in fact, a kind of pruritus, how straight the pathway finally 
seemed, how easily thought found its way towards nature — aren't our gut feel- 
ings designed to assure us of this? 

This is what allows a good analytic student of this type to be distinguished 
at first glance by anyone who has seen one even just once before: by the inner 
and even posterior air that makes him look as if he were leaning on the mac- 
erated fetus of his resistances. 

Disintellectualization — this word does not indicate that anyone becomes 
stupid for all that: unlike ordinary fears and even hopes, analysis is truly inca- 
pable of changing anything in this department. 

The study of intelligence, the level of which behaviorist psychology 

thought it could superimpose onto the measure of what the animal knows how 

to encompass in detour behavior, has often seemed to me capable of improve- 

484 ment, at least for man, through a broader reference — namely, through what 

I would call trace behavior. 

I have always been struck, while taking my little dog for a walk so he could 
attend to his needs, by what we could glean from his activities that would 
help us analyze the capacities that make for man's success in society, as well 
as the virtues that Antiquity's thinkers meditated upon under the heading of 
Means-to-an-End [Moyen-de-Parvenir]. I hope that this digression will, at the 
very least, dispel the misunderstanding I may have given rise to in certain 
people 's minds: the misunderstanding of attributing to me the doctrine of a 
discontinuity between animal psychology and human psychology, which is 
truly foreign to my way of thinking. 

I simply wanted to maintain that, in order to correctly work on what psy- 
choanalysis classifies in mankind as symptoms — which, being so directly 
involved in his destiny, not to mention his vocation, seem to fall with these 
latter under the same heading, that of language — it is preferable, no doubt, 
not to remain completely illiterate. More modestly stated, the possible risk 
of making a mistake should not prevent us from making an effort to become 
literate. 

But other needs no doubt take precedence over this, and the burden borne 
by the Beatitudes, like that borne by the white man, cannot be within a single 
man's purview. 

I heard it, and everyone could have heard it, from the lips of a Sufficiency 
at a fertile moment of the psychoanalytic institution in France: "We want there 
to be," this mouth declared, "a hundred mediocre psychoanalysts." He was 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 405 

not affirming in this statement the modesty of a program, but rather the ambi- 
tious demand for the qualitative change that Marx's formidable thinking for- 
ever showed to be rooted in quantitative change. 

And the statistics published to date show that the undertaking, superbly 21 
overcoming all obstacles, is in the process of achieving a success in which it 
exceeds its own standards. 

Assuredly, we are still far from what is achieved in other countries, the 1 3 
two-columned quarto pages that barely suffice to list the analysts in the Amer- 48 5 

ican Psychoanalytic Association dwarfing the scant two and a half pages on 
which the French and British practitioners fit. 

The German Diaspora must bear much of the responsibility for this, hav- 
ing given America the highest executives of Beatitude; and we must realize 
what is represented by the responsibility it takes for all these "dentists," to bor- 
row the term used by these supreme Beatitudes to designate the rank and file*, 
a term which is imbued with the traditional affectionate paternalism. 

It is not difficult to understand why it was among these Beatitudes that the 
theory of the "autonomous ego" first appeared. 22 How could we but admire 
the strength of those who initiated the grand project of disintellectualization, 
which, extending little by little, represents one of the most fertile challenges* 
by which a civilization can assert its strength, those challenges that it forges 
within itself ? However do they find the time to oversee the project, when all 
year long they devote themselves to humbling the strong egos and raising up 
the weak egos [mois]? — no doubt during the months [mois] that do not 
include an r. 

Assuredly, a civilized state will, in the long run, find something to criticize 
in the fact that the prebends, on the scale of the considerable investments mobi- 
lized by such a community, are left to the discretion of a spiritual power whose 
odd extraterritoriality I have noted. 

But the solution would be easy to find: a small territory, on the scale of phil- 
atelic States (Ellis Island, to give a concrete idea), could be ceded by the U.S. 
Congress — through a vote by the states most involved in this business — to 
the IPA so that the latter could locate its departments there, including its Con- 
gregations of the Index, Missions, and Propaganda; the situation would be bet- 
ter defined, diplomatically speaking, because the decrees that the IPA would 
hand down to the entire world would be dated and promulgated from this ter- 
ritory; one would clearly know, moreover, whether the function of the 
autonomous ego is, for example, an article of the ecumenical doctrine 's sym- 
bolism or simply an article to be given to the Little Shoes for Christmas. 

Let me stop here in order to end on an energizing note. Since I was not 486 

afraid to show the forces of dissociation to which Freud's heritage is being 



406 Ecrits 

subjected, let me point out the remarkable persistence the psychoanalytic insti- 
tution has demonstrated. 

I will deserve little credit for doing so since nowhere else have I found greater 
confirmation of the virtue that I grant to the pure signifier. For in the use that 
is made in the psychoanalytic institution of Freud's concepts, how can we fail 
to see that their signification is in no way taken into account? And yet it is to 
nothing but their presence that one can attribute the fact that the association 
has not yet fallen apart and been dispersed into the confusion of Babel. 

Thus the coherence maintained in this large body reminds me of the odd 
imaginings that Poe 's genius proposes to us in the extraordinary story of "The 
Facts in the Case of M. Valdemar." 

It is the story of a man who passes away, but since he was under hypnosis 
during his death throes, his cadaver remains intact, due to the action of the 
hypnotizer, in a state involving not only an apparent immunity to physical dis- 
solution but also the ability to attest in speech to his atrocious condition. 

This is how the association created by Freud metaphorically lives on in its 
collective being, but here it is a voice that sustains it, the voice of a dead man. 

Of course, Freud went so far as to make us recognize the Eros by which 
life finds a way to prolong its jouissance in the reprieve of its rotting. 

In such a case, however, the operation of waking that association up — using 
the Master's words in a return to life of his Speech — can be confused with the 
care involved in providing a decent burial. 

Pommersfelden-Guitrancourt, September-October 1956 

Notes 

1. 1 mean a Thomist. trans. H. E. Butler (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 

2. From the letter to Fliess dated September University Press, 1955)]. 

21, 1897, to the writing of the "Wolf Man" case 5. This is the second verse of Schiller's 

(see the introductory note to the case history). famous distich, the first verse of which ques- 

3. It should be understood that this is not an tions as follows, " Warum kann der lebendige 
aria di bravura, but a remark about technique Geist dem Geist nicht erscheinen?," to which 
that the reading of Freud 's Wit^ makes acces- the second verse is the response. The title of this 
sible to one and all. It is true that few psycho- distich is "Sprache." 

analysts read this book, a fact that I am no 6. See Ernest Jones, Sigmund Freud: Life and 

longer keeping quiet about after one of the most Work (New York: Basic Books, 1955), vol. II, 

dignified among them admitted to me as a sim- 76. 

pie lacuna that he had never opened Freud's 7. This is known in French as The Science of 

Psychopathology of Everyday Life. Dreams [in English as The Interpretation of 

4. Sententiarum aut verborum. See Quintilian, Dreams], which Freud designated as his capital 
Institutio Oratoria, Book IX, Chapters 2 and 3. work. 

[The Loeb Classical Library, Quintilian III, 8. And not the "pendant," as it is expressed 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1 956 40 j 



in a translation that the upper part of an ideal 
clock no doubt inspired. 

9. "Die cur hie" (the other School)," the epi- 
graph of a Traitede la contingence ("Treatise on 
Contingency") which came out in 1895 (Paris: 
Librairie de l'Art Independant), in which the 
dialectic of this example is discussed (page 41). 
It was written by a young man named Andre 
Gide and we can only regret that he was 
diverted so early on from logical problems at 
which this essay shows him to be so adept. The 
nonsense* about which I'm speculating here in 
his footsteps, takes up, if it must be recalled to 
mind, the burlesque translation given to school 
children of the Latin phrase: numero Deus 
impare gaudet. 

10. See Freud, GJTXIV, 281 and 283 ["The 
Question of Lay Analysis," SE XX, 246 and 
248]. 

11. In effect, it was from Freud that the 
actions of the "Committee" received their char- 
acter and their orders. "This committee would 
have to be strictly secret [italicized in the text pro- 
vided by Jones] in its existence and its action [ital- 
icized by me]." From the letter by Freud to Jones 
dated August 1,1912, which was to be followed 
by a trip Freud was to make to London to lay the 
groundwork of this "plan" with Jones, Ferenczi, 
and Rank; in Ernest Jones, Sigmund Freud, Life 
andWork^Ytt. 

12. "The secret of this Committee is that it 
has taken from me my most burdensome care 
for the future, so that I can calmly follow my 
path to the end," and "Since then I have felt 
more light-hearted and carefree about how 
long my life will last." From letters sent by 
Freud to Eitingon dated October 22, 1919, and 
November 23, 1919, that is, seven years later 
(during which the existence of the Committee 
thus remained unknown even to someone at 
Eitingon's level), the first of them written to 
propose that he become a member of the Com- 
mittee. Jones, Sigmund Freud, II, 154. 

13. "I know there is a boyish and perhaps 
romantic element too in this conception ..." 
Letter by Freud to Jones cited in Jones, Sigmund 
Freud,ll,\53. 

14. Jones, Sigmund Freud, II, 153. 



15. [Added in 1966:] The two preceding 
paragraphs were not included in the paper pub- 
lished in Les Etudes Philosophiques, the pres- 
ent version having been reserved for a separate 
printing. 

16. [Added in 1966:] The version published 
[in 1956] was different starting with this para- 
graph. I have included that version in the 
appendix to this text. 

17. This is what the euphuism that is custom- 
ary in the milieu for describing what affects it 
designates exquisitely by "the narcissism of 
minor differences." 

18. 1 cited this passage in its entirety in my 
thesis, De la psychos e paranoiaque dans ses rap- 
ports avec la personnalite (Paris: Le Francois, 
1932), pages 283 (footnote 1) and 284. It is thus 
clear that my interest in this subject was not 
born in the last decade. 

1 9. For those who might not be familiar with 
the metaphor of the sieve used in milking a billy 
goat, see Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, the sec- 
tion entitled "Transcendental Logic, Part III: 
Of the Division of General Logic into Analytic 
and Dialectic." Freud reminds us of it in his text 
on Schreber. It is not superfluous to note that 
Freud took it up at the precise point at which 
Kant submits the following question to his cri- 
tique: "What is truth?" [See F. Max Miiller's 
translation of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason 
(New York: Doubleday, 1966), 48.] 

20. It may also succeed on its own merits. 
This is witnessed by the inventor of the 
smelling technique mentioned earlier who, 
because of this find, was promoted, without 
any probational stage, from the Truly Neces- 
sary, where he would clearly have done mar- 
velous things, to the ranks of the Sufficiencies, 
and was soon whisked away to the heavens of 
the Beatitudes. 

21. (Added in 1966:) This is the very term 
that was used by Ernest Jones, and reproduced 
in the official journal of the English-speaking 
Psychoanalytic Association, to pay homage to 
the success of the abovementioned undertaking. 

22. See the footnote on page 490 of the 
appendix to this article. 



4 8 7 Appendix 



The version that was originally published in 1956, starting 

from the paragraph designated in the footnote on page 485 

[in Ecrits 1966], read as follows: 



Had he been more attentive to these effects earlier on, Freud would have given 
more serious thought to the specific pathways required of the institution 
designed to ensure the transmission of his doctrine. The mere organization of 
a community would not have seemed to him to insure this transmission against 
the insufficiency of the very team* of the faithful; several things he apparently 
said in confidence show that he harbored hard feelings toward them. 1 

He would have realized the root of the affinity between ever psychologiz- 
ing simplifications, against which analytic experience warned him, and the 
function of misrecognition characteristic of an individual's ego as such. 

He would have perceived the slippery slope that the particularity of the test 
that this community must impose at its threshold offers up to this misrecog- 
nition: namely, analysis, which is customarily referred to as "training analy- 
sis." The slightest deflecting of the meaning of what it seeks turns it into an 
experience of dyadic identification. 

I am not the one who is making a judgment here, for it was in the circles of 
training analysts that the theory of the end of analysis as identification with 
the analyst's ego was avowed and is still professed. 

Now, no matter how closely we assume an ego has managed to conform to 
the reality it is supposed to gauge, the psychological subjection with which 
such analysts thus align the completion of an analysis is, if one reads my work 
correctly, what is most opposed to the truth that analysis must bring out — 
that truth being the foreignness of unconscious effects, which cut down to size 
488 the pretension to autonomy that the ego takes as its ideal. Nor is there any- 

thing more contrary to the boon we expect from an analysis: namely, restitu- 
tion to the analysand of the signifier that explains these unconscious effects, 
involving a mediation that in fact reveals the aspect of repetition that is pre- 
cipitated in the model. 

The fact that the dyadic pathway, which these analysts choose instead as 
the aim of analysis, fails to bring about normalization — which might have 
served as a minimal justification for it — is, as I have said, commonly recog- 
nized, but no one draws the obvious inference that there must be a mistake in 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1956 409 

the premises, people being content to attribute its result to the reflected weak- 
nesses whose accident is, in effect, only too visible. 

At any rate, the very fact that the goals of training are asserted in the form 
of psychological postulates introduces a form of authority into the group that 
has no counterpart anywhere in science, a form that the term "sufficiency" 
alone allows us to qualify. 

Indeed, only the Hegelian dialectic of infatuation may possibly account for 
the phenomenon. Failing which, we would have to resort to satire — if its savor 
did not repulse those who are not part of this milieu — in order to give a fair 
idea of the way people try to stand out in it. 

One can only highlight apparent results here. 

Consider, first, the curious position of scientific extraterritoriality with 
which I began my remarks, and the magisterial tone with which analysts main- 
tain it as soon as they have to respond to the interest their discipline generates 
among those in neighboring fields. 

If, second, the variations that I have pointed out in the different theoreti- 
cal approaches to psychoanalysis give outsiders the impression that analysis 
is engaged in an ever conquering progression at the forefront of new fields, it 
is all the more striking to note just how static the formulations teachable to 
insiders are compared to the enormous quantity of experience which has, as 
it were, passed through their hands. 

This has resulted in something that is diametrically opposed to the open- 
ing-up for which Freud formulated the university project, as I have indicated — 
namely, in the establishment of a routinized theoretical program, the content 
of which I could designate quite well with the coined term "fictional matters." 

Nevertheless, given the state of neglect in which psychoanalytic method 489 

(which was nonetheless revolutionizing in its approach to the phenomena) left 
psychiatric nosography, it is hard to say whether one should be more surprised 
that its teaching in this field confines itself to elaborating on the classical symp- 
tomatology, or that it manages in this way to cover the same ground as the 
official courses in psychiatry. 

Lastly, however little one forces oneself to keep up with a literature which 
is, it must be admitted, hardly enticing, one sees the role played in it by igno- 
rance, by which I do not mean to designate learned ignorance or trained igno- 
rance, but rather crass ignorance: the kind of ignorance whose surface has never 
even been scratched by the plow of a critique of its sources. 

These sterilizing phenomena, which are even more blatant when seen from 
the inside, must be related to the effects of imaginary identification whose fun- 
damental instance Freud revealed in groups and associations. At the very least, 



410 Ecrits 

we can say that these effects do not foster discussion, which is at the root of 
all scientific progress. Identification with the image that gives the group its 
ideal — which is here the image of sufficiency incarnate — certainly founds, as 
Freud showed in a decisive schema, the communion of the group, but it is pre- 
cisely at the expense of all articulate communication. Hostile tension is even 
constitutive of individual-to-individual relations in it. This is what the 
euphuism that is customary in the milieu quite validly recognizes with the 
expression "the narcissism of minor differences," which I will translate in more 
direct terms as "conformist terror." 

Those who are familiar with the itinerary of The Phenomenology of Mind 
will find their way around better at this critical juncture, and will be less sur- 
prised by the patience that seems to defer any and every questioning excur- 
sion in this milieu. Yet the reluctance to call things into question does not 
concern candidates alone, and it was not a novice who was learning from his 
courage who explained it as follows: "There is no field in which one exposes 
ones elf 'more totally than in speaking about analysis." 

Of course, a "good object," as they put it, can preside over this collective 
subjection, but this image, which makes dogs faithful, makes men tyrannical — 
490 for it is Eros itself, whose phasmid, extending itself over the destroyed polis, 

by which the hounded soul is panic-stricken, Plato showed us. 

This experience thus comes to give rise to its own ideology, but in the form 
of misrecognition characteristic of the ego's presumption, by resuscitating a 
theory of the "autonomous ego" that is weighed down with all the question 
begging which psychology had refuted, without waiting for psychoanalysis, 
but that unambiguously delivers up the figure of its promoters' ideals. 2 

Assuredly, this analytic psychologism does not fail to encounter resistance. 
What is interesting is that in treating it as resistance, this psychologism proves 
to be favored by the many confusions that have appeared in the lifestyles of 
large cultural regions, insofar as a demand for patterns* manifests itself in them, 
patterns that it is not inept at furnishing. 3 

We find here the point at which psychoanalysis is deflected toward a form 
of behaviorism, which is ever more dominant in psychoanalysis' "current ten- 
dencies." This movement is supported, as we see, by sociological conditions 
that go far beyond analytic knowledge as such. What one cannot fail to say 
here is that Freud, in foreseeing this collusion with behaviorism, denounced 
it in advance as diametrically opposed to his pathway. 4 

Whatever the outcome must be of the odd spiritual direction in which psy- 
choanalysis thus seems to be heading, its promoters must retain full respon- 
sibility for the subjects they take into their charge. And it is here that one cannot 
but be alarmed by certain ideals that seem to prevail in their training, such as 



The Situation of Psychoanalysis and the Training of Psychoanalysts in 1 956 411 

the one that is sufficiently denounced by the term "disintellectualization," 
which has gained full acceptance. 

As if it were not already dreadful that the success of the analytic profession 
has attracted so many uneducated enthusiasts to it, is it fitting to consider as 
a major and beneficial result of training analysis that even the slightest hint of 49 1 

a thought is proscribed among those for whom all of human reflection would 
not suffice to thwart the intempestive actions of all sorts to which their best 
intentions expose them? 

Thus the plan to produce, for this country alone, "a hundred mediocre psy- 
choanalysts" was proffered in notorious circumstances, and not as the remark 
of a well-informed modesty, but as the ambitious promise of the shift from 
quantity to quality illustrated by Marx. The promoters of this plan have even 
announced, according to the latest news, that they are in the process of exceed- 
ing their own standards. 

No one doubts, in fact, the importance of the number of workers for the 
advancement of a science. Yet discordance must not break out on all sides 
regarding the meaning to be attributed to the experience that founds it. That 
is, as I have said, the situation of psychoanalysis. 

At least this situation seems to me exemplary in that it provides additional 
proof of the preeminence that I attribute, based on Freud's discovery, to the 
signifier in the structure of the intersubjective relationship. 

The more the analytic community lets Freud's inspiration dissipate, what, 
if not the letter of his doctrine, will allow it to continue to constitute a body? 

Notes 

1. Consider what Freud said to Binswanger (Added in 1966:) This is the yardstick by 
after one of the weekly meetings held at his which one 's entry into the New York associa- 
house at the beginning of 1907: "So, haben Sie tion is measured. 

jetzt diese Bande gesehen?" See Ludwig Bin- 3. [Added in 1966:] What is demanded of us 

swanger: Erinnerungen an Sigmund Freud (Bern: so greatly dominates our profession at present 

Francke Verlag, 1956). that it no longer has anything to do with psy- 

2. This is, as we know, the theory to the choanalysis (this remark was made to me by a 
yardstick of which Heinz Hartmann, Ernst psychoanalyst at the end of my recent stay in 
Kris, and Rudolf Loewenstein intend to reduce the United States in 1 966). 

the practice of psychoanalysis and to "syn- 4. See Freud, GW XIV, 78—79 ["An Auto- 

chronize" (that is their term) Freud's thought, biographical Study," SE XX, 52-53]. 
no doubt a little too vacillating for their taste, 
if not in their eyes. 



493 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 

or Reason Since Freud 

"Of Children Who Are Wrapped in Swaddling Bands" 
O cities of the sea, I behold in you your citizens, women as well as men, 
tightly bound with stout bonds around their arms and legs by folk who will 
have no understanding of [y]our speech; and you will only be able to give 
vent to your griefs and sense of loss of liberty by making tearful complaints, 
and sighs, and lamentation one to another; for those who bind you will not 
have understanding of your speech nor will you understand them. 1 
— Leonardo Da Vinci 



While the theme of the third volume of La Psychanalyse 1 commissioned this 
contribution by me, I owe this deference to what will be discovered here by 
introducing it in situating it between writing and speech — it will be halfway 
between the two. 

Writing is in fact distinguished by a prevalence of the text in the sense that 
we will see this factor of discourse take on here — which allows for the kind 
of tightening up that must, to my taste, leave the reader no other way out than 
the way in, which I prefer to be difficult. This, then, will not be a writing in 
my sense of the term. 

The fact that I contribute something wholly new at each class of my sem- 
inar has heretofore prevented me from providing such a text, except in one 
class, which has nothing particularly outstanding about it in terms of the series, 
and is only worth referring to for an idea of its overall level. 

For the urgency that I am now taking as a pretext for leaving that aim behind 
merely covers over the problem that, in maintaining it at the level at which I 
must present my teachings here, it might stray too far from speech, whose 
494 very different measures are essential to the training I seek to effect. 

This is why I took the opportunity presented to me at that time by an invi- 
tation to meet with the philosophy group of the Federation des etudiants es 
lettres 3 to make an appropriate adjustment to my expose — its necessary gen- 
erality matching the extraordinary character of their interest, but its sole object 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 413 

encountering the connivance of their common background, a literary back- 
ground, to which my title pays homage. 

Indeed, how could we forget that Freud constantly, and right until the end, 
maintained that such a background was the prime requisite in the training of 
analysts, and that he designated the age-old universitas litterarum as the ideal 
place for its institution? 4 

Thus this reference to the real-life context of my lecture, by showing whom 
I tailored it for, also marked those to whom it is not addressed. 

I mean: none of those who, for whatever reason in psychoanalysis, allow 
their discipline to take advantage of some false identity. 

This is a vice of habit and its effect on the mind is such that its true iden- 
tity may appear among them as just one more diversion, whose refined 
redoubling one hopes will not escape the notice of subtler minds. 

It is thus that we observe with curiosity the beginnings of a new tack con- 
cerning symbolization and language in the International Journal of Psycho- 
Analysis^ a great many wetted fingers leafing through works by Sapir and 
Jespersen. These exercises are still green around the edges, but it is above all 
the tone that is missing. A certain seriousness always raises a smile when it 
enters the domain of veracity. 

And how could a contemporary psychoanalyst not sense, in coming upon 
speech, that he had reached this domain, when it is from speech that analytic 
experience receives its instrument, its frame, its material, and even the back- 
ground noise of its uncertainties? 

/. The Meaning of the Letter 495 

My title conveys the fact that, beyond this speech, it is the whole structure of 
language that psychoanalytic experience discovers in the unconscious. This is 
to alert prejudiced minds from the outset that the idea that the unconscious is 
merely the seat of the instincts may have to be reconsidered. 

But how are we to take the letter here? Quite simply, literally [a la lettre]. 

By "letter" I designate the material medium [support] that concrete discourse 
borrows from language. 

This simple definition assumes that language is not to be confused with the 
various psychical and somatic functions that serve it in the speaking subject. 

The primary reason for this is that language, with its structure, exists prior 
to each subject's entry into it at a certain moment in his mental development. 

Let us note that, although the deficits of aphasia are caused by purely 
anatomical lesions in the cerebral systems that provide the mental center for 



4i4 Ecrits 

these functions, they prove, on the whole, to be distributed between the two 
aspects of the signifying effect of what I am calling here "the letter" in the cre- 
ation of signification. 5 This point will become clearer in what follows. 

And the subject, while he may appear to be the slave of language, is still 
more the slave of a discourse in the universal movement of which his place is 
already inscribed at his birth, if only in the form of his proper name. 

Reference to the experience of the community as the substance of this dis- 

496 course resolves nothing. For this experience takes on its essential dimension in 
the tradition established by this discourse. This tradition, long before the drama 
of history is inscribed in it, grounds the elementary structures of culture. And 
these very structures display an ordering of exchanges which, even if uncon- 
scious, is inconceivable apart from the permutations authorized by language. 

With the result that the ethnographic duality of nature and culture is giv- 
ing way to a ternary conception of the human condition — nature, society, and 
culture — the last term of which may well be reduced to language, that is, to 
what essentially distinguishes human society from natural societies. 

But I shall neither take sides here nor take this as a point of departure, leav- 
ing to their own obscurity the original relations between the signifier and labor. 
To settle accounts with the general function of praxis in the genesis of history 
by way of a quip, I will confine myself to mentioning that the very society that 
wished to restore the hierarchy responsible for the relations between produc- 
tion and ideological superstructures to its rightful political place, alongside 
the privilege of the producers, has nevertheless failed to give birth to an 
Esperanto whose relations to socialist reality [reel] would have ruled out from 
the start any possibility of literary formalism. 6 

For my part, I will put my faith in only those premises whose value has 
already been proven, in that they have allowed language to attain the status in 
experience of a scientific object. 

This is what permits linguistics 7 to present itself in the pilot position in this 
domain, around which a reclassification of the sciences is signaling, as is usu- 

497 ally the case, a revolution in knowledge; only the necessities of communication 
have made me term this domain, in the theme of this volume of La Psychanalyse, 
"the sciences of man" — despite the confusion that may hide behind it. 

To pinpoint the emergence of the discipline of linguistics, I will say that, 
as in the case of every science in the modern sense, it consists in the constitu- 
tive moment of an algorithm that grounds it. This algorithm is the following: 

S 
s 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 41 5 

It is read as follows: signifier over signified, "over" corresponding to the bar 
separating the two levels. 

The sign written in this way should be attributed to Ferdinand de Saussure, 
although it is not reduced to this exact form in any of the numerous schemas 
in which it appears in the printed version of the various lectures from the three 
courses he gave in 1906—7, 1908— 9, and 1910— 11, which a group of his devoted 
disciples collected under the title, Cours de linguistique generate — a publica- 
tion of prime importance for the transmission of a teaching worthy of the name, 
that is, that one can stop only on its own movement. 

This is why it is legitimate for us to credit him for the formalization 
— , which characterizes the modern stage of linguistics, despite the diversity 
between schools of linguistics. 

The major theme of this science is thus based, in effect, on the primordial 
position of the signifier and the signified as distinct orders initially separated 
by a barrier resisting signification. 

This is what makes possible an exact study of the connections characteris- 
tic of the signifier, and of the magnitude of their function in generating the 
signified. 

For this primordial distinction goes well beyond the debate over the arbi- 
trariness of the sign, such as it has been elaborated since the reflections of 
Antiquity, and even beyond the impasse, already sensed at that time, which 
opposed the one-to-one correspondence between word and thing, even in the 
act of naming — despite the appearances suggested by the role imputed to the 
index finger pointing to an object as an infant learns its mother tongue, or in 
the use of so-called concrete academic methods in the study of foreign Ian- 498 

guages [langues]. 

We can take things no further along this path than to demonstrate that no 
signification can be sustained except by reference to another signification. 8 
This ultimately leads us to the remark that there is no existing language [langue] 
whose ability to cover the field of the signified can be called into question, one 
of the effects of its existence as a language [langue] being that it fulfills all needs 
there. Were we to try to grasp the constitution of the object in language, we 
could but note that this constitution is found only at the level of the concept — 
which is very different from any nominative — and that the thing [ckose] y when 
quite obviously reduced to the noun, splits into the double, divergent ray of 
the cause in which the thing has taken shelter in French, and of the nothing 
[rien] to which the thing has abandoned its Latin dress (rem). 

These considerations, as existent as they may be to philosophers, divert us 
from the locus whence language questions us about its very nature. And we 



4i6 



Ecrits 



499 



will fail to sustain this question as long as we have not jettisoned the illusion 
that the signifier serves [repond a] the function of representing the signified, 
or better, that the signifier has to justify [repondre de] its existence in terms of 
any signification whatsoever. 

For even if it is reduced to this latter formulation, the heresy is the same — 
the heresy that leads logical positivism in search of the "meaning of mean- 
ing,"* as its objective is called in the language [langue] in which its devotees 
snort. It can be seen here how this sort of analysis can reduce the text the most 
highly charged with meaning to insignificant trifles. Only mathematical algo- 
rithms resist this process; they are considered to be devoid of meaning, as they 
should be. 9 

The fact remains that if we were able to subtract solely the notion 
of the parallelism of its upper and lower terms from the algorithm — , 
each term only being taken globally, it would remain the enigmatic sign of a 
total mystery. Which, of course, is not the case. 

In order to grasp its function, I will begin by reproducing the faulty illus- 
tration by which its usage is classically introduced: 




We can see here how it lends itself to the kind of direction indicated above as 
erroneous. 

In my lecture, I replaced this illustration with another, which can be con- 
sidered more correct only because it exaggerates in the incongruous dimen- 
sion psychoanalysts have not yet altogether given up, because of their justified 
sense that their conformism derives its value from it alone. Here is the other 
illustration: 



GENTLEMEN 



o o 

O o 



500 



Here we see that, without greatly extending the scope of the signifier 
involved in the experiment — that is, by simply doubling the nominal type 
through the mere juxtaposition of two terms whose complementary mean- 
ings would seem to have to reinforce each other — surprise is produced by 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 41 j 

the precipitation of an unexpected meaning: the image of two twin doors that 
symbolize, with the private stall offered Western man for the satisfaction of 
his natural needs when away from home, the imperative he seems to share 
with the vast majority of primitive communities that subjects his public life 
to the laws of urinary segregation. 

The point is not merely to silence the nominalist debate with a low blow, 
but to show how the signifier in fact enters the signified — namely, in a form 
which, since it is not immaterial, raises the question of its place in reality. For 
in having to move closer to the little enamel plaques that bear it, the squint- 
ing gaze of a nearsighted person might be justified in wondering whether it 
is indeed here that we must see the signifier, whose signified would in this 
case be paid its last respects by the solemn procession in two lines from the 
upper nave. 

But no contrived example can be as telling as what is encountered in the 
lived experience of truth. Thus I have no reason to be unhappy I invented 
the above, since it awoke in the person the most worthy of my trust a child- 
hood memory which, having come serendipitously to my attention, is best 
placed here. 

A train arrives at a station. A little boy and a little girl, brother and sister, are 
seated across from each other in a compartment next to the outside window 
that provides a view of the station platform buildings going by as the train 
comes to a stop. "Look," says the brother, "we're at Ladies!" "Imbecile!" 
replies his sister, "Don't you see we're at Gentlemen." 

Aside from the fact that the rails in this story materialize the bar in the Saus- 
surian algorithm in a form designed to suggest that its resistance may be other 
than dialectical, one would have to be half-blind to be confused as to the respec- 
tive places of the signifier and the signified here, and not to follow from what 
radiant center the signifier reflects its light into the darkness of incomplete 
significations. 

For the signifier will raise Dissension that is merely animal in kind, and 
destined to the natural fog of forgetfulness, to the immeasurable power of ide- 
ological warfare, which is merciless to families and a torment to the gods. To 501 
these children, Gentlemen and Ladies will henceforth be two homelands 
toward which each of their souls will take flight on divergent wings, and regard- 
ing which it will be all the more impossible for them to reach an agreement 
since, being in fact the same homeland, neither can give ground regarding the 
one 's unsurpassed excellence without detracting from the other's glory. 

Let us stop there. It sounds like the history of France. Which it is more 
humane to recall here, and rightly so, than that of England, destined to flip 
from the Large to the Small End of Dean Swift's egg. 



4i 8 Ecrits 

It remains to be grasped up what steps and down what corridor the S of the 
signifier, visible here in the plurals [hommes and dames] by which it focuses its 
welcome beyond the train window, must pass to impress its curves upon the 
ducts by which — like hot air and cold air — indignation and scorn hiss on this 
side. 

One thing is certain: this access must not, in any case, carry any significa- 
tion with it if the algorithm, — ,with its bar is appropriate to it. For insofar as 
the algorithm itself is but a pure function of the signifier, it can reveal only a 
signifying structure in this transfer. 

Now the structure of the signifier is, as is commonly said of language, that 
it is articulated. 

This means that its units — no matter where one begins in tracing out their 
reciprocal encroachments and expanding inclusions — are subject to the 
twofold condition of being reduced to ultimate differential elements and of 
combining the latter according to the laws of a closed order. 

These elements, the decisive discovery of linguistics, are phonemes; we must 
not look for any phonetic constancy in the modulatory variability to which this 
term applies, but rather for the synchronic system of differential couplings 
that are necessary to discern vocables in a given language [langue]. This allows 
us to see that an essential element in speech itself was predestined to flow into 
moveable type which, in Didots or Garamonds squeezing into lower-cases, 
renders validly present what I call the "letter" — namely, the essentially local- 
ized structure of the signifier. 

The second property of the signifier, that of combining according to the 

502 laws of a closed order, affirms the necessity of the topological substratum, of 

which the term I ordinarily use, "signifying chain," gives an approximate idea: 

links by which a necklace firmly hooks onto a link of another necklace made 

of links. 

Such are the structural conditions that define the order of the signifier's 
constitutive encroachments up to the unit immediately above the sentence as 
grammar, and the order of the signifier's constitutive inclusions up to the 
verbal locution as the lexicon. 

In the limits within which these two approaches to understanding linguis- 
tic usage are confined, it is easy to see that only signifier-to-signifier correla- 
tions provide the standard for any and every search for signification; this is 
indicated by the notion of "usage" of a taxeme or semanteme, which refers to 
contexts just one degree above that of the units in question. 

But it is not because grammatical and lexical approaches are exhausted at 
a certain point that we must think that signification rules unreservedly beyond 
it. That would be a mistake. 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 419 

For the signifier, by its very nature, always anticipates meaning by deploy- 
ing its dimension in some sense before it. As is seen at the level of the sentence 
when the latter is interrupted before the significant term: "I'll never . . .," "The 
fact remains . . .," "Still perhaps . . ." Such sentences nevertheless make sense, 
and that sense is all the more oppressive in that it is content to make us wait 
fork. 10 

But the phenomenon is no different, which — making her appear, with the 
sole postponement of a "but," as comely as the Shulamite, as honest as a vir- 
tuous maiden — adorns and readies the Negress for the wedding and the poor 
woman for the auction block. 

Whence we can say that it is in the chain of the signifier that meaning insists, 
but that none of the chain's elements consists in the signification it can provide 
at that very moment. 

The notion of an incessant sliding of the signified under the signifier thus 
comes to the fore — which Ferdinand de Saussure illustrates with an image 
resembling the wavy lines of the upper and lower Waters in miniatures from 
manuscripts of Genesis. It is a twofold flood in which the landmarks — fine 
streaks of rain traced by vertical dotted lines that supposedly delimit corre- 503 

sponding segments — seem insubstantial. 

All our experience runs counter to this, which made me speak at one point 
in my seminar on the psychoses of the "button ties" [points de capiton] required 
by this schema to account for the dominance of the letter in the dramatic trans- 
formation that dialogue can effect in the subject. 11 

But while the linearity that Saussure considers to be constitutive of the chain 
of discourse — in accordance with its emission by a single voice and with the 
horizontal axis along which it is situated in our writing — is in fact necessary, 
it is not sufficient. It applies to the chain of discourse only in the direction in 
which it is oriented in time, even being taken up therein as a signifying factor 
in all languages [langues] in which the time of "Peter hits Paul" is reversed 
when the terms are inverted. 

But it suffices to listen to poetry, which Saussure was certainly in the habit 
of doing, 12 for a polyphony to be heard and for it to become clear that all dis- 
course is aligned along the several staves of a musical score. 

Indeed, there is no signifying chain that does not sustain — as if attached to 
the punctuation of each of its units — all attested contexts that are, so to speak, 
"vertically" linked to that point. 

Thus, if we take up the word arbre (tree) again, this time not in its nominal 
isolation, but at the endpoint of one of these punctuations, we see that it is not 
simply because the word bane (bar) is its anagram that it crosses the bar of the 
Saussurian algorithm. 



420 Ecrits 

504 For broken down into the double specter of its vowels and consonants, it 
calls up — with the robur-oak [robre] and the plane tree [platane] — the signi- 
fications of strength and majesty that it takes on in our flora. Tapping all the 
symbolic contexts in which it is used in the Hebrew of the Bible, it erects on 
a barren hill the shadow of the cross. Next it reduces to a capital Y, the sign of 
dichotomy — which, without the illustration that historiates armorials, would 
owe nothing to the tree, however genealogical it claims to be. Circulatory tree, 
arbor vitae of the cerebellum, lead tree or silver amalgam [arbre de Diane\ 
crystals precipitated into a tree that conducts lightning, is it your countenance 
that traces our destiny for us in the fire-scorched tortoiseshell, or your flash 
that brings forth from an infinite night that slow change in being in the Ev 
ndvxa of language: 

No J says the Tree, it says No J in the scintillating 
Of its superb head 

verses that I consider to be as legitimately heard in the harmonics of the tree 
as their reverse: 

Which the storm treats universally 
As it does a blade of grass. 

For this modern verse is organized according to the same law of the paral- 
lelism of the signifier, whose concert governs both primitive Slavic epic 
poetry and the most refined Chinese poetry. 

This can be seen in the common mode of beings [I'etant] from which the 
tree and the blade of grass are chosen, so that the signs of contradiction — say- 
ing "No!" and "treat as" — can come into being here, and so that, through the 
categorical contrast between the particularity of "superb" and the "univer- 
sally" of its reduction, the indiscernible scintillating of the eternal instant may 
be accomplished in the condensation of tete (head) and tempete (storm). 

But all this signifier can only operate, it may be objected, if it is present in 
the subject. I answer this objection by assuming that he has shifted to the level 
of the signified. 

For what is important is not whether the subject know more or less about 
it. (If gentlemen and ladies were written in a language [langue] with which 
the little boy and girl were unfamiliar, their quarrel would simply be more 
exclusively a quarrel over words, but it would be no less ready to take on sig- 
nification for all that.) 

505 What this structure of the signifying chain discloses is the possibility I 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 421 

have — precisely insofar as I share its language [langue] with other subjects, 
that is, insofar as this language [langue] exists — to use it to signify something 
altogether different from what it says. This is a function of speech that is more 
worthy of being pointed out than that of disguising the subject's thought (which 
is usually indefinable) — namely, the function of indicating the place of this 
subject in the search for truth. 

I need but plant my tree in a locution, grimper a Uarbre, or even project onto 
it the derisive light that a descriptive context gives the word, arborer, to not let 
myself be imprisoned in some sort of communique of the facts, however offi- 
cial it may be, and if I know the truth, convey it, despite all the censors, between- 
the-lines using nothing but the signifier that can be constituted by my 
acrobatics through the branches of the tree. These acrobatics may be provoca- 
tive to the point of burlesque or perceptible only to the trained eye, depend- 
ing on whether I wish to be understood by the many or the few. 

The properly signifying function thus depicted in language has a name. We 
learned this name in our childhood grammar book on the last page, where the 
shade of Quintilian, relegated to some phantom chapter to convey final con- 
siderations on style, seemed suddenly to hasten its voice due to the threat of 
being cut off. 

It is among the figures of style, or tropes — from which the verb "to find" 
[trouver] comes to us — that this name is, in fact, found. This name is 
metonymy. 

I shall refer only to the example of it given there: "thirty sails." For the 
worry I felt, over the fact that the word "ship" [bateau] that was hiding therein 
seemed to split its presence there in two by having been able to borrow its fig- 
urative sense from the very rehashing of this example, veiled [voilait] not 
so much those illustrious sails [voiles] as the definition they were supposed 
to illustrate. 

The part taken for the whole — I said to myself, if the thing is supposed to 
be based on reality [reel] — leaves us with hardly any idea what we are to con- 
clude about the size of the fleet these thirty sails are nevertheless supposed to 
gauge: for a ship to have but one sail is very rare indeed. 

This shows that the connection between ship and sail is nowhere other than 506 

in the signifier, and that metonymy is based on the word-to-word nature of this 
connection. 13 

I shall designate as metonymy the first aspect of the actual field the signi- 
fier constitutes, so that meaning may assume a place there. 

The other aspect is metaphor. Let me illustrate it immediately; Quillet's 
dictionary seemed appropriate to me to provide a sample that would not be 
suspected of being deliberately selected, and I didn't pursue the farce any far- 



422 Ecrits 

ther than Victor Hugo's well-known verse, "His sheaf was neither miserly 
nor hateful . . .," with which I presented metaphor, when the time came for 
it, in my seminar on the psychoses. 

Let us say that modern poetry and the Surrealist school led us to take a 

major step forward here by showing that any conjunction of two signifiers 

could just as easily constitute a metaphor, if an additional condition — that of 

the greatest disparity of the images signified — weren't required for the pro- 

507 duction of the poetic spark, in other words, for metaphoric creation to occur. 

Of course, this radical position is based on the so-called "automatic writ- 
ing" experiment, which would not have been attempted without the assurance 
its pioneers drew from Freud's discovery. But it remains marked by confusion 
because the doctrine behind it is false. 

Metaphor's creative spark does not spring forth from the juxtaposition of 
two images, that is, of two equally actualized signifiers. It flashes between two 
signifiers, one of which has replaced the other by taking the other's place in 
the signifying chain, the occulted signifier remaining present by virtue of its 
(metonymic) connection to the rest of the chain. 

One word for another: this is the formula for metaphor, and if you are a poet 
you will make it into a game and produce a continuous stream, nay, a dazzling 
weave of metaphors. You will, moreover, obtain the intoxicating effect of Jean 
Tardieu's dialogue that goes by this title, due solely to the demonstration it 
provides of the radical superfluousness of all signification to a perfectly con- 
vincing representation of bourgeois comedy. 

In Hugo's verse, it is obvious that not the slightest light emanates from the 
assertion that a sheaf is neither miserly nor hateful, because it is clear that the 
sheaf has no more the merit than the demerit of these attributes, since miser- 
liness and hatred, along with the sheaf, are properties of Booz, who exercises 
them when he uses the sheaf as he sees fit, without making his feelings known 
to it. 

If "his sheaf" refers back to Booz, as is clearly the case nevertheless, it is 
because it replaces him in the signifying chain — at the very place that awaited 
him, because it had been raised up a step by the clearing away of miserliness 
and hatred. But the sheaf has thus cleared this place of Booz, ejected as he now 
is into the outer darkness where miserliness and hatred harbor him in the hol- 
low of their negation. 

But once his sheaf has thus usurped his place, Booz cannot go back to it, 
the slender thread of the little "his" that attaches him to it being an additional 
obstacle thereto, because it binds this return with a title of ownership that would 
detain him in the heart of miserliness and hatred. His asserted generosity is 
thus reduced to less than nothing by the munificence of the sheaf which, being 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 423 

drawn from nature, knows neither our reserve nor our rejections, and even in 508 

its accumulation remains prodigaj by our standards. 

But if, in this profusion, the giver disappears with the gift, it is only to 
reemerge in what surrounds the figure of speech in which he was annihilated. 
For it is the radiance of fecundity — which announces the surprise the poem 
celebrates, namely, the promise of acceding to paternity that the old man 
receives in a sacred context. 

Thus it is between a man's proper name qua signifier and the signifier 
that metaphorically abolishes it that the poetic spark is produced, and it is 
all the more effective here in bringing about the signification of paternity in 
that it reproduces the mythical event through which Freud reconstructed the 
path along which the mystery of paternity advances in the unconscious of 
every man. 

The structure of modern metaphor is no different. Hence the jaculation, 
"Love is a pebble laughing in the sun," recreates love in a dimension that I 
have said strikes me as tenable, as opposed to its ever imminent slippage into 
the mirage of some narcissistic altruism. 

We see that metaphor is situated at the precise point at which meaning is 
produced in nonmeaning — that is, at the passage which, as Freud discovered, 
when crossed in the opposite direction, gives rise to the word that is "the word" 
["le mot 99 ] par excellence in French, the word that has no other patronage there 
than the signifier esprit 14 — and at which it becomes palpable that, in deriding 
the signifier, man defies his very destiny. 

But to return to metonymy now, what does man find in it, if it must be more 
than the power to skirt the obstacles of social censure? Doesn't this form, which 
gives oppressed truth its field, manifest a certain servitude that is inherent in 
its presentation? 

It's worth taking the time to read a book in which Leo Strauss, from the 
land that has traditionally offered asylum to those who have chosen freedom, 509 

reflects on the relations between the art of writing and persecution. 15 By hon- 
ing in on the sort of connaturality that ties this art to this condition, he allows 
us to glimpse something that imposes its form here, in the effect of truth on 
desire. 

But haven't we been feeling for a while now that, in following the paths of 
the letter to reach the Freudian truth, we are getting hot, its flames spreading 
all around us? 

Of course, as it is said, the letter kills while the spirit gives life. I don't dis- 
agree, having had to pay homage somewhere here to a noble victim of the 
error of seeking in the letter, but I also ask how die spirit could live without 
the letter. The spirit's pretensions would nevertheless remain indisputable if 



424 Ecrits 

the letter hadn't proven that it produces all its truth effects in man without the 
spirit having to intervene at all. 

This revelation came to Freud, and he called his discovery the unconscious. 

II. The Letter in the Unconscious 

In Freud 's complete works, one out of three pages presents us with philolog- 
ical references, one out of two pages with logical inferences, and everywhere 
we see a dialectical apprehension of experience, linguistic analysis becoming 
still more prevalent the more directly the unconscious is involved. 

Thus what is at stake on every page in The Interpretation of Dreams is what 
I call the letter of discourse, in its texture, uses, and immanence in the matter 
in question. For this book inaugurates both Freud's work and his royal road 
to the unconscious. And we are informed of this by Freud, whose confession 
in letters to Fliess that have since been made public, when he launches this 
book toward us in the early days of this century, 16 merely confirms what he 
continued to proclaim to the end: that the whole of his discovery lies in this 
no-holds-barred expression of his message. 
510 The first clause, articulated already in the introductory chapter because its 

exposition cannot be postponed, is that the dream is a rebus. And Freud stip- 
ulates that it must be understood quite literally [a la lettre\ as I said earlier. 
This is related to the instance in the dream of the same "literating" (in other 
words, phonemic) structure in which the signifier is articulated and analyzed 
in discourse. Like the unnatural figures of the boat on the roof, or the man 
with a comma for a head, which are expressly mentioned by Freud, dream 
images are to be taken up only on the basis of their value as signifiers, that is, 
only insofar as they allow us to spell out the "proverb" presented by the oneiric 
rebus. The linguistic structure that enables us to read dreams is at the crux of 
the " signifier ness of dreams," at the crux of the Traumdeutung. 

Freud shows us in every possible way that the image 's value as a signifier 
has nothing to do with its signification, giving as an example Egyptian hiero- 
glyphics in which it would be ridiculous to deduce from the frequency in a 
text of a vulture (which is an aleph) or a chick (which is a vau) indicating a 
form of the verb "to be" and plurals, that the text has anything whatsoever 
to do with these ornithological specimens. Freud takes his bearings from cer- 
tain uses of the signifier in this writing that are effaced in ours, such as the 
use of determinatives, where a categorical figure is added as an exponent to 
the literal figuration of a verbal term; but this is only to bring us back to the 
fact that we are dealing with writing where even the supposed "ideogram" is 
a letter. 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 425 

But psychoanalysts who have no training in linguistics don't need the cur- 
rent confusion regarding the term "ideogram" to believe in a symbolism deriv- 
ing from natural analogy, or even from instinct's coaptational image. This is 
so true that, apart from the French school, which attends to this, it is with a 
statement like "reading coffee grounds is not the same as reading hiero- 
glyphics" that I must recall to its own principles a technique whose pathways 
cannot be justified unless they aim at the unconscious. 

It must be said that this is admitted only reluctantly, and that the mental vice 
denounced above enjoys such favor that the contemporary psychoanalyst can 
be expected to say that he decodes before resolving to take the journey with 
Freud (turn at the statue of Champollion, says the guide) that is necessary for 
him to understand that he deciphers — the latter differing in that a cryptogram 5 1 1 

only takes on its full dimensions when it is in a lost language [langue]. 

Taking this journey simply amounts to going further in the Traumdeutung. 

Entstellung, translated as "transposition" — which Freud shows to be the 
general precondition for the functioning of the dream — is what I designated 
earlier, with Saussure, as the sliding of the signified under the signifier, which 
is always happening (unconsciously, let us note) in discourse. 

But the two aspects of the signifier's impact on the signified are also found 
here: 

Verdichtung, "condensation," is the superimposed structure of signifiers in 
which metaphor finds its field; its name, condensing in itself the word Dich- 
tung^ shows the mechanism's connaturality with poetry, to the extent that it 
envelops poetry's own properly traditional function. 

Verschiebung or "displacement" — this transfer of signification that 
metonymy displays is closer to the German term; it is presented, right from 
its first appearance in Freud's work, as the unconscious' best means by which 
to foil censorship. 

What distinguishes these two mechanisms, which play a privileged role in 
the dream- work, Traumarbeit, from their homologous function in discourse? 
Nothing, except a condition imposed upon the signifying material, called Riick- 
sicht auf Darstellbarkeit^ which must be translated as "consideration of the 
means of staging" (the translation by "role of the possibility of representa- 
tion" being overly approximate here). But this condition constitutes a limita- 
tion operating within the system of writing, rather than dissolving the system 
into a figurative semiology in which it would intersect the phenomena of nat- 
ural expression. This would probably allow us to shed light on problems with 
certain types of pictography, which we are not justified in regarding as evo- 
lutionary stages simply because they were abandoned in writing as imperfect. 
Let us say, then, that dreams are like the parlor game in which each person, in 



426 Ecrits 

turn, is supposed to get the spectators to guess some well-known saying or 
variant of it solely by silent gestures. The fact that dreams have speech at their 

512 disposal makes no difference since, for the unconscious, speech is but one stag- 
ing element among others. It is precisely when games and dreams alike run up 
against the lack of taxemic material by which to represent logical relationships 
such as causality, contradiction, hypothesis, and so on that they prove they 
have to do with writing, not mime. The subtle procedures dreams end up using 
to represent these logical connections — in a much less artificial way than games 
usually employ — are taken up specifically in Freud's work, where it is once 
again confirmed that the dream-work proceeds in accordance with the laws 
of the signifier. 

The rest of the dream revision is termed "secondary" by Freud, taking on 
its value from what is at stake: they are fantasies or daydreams, Tagtraum, to 
use the term Freud prefers to use to situate them in their wish-fulfilling func- 
tion (Wunscherfiillung). Given that these fantasies may remain unconscious, 
their distinctive feature is clearly their signification. Now, Freud tells us that 
their role in dreams is either to serve as signifying elements for the statement 
of the unconscious thought (Traumgedanke), or to be used in the secondary 
revision that occurs — that is, in a function not to be distinguished, he says, 
from our waking thought {yon unserem wachen Denken nicht %u unterscheideri). 
No better idea of this function's effects can be given than by comparing it to 
patches of colorwash which, when applied here and there on a stencil, can make 
stick figures — which are rather unprepossessing in themselves — in a rebus or 
hieroglyphics look more like a painting of people. 

I apologize for seeming to spell out Freud's text myself; it is not merely to 
show how much is to be gained by not lopping off parts of it. It is to be able 
to situate what has happened in psychoanalysis in terms of its earliest refer- 
ence points, which are fundamental and have never been revoked. 

Right from the outset, people failed to recognize the constitutive role of 
the signifier in the status Freud immediately assigned to the unconscious in 
the most precise and explicit ways. 

The reason for this was twofold, the least perceived being, naturally, that 
this formalization was not sufficient by itself to bring people to recognize the 

513 instance of the signifier, because when the Traumdeutung was published it was 
way ahead of the formalizations of linguistics for which one could no doubt 
show that it paved the way by the sheer weight of its truth. 

The second reason is merely the flip side of the first, for if psychoanalysts 
were fascinated exclusively by the significations highlighted in the uncon- 
scious, it was because these significations derived their most secret attraction 
from the dialectic that seemed to be immanent in them. 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 423 

I demonstrated to those who attend my seminar that the apparent changes 
of direction or rather changes in tack along the way — that Freud, in his pri- 
mary concern to ensure the survival of his discovery along with the basic revi- 
sions it imposed upon our knowledge, felt it necessary to apply to his 
doctrine — were due to the need to counteract the ever-accelerating effects of 
this partiality. 

For, I repeat, given the situation he found himself in, where he had noth- 
ing corresponding to the object of his discovery that was at the same level of 
scientific maturity, he at least never failed to maintain this object at the level 
of its ontological dignity. 

The rest was the work of the gods and took such a course that analysis today 
finds its bearings in the imaginary forms I have just shown to be sketched out 
through inverse printing on the text they mutilate. It is to them that the ana- 
lyst's aim now adapts, confusing them, in the interpretation of dreams, with 
the visionary liberation of the hieroglyphic aviary, and seeking more gener- 
ally to verify the exhaustion of the analysis in a sort of "scanning"* 17 of these 
forms wherever they appear — with the idea that they bear witness both to the 
exhaustion of the regressions and to the remodeling of "the object-relation" 
that is supposed to typify the subject. 18 

The technique that is based on such positions can give rise to many varied 
effects, which are quite difficult to criticize behind their therapeutic aegis. But 514 

an internal critique can emerge from the flagrant discordance between the mode 
of operation by which the technique legitimates itself — namely, the funda- 
mental rule of psychoanalysis, all the instruments of which, starting with "free 
association," derive their justification from its inventor's conception of the 
unconscious — and the complete ignorance reigning there of this very con- 
ception of the unconscious. The most trenchant supporters of this technique 
let themselves off the hook here with a mere flourish: the fundamental rule 
must, they say, be observed all the more religiously since it is only the fruit of 
a lucky accident. In other words, Freud never really knew what he was doing. 

A return to Freud's texts shows, on the contrary, the absolute coherence 
between his technique and his discovery, and this coherence allows us to sit- 
uate his procedures at their proper level. 

This is why any rectification of psychoanalysis requires a return to the truth 
of that discovery, which is impossible to obscure in its original moment. 

For in the analysis of dreams, Freud intends to give us nothing other than 
the laws of the unconscious in their broadest extension. One of the reasons 
why dreams were the most propitious here is, Freud tells us, that they reveal 
these laws no less in normal subjects than in neurotics. 

In neither, however, does the efficacy of the unconscious cease upon awak- 



428 Ecrits 

ening. Psychoanalytic experience consists in nothing other than establishing 
that the unconscious leaves none of our actions outside its field. The presence 
of the unconscious in the psychological order — in other words, in the indi- 
vidual's relational functions — nevertheless deserves to be more precisely 
defined. It is not coextensive with that order, for we know that, while uncon- 
scious motivation manifests itself just as much in conscious psychical effects 
as in unconscious ones, conversely it is elementary to note that a large num- 
ber of psychical effects that are legitimately designated as unconscious, in the 
sense of excluding the characteristic of consciousness, nevertheless bear no 
relation whatsoever, by their nature, to the unconscious in the Freudian sense. 
It is thus only due to an incorrect use of the term that "psychical" and "uncon- 
scious" in this sense are confused, and that people thus term psychical what is 
actually an effect of the unconscious on the soma, for example. 
515 The point is, therefore, to define the topography of this unconscious. I say 

that it is the very topography defined by the algorithm: 

_S_ 
s 

What it has permitted me to elaborate concerning the impact of the signi- 
fier on the signified allows for its transformation into: 



/(S)j- 



It is on the basis of the copresence in the signified not only of the elements of 
the horizontal signifying chain but also of its vertical dependencies, that I have 
demonstrated the effects, distributed in accordance with two fundamental 
structures, in metonymy and metaphor. We can symbolize them by: 

/(S...S')S = S(— )s 

that is, metonymic structure, indicating that it is the signifier-to-signifier con- 
nection that allows for the elision by which the signifier instates lack of being 
\le manque de Vetre\ in the object-relation, using signification's referral [ren- 
voi] value to invest it with the desire aiming at the lack that it supports. The 
— sign placed in ( ) manifests here the maintenance of the bar — which, in 
the first algorithm, denotes the irreducible nature of the resistance of signifi- 
cation as constituted in the relations between signifier and signified. 19 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 429 

Now we turn to 



#)- 



S(+), 



metaphoric structure, indicating that it is in the substitution of signifier for 
signifier that a signification effect is produced that is poetic or creative, in other 
words, that brings the signification in question into existence. 20 The + sign in 
( ) manifests here the crossing of the bar, — , and the constitutive value of this 
crossing for the emergence of signification. 

This crossing expresses the condition for the passage of the signifier into 
the signified, whose moment I pointed out above by provisionally conflating 516 

it with the place of the subject. 

It is the function of the subject, thus introduced, on which we must now 
dwell since it lies at the crux of our problem. 

"I am thinking, therefore I am" {cogito ergo sum) is not simply the formu- 
lation in which the link between the transparency of the transcendental sub- 
ject and his existential affirmation is constituted, at the historical apex of 
reflection on the conditions of science. 

Perhaps I am only object and mechanism (and so nothing more than phe- 
nomenon), but assuredly, insofar as I think so, I am — absolutely. Philosophers 
certainly made important corrections here — namely, that in that which is think- 
ing (cogitans), I am never doing anything but constituting myself as an object 
(cogitatum). The fact remains that through this extreme purification of the tran- 
scendental subject, my existential link to its project seems irrefutable, at least 
in the form of its actuality, and that "cogito ergo sum " ubi cogito, ibisum, over- 
comes this objection. 

Of course, this limits me to being there in my being only insofar as I think 
that I am in my thought; to what extent I really think this concerns me alone 
and, if I say it, interests no one. 21 

Yet to avoid it on the pretext of its philosophical semblances is simply to 
demonstrate one's inhibition. For the notion of the subject is indispensable 
even to the workings of a science such as strategy in the modern sense, whose 
calculations exclude all "subjectivism." 

It is also to deny oneself access to what might be called the Freudian uni- 
verse — in the sense in which we speak of the Copernican universe. Indeed, 
Freud himself compared his discovery to the so-called Copernican revolution, 
emphasizing that what was at stake was once again the place man assigns him- 
self at the center of a universe. 



430 Ecrits 

Is the place that I occupy as subject of the signifier concentric or eccen- 

517 trie in relation to the place I occupy as subject of the signified? That is the 
question. 

The point is not to know whether I speak of myself in a way that conforms 
to what I am, but rather to know whether, when I speak of myself, I am the 
same as the self of whom I speak. And there is no reason not to bring in the 
term "thought" here. For Freud uses the term to designate the elements at 
stake in the unconscious, that is, in the signifying mechanisms I just pointed 
to there. 

It is nonetheless true that the philosophical cogito is at the center of the mirage 
that renders modern man so sure of being himself in his uncertainties about 
himself, and even in the distrust he has long since learned to exercise regard- 
ing the pitfalls of pride. 

Now if, turning the weapon of metonymy against the nostalgia that it serves, 
I stop myself from seeking any meaning beyond tautology, and if, in the name 
of "war is war" and "a penny's a penny," I resolve to be only what I am, how 
can I escape here from the obvious fact that I am in this very act? 

And how — in going to the other, metaphoric, pole of the signifying quest, 
and dedicating myself to becoming what I am, to coming into being — can I 
doubt that, even if I were to lose myself there, I am there? 

Now it is on these very points, where the obvious is subverted by the empir- 
ical, that the trick of the Freudian conversion lies. 

This signifying game of metonymy and metaphor — up to and including 
its active tip [pointe] that "cotter-pins" my desire to a refusal of the signifier 
or to a lack of being, and links my fate to the question of my destiny — this 
game is played, in its inexorable subtlety, until the match is over, where I am 
not because I cannot situate myself there. 

That is, it wasn't going very far to say the words with which I momentar- 
ily dumbfounded my audience: I am thinking where I am not, therefore I am 
where I am not thinking. These words render palpable to an attentive ear with 
what elusive ambiguity the ring of meaning flees from our grasp along the 
verbal string. 

What we must say is: I am not, where I am the plaything of my thought; I 
think about what I am where I do not think I am thinking. 

This two-sided mystery can be seen to intersect the fact that truth is evoked 
only in that dimension of ruse whereby all "realism" in creation derives its 

518 virtue from metonymy, as well as this other fact that access to meaning is 
granted only to the double elbow of metaphor, when we hold in our hand their 
one and only key: namely, the fact that the S and s of the Saussurian algorithm 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 431 

are not in the same plane, and man was deluding himself in believing he was 
situated in their common axis, which is nowhere. 

At least until Freud made this discovery. For if what Freud discovered isn't 
precisely that, it is nothing. 

The contents of the unconscious, in their deceptive ambiguity, supply us no 
reality in the subject more consistent than the immediate; it is from truth that 
they derive their virtue in the dimension of being: Kern unseres Wesen is Freud 's 
own expression. 

Metaphor's two-stage mechanism is the very mechanism by which symp- 
toms, in the analytic sense, are determined. Between the enigmatic signifier 
of sexual trauma and the term it comes to replace in a current signifying chain, 
a spark flies that fixes in a symptom — a metaphor in which flesh or function 
is taken as a signifying element — the signification, that is inaccessible to the 
conscious subject, by which the symptom may be dissolved. 

And the enigmas that desire — with its frenzy mimicking the gulf of the infi- 
nite and the secret collusion whereby it envelops the pleasure of knowing and 
of dominating in jouissance — poses for any sort of "natural philosophy" are 
based on no other derangement of instinct than the fact that it is caught in the 
rails of metonymy, eternally extending toward the desire for something else. 
Hence its "perverse" fixation at the very point of suspension of the signify- 
ing chain at which the screen-memory is immobilized and the fascinating image 
of the fetish becomes frozen. 

There is no other way to conceive of the indestructibility of unconscious 
desire — given that there is no need which, when its satiation is prohibited, 
does not wither, in extreme cases through the very wasting away of the organ- 
ism itself. It is in a kind of memory, comparable to what goes by that name in 
our modern thinking-machines (which are based on an electronic realization 
of signifying composition), that the chain is found which insists by reproduc- 
ing itself in the transference, and which is the chain of a dead desire. 

It is the truth of what this desire has been in his history that the subject cries 
out through his symptom, as Christ said that stones themselves would have 
cried out, had the children of Israel not lent them their voices. 

And this is also why psychoanalysis alone allows us to differentiate in mem- 519 

ory the function of remembering. The latter, rooted in the signifier, resolves 
the Platonic aporias of reminiscence through the ascendancy of history in man. 

One need but read Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality — which is cov- 
ered over for the masses by so many pseudo-biological glosses — to note that 
Freud has all accession to the object derive from a dialectic of return. 



432. 



Ecrits 



Having thus begun with Holderlin's v 6 oxo q , Freud arrives less than twenty 
years later at Kierkegaard's repetition; that is, his thought, in submitting at the 
outset to the humble but inflexible consequences of the talking cure* alone, was 
never able to let go of the living servitudes that, starting from the royal prin- 
ciple of the Logos, led him to rethink the deadly Empedoclean antinomies. 

And how, if not on the "other scene" Freud speaks of as the locus of the 
dream, are we to understand his recourse as a man of science to a Deus ex 
machina that is less derisory in that here it is revealed to the spectator that the 
machine directs the director himself? How can we fathom the fact that a sci- 
entist of the nineteenth century valued more highly than all his other works 
his Totem and Taboo — with its obscene, ferocious figure of the primordial 
father, who is inexhaustibly redeemed in the eternal blinding of Oedipus — 
before which contemporary ethnologists bow as before the development of 
an authentic myth, unless we realize that he had to bow to a force of evidence 
that went beyond his prejudices? 

Similarly, the imperious proliferation of particular symbolic creations — 
such as what are called the sexual theories of children — which account for even 
the smallest details of the neurotic's compulsions, answer to the same neces- 
sities as do myths. 

This is why, to bring you to the precise point of the commentary on Freud 's 
work I am developing in my seminar, little Hans, left in the lurch at the age of 
five by the failings of his symbolic entourage, and faced with the suddenly 
actualized enigma to him of his sex and his existence, develops — under the 
direction of Freud and his father, who is Freud 's disciple — all the possible per- 
mutations of a limited number of signifiers in the form of a myth, around the 
signifying crystal of his phobia. 
520 We see here that, even at the individual level, man can find a solution to 

the impossible by exhausting all possible forms of the impossibilities that are 
encountered when the solution is put into the form of a signifying equation. 
This is a striking demonstration that illuminates the labyrinth of a case study 
which thus far has been used only as a scrap heap. It also makes us grasp that 
the nature of neurosis is revealed in the fact that a symptom's development is 
coextensive with its elimination in the treatment: whether phobic, hysterical, 
or obsessive, neurosis is a question that being raises for the subject "from where 
he was before the subject came into the world" (this subordinate clause is the 
very expression Freud uses in explaining the Oedipus complex to little Hans). 

At stake here is the being that appears in a split second in the emptiness of 
the verb "to be" and, as I said, this being raises its question for the subject. 
What does that mean? It does not raise it before the subject, since the subject 
cannot come to the place where being raises it, but being raises it in the sub- 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 433 

ject's place — in other words, being raises the question in that place with the 
subject, just as one raises a problem with a pen and as antiquity's man thought 
with his soul. 

Freud brought the ego into his doctrine in this way, defining it by the resist- 
ances that are specific to it. 22 1 have tried to get people to understand that these 
resistances are imaginary in nature, like the coaptational lures that ethology 
shows us in display or combat in animal behavior, these lures being reduced 
in man to the narcissistic relation introduced by Freud and elaborated by me 
in "The Mirror Stage." While Freud — by situating in this ego the synthesis 
of the perceptual functions in which the sensorimotor selections are inte- 
grated — seems to agree with the tradition that delegates to the ego the task of 
answering for reality, this reality is simply all the more included in the sus- 
pension of the ego. 

For this ego, distinguished first for the imaginary inertias it concentrates 
against the message of the unconscious, operates only by covering over the 
displacement the subject is with a resistance that is essential to discourse as 
such. 

This is why an exhaustion of the defense mechanisms, as palpable as 521 

Fenichel renders it in his Problems of Psychoanalytic Technique because he is a 
practitioner (whereas his whole theoretical reduction of the neuroses and psy- 
choses to genetic anomalies in libidinal development is pure platitude), turns 
out to be the other side of unconscious mechanisms, without Fenichel 
accounting for or even realizing it. Periphrasis, hyperbaton, ellipsis, suspen- 
sion, anticipation, retraction, negation, digression, and irony, these are the fig- 
ures of style (Quintilian's figurae sententiarum), just as catachresis, litotes, 
antonomasia, and hypotyposis are the tropes, whose names strike me as the 
most appropriate ones with which to label these mechanisms. Can one see here 
mere manners of speaking, when it is the figures themselves that are at work 
in the rhetoric of the discourse the analysand actually utters? 

By obstinately characterizing resistance as having an emotional perma- 
nence, thereby making it foreign to discourse, contemporary psychoanalysts 
simply show that they have succumbed to one of the fundamental truths Freud 
rediscovered through psychoanalysis. Which is that we cannot confine our- 
selves to giving a new truth its rightful place, for the point is to take up our 
place in it. The truth requires us to go out of our way. We cannot do so by 
simply getting used to it. We get used to reality [reel]. The truth we repress. 

Now it is especially necessary to the scholar, the sage, and even the quack, 
to be the only one who knows. The idea that deep within the simplest of souls — 
and, what's more, in the sickest — there is something ready to blossom is one 
thing. But that there may be someone who seems to know as much as them 



434 Ecrits 

about what we ought to make of it . . . come to our rescue yon categories of 
primitive, pre-logical, and archaic thought — nay, of magical thought, so con- 
venient to attribute to others! It is not fitting that these country bumpkins should 
keep us breathless by posing enigmas to us that prove overly clever. 

To interpret the unconscious as Freud did, one would have to be, as he 
was, an encyclopedia of the arts and muses, as well as an assiduous reader of 

522 the Fliegende Blatter. And the task would become no easier were we to put 
ourselves at the mercy of a thread spun of allusions and quotations, puns and 
equivocations. Must we make a career out of "antidoted fanfreluches"? 

Indeed, we must resolve to do so. The unconscious is neither the primor- 
dial nor the instinctual, and what it knows of the elemental is no more than 
the elements of the signifier. 

The three books that one might call canonical with regard to the uncon- 
scious — the Traumdeutung, The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, and Jokes 
(Wit^) and their Relation to the Unconscious — are but a web of examples whose 
development is inscribed in formulas for connection and substitution (though 
multiplied tenfold by their particular complexity, diagrams of them sometimes 
being provided by Freud outside the main body of the text), which are the for- 
mulas I give for the signifier in its transference function. For in the Traumdeu- 
tung it is in terms of such a function that the term Ubertragung, or transference, 
which later gave its name to the mainspring of the intersubjective link between 
analysand and analyst, is introduced. 

Such diagrams are not solely constitutive in neurosis of each of the symp- 
toms, but they alone allow us to encompass the thematic of its course and res- 
olution — as the major case histories provided by Freud demonstrate admirably. 

To fall back on a more limited fact, but one that is more manageable as it 
provides a final seal with which to close these remarks, I will cite the 1927 arti- 
cle on fetishism and the case Freud reports there of a patient for whom sexual 
satisfaction required a certain shine on the nose (Glan% aufder Nase)P The 
analysis showed that he owed it to the fact that his early English-speaking 
years had displaced the burning curiosity that attached him to his mother's 
phallus — that is, to that eminent want-to-be, whose privileged signifier Freud 
revealed — into a "glance at the nose,"* rather than a "shine on the nose"* in 
the forgotten language [langue] of his childhood. 

It was the abyss, open to the thought that a thought might make itself heard 
in the abyss, that gave rise to resistance to psychoanalysis from the outset — 

523 not the emphasis on man's sexuality, as is commonly said. The latter is the 
object that has clearly predominated in literature throughout the ages. And 
the evolution of psychoanalysis has succeeded by a comical stroke of magic 
in turning it into a moral instance, the cradle and waiting area of oblativity 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 43S 

and attraction. The soul's Platonic steed, now blessed and enlightened, goes 
straight to heaven. 

The intolerable scandal when Freudian sexuality was not yet holy was that 
it was so "intellectual." It was in this respect that it showed itself to be the wor- 
thy stooge of all those terrorists whose plots were going to ruin society. 

At a time when psychoanalysts are busy refashioning a right-thinking psy- 
choanalysis, whose crowning achievement is the sociological poem of the 
"autonomous ego," I would like to say, to those who are listening to me, how 
they can recognize bad psychoanalysts: by the word they use to deprecate all 
research on technique and theory that furthers the Freudian experience in its 
authentic direction. That word is "intellectualization" — execrable to all those 
who, living in fear of putting themselves to the test by drinking the wine of 
truth, spit on men's bread, even though their spittle can never again have any 
effect but that of leavening. 

777. The Letter, being, and the other 

Is what thinks in my place, then, another ego? Does Freud's discovery represent 
the confirmation, at the level of psychological experience, of Manichaeism? 24 

There can, in fact, be no confusion on this point: what Freud's research 
introduced us to was not some more or less curious cases of dual personality. 
Even at the heroic era I have been describing — when, like animals in the age 
of fairy tales, sexuality spoke — the diabolical atmosphere that such an orien- 
tation might have given rise to never materialized. 25 

The goal Freud's discovery proposes to man was defined by Freud at the 524 

height of his thought in these moving terms: Wo Es war, solllch werden. Where 
it was, I must come into being. 

This goal is one of reintegration and harmony, I might even say of recon- 
ciliation [Fersohnung], 

But if we ignore the self 's radical eccentricity with respect to itself that man 
is faced with — in other words, the very truth Freud discovered — we will 
renege on both the order and pathways of psychoanalytic mediation; we will 
make of it the compromise operation that it has, in effect, become — precisely 
what both the spirit and letter of Freud's work most repudiate. For, since he 
constantly points out that compromise is behind all the miseries his analysis 
assuages, we can say that resorting to compromise, whether explicit or 
implicit, disorients all psychoanalytic action and plunges it into darkness. 

But neither does it suffice to rub shoulders with the moralistic tartufferies 
of our time or to be forever spouting forth about the "total personality" in 
order to have said anything articulate about the possibility of mediation. 



436 Ecrits 

The radical heteronomy that Freud's discovery shows gaping within man 
can no longer be covered over without whatever tries to hide it being funda- 
mentally dishonest. 

Which other is this, then, to whom I am more attached than to myself 
[moi], since, at the most assented to heart of my identity to myself, he pulls 
the strings? 

His presence can only be understood in an alterity raised to the second 
power, which already situates him in a mediating position in relation to my 
own splitting from myself, as if from a semblable. 

If I have said that the unconscious is the Other's discourse (with a capital 
O), it is in order to indicate the beyond in which the recognition of desire is 
tied to the desire for recognition. 

In other words, this other is the Other that even my lie invokes as a guar- 
antor of the truth in which my lie subsists. 

Here we see that the dimension of truth emerges with the appearance of 
language. 

Prior to this point, we have to admit the existence — in the psychological 
relation, which can be precisely isolated in the observation of animal behav- 
525 ior — of subjects, not because of some projective mirage, it being the psy- 

chologist's vacuous watchword to hack this phantom to pieces, but because 
of the manifested presence of intersubjectivity. In the animal hidden in his 
lookout, in the well-laid trap, in the straggler ruse by which a runaway sepa- 
rated from the flock throws a raptor off the scent, something more emerges 
than in the fascinating erection of display or combat. Yet there is nothing here 
that transcends the function of a lure in the service of a need, or that affirms 
a presence in that beyond-the-veil where the whole of Nature can be ques- 
tioned about its design. 

For the question to even arise (and we know that it arose for Freud in Beyond 
the Pleasure Principle), there must be language. 

For I can lure my adversary with a movement that runs counter to my 
battle plan, and yet this movement has its deceptive effect only insofar as I 
actually make it for my adversary. 

But in the proposals by which I initiate peace negotiations with him, what 
my negotiations propose is situated in a third locus which is neither my speech 
nor my interlocutor. 

This locus is nothing but the locus of signifying convention, as is seen in 
the comedy of the distressed complaint of the Jew to his pal: "Why are you 
telling me you are going to Cracow so I'll believe you are going to Lemberg, 
when you really are going to Cracow?" 

Of course the aforementioned flock-movement can be understood in the 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 43J 

conventional register of a game 's strategy, where it is on the basis of a rule 
that I deceive my adversary; but here my success is assessed as connoting 
betrayal — that is, it is assessed in the relationship to the Other who is the guar- 
antor of Good Faith. 

Here the problems are of an order whose heteronomy is simply ignored if 
it is reduced to some "awareness of others," or whatever people choose to call 
it. For the "existence of the other" having, not long ago, reached the ears of 
Midas, the psychoanalyst, through the partition that separates him from the 
phenomenologists' confabs, the news is now being whispered through the 
reeds: "Midas, King Midas, is the other of his patient. He himself said so." 526 

What sort of breakthrough is that? The other — which other? 

Which other was the young Andre Gide aiming at when he defied the land- 
lady, in whose care his mother had placed him, to treat him as a responsible 
being by unlocking right in front of her — with a key that was fake only inso- 
far as it opened all locks of the same kind — the lock that she herself consid- 
ered to be the worthy signif ier of her educational intentions? Was it she who 
would later intervene and to whom the child would laughingly say: "Do you 
really think a lousy padlock can ensure my obedience? " But by simply remain- 
ing out of sight and waiting until that evening before lecturing the kid, after 
giving him a suitably cold reception upon his return home, it was not simply 
a female other whose angry face she showed him, but another Andre Gide, 
one who was no longer really sure, either then or even later when he thought 
back on it, what he had wanted to do — who had been changed right down to 
his very truth by the doubt cast on his good faith. 

Perhaps it would be worth dwelling on this realm of confusion — which is 
simply that in which the whole human opera buffa is played out — to under- 
stand the pathways by which analysis proceeds, not only to restore order here 
but also to instate the conditions for the possibility of its restoration. 

Kern unseres Wesen, "the core of our being" — it is not so much that Freud 
commands us to target this, as so many others before him have done with the 
futile adage "Know thyself," as that he asks us to reconsider the pathways that 
lead to it. 

Or, rather, the "this" which he proposes we attain is not a this which can 
be the object of knowledge, but a this — doesn't he say as much? — which con- 
stitutes my being and to which, as he teaches us, I bear witness as much and 
more in my whims, aberrations, phobias, and fetishes, than in my more or less 
civilized personage. 

Madness, you are no longer the object of the ambiguous praise with which 
the sage furnished the impregnable burrow of his fear. And if he is, after all, 
not so badly ensconced there, it is because the supreme agent at work since 



438 Ecrits 

time immemorial, digging its tunnels and maze, is reason itself, the same 
Logos he serves. 

Then how do you explain the fact that a scholar like Erasmus, with so little 
talent for the "commitments" that solicited him in his age, as in any other, 

527 could hold such an eminent place in the revolution brought about by a Refor- 
mation in which man has as much of a stake in each man as in all men? 

It is by touching, however lightly, on man's relation to the signifier — in 
this case, by changing the procedures of exegesis — that one changes the 
course of his history by modifying the moorings of his being. 

It is precisely in this respect that anyone capable of glimpsing the changes 
we have lived through in our own lives can see that Freudianism, however 
misunderstood it has been and however nebulous its consequences have been, 
constitutes an intangible but radical revolution. There is no need to go seek- 
ing witnesses to the fact: 26 everything that concerns not just the human sci- 
ences, but the destiny of man, politics, metaphysics, literature, the arts, 
advertising, propaganda — and thus, no doubt, economics — has been affected 
by it. 

But is this anything more than the dissonant effects of an immense truth 
where Freud has traced a pure path? It must be said here that a technique that 
takes advantage of the psychological categorization alone of its object is not 
following this path, as is the case of contemporary psychoanalysis apart from 
a return to the Freudian discovery. 

Thus the vulgarity of the concepts by which its practice shows its mettle, 
the embroidery of Freudery [fofreudisme] which is now mere decoration, and 
what must be called the discredit in which it prospers, together bear witness 
to the fundamental repudiation of that discovery. 

Through his discovery, Freud brought the border between object and 
being that seemed to mark the limits of science within its ambit. 

This is the symptom of and prelude to a reexamination of man's situation 

528 in the midst of beings [dans I'etant], as all the postulates of knowledge have 
heretofore assumed it to be — but please don't be content to classify the fact 
that I am saying so as a case of Heideggerianism, even prefixed by a "neo-" 
that adds nothing to the trashy style by which it is common to spare oneself 
any reflection with the quip, "Separate that out for me from its mental jetsam." 

When I speak of Heidegger, or rather when I translate him, I strive to pre- 
serve the sovereign signifierness of the speech he proffers. 

If I speak of the letter and being, if I distinguish the other from the Other, 
it is because Freud suggests them to me as the terms to which resistance and 
transference effects refer — effects against which I have had to wage unequal 
battle in the twenty years that I have been engaged in the practice that we all, 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 439 

repeating after Freud, call impossible: that of psychoanalysis. It is also because 
I must help others avoid losing their way there. 

It is to prevent the field they have inherited from falling fallow, and to that 
end to convey that if the symptom is a metaphor, it is not a metaphor to say 
so, any more than it is to say that man's desire is a metonymy. For the symp- 
tom is a metaphor, whether one likes to admit it or not, just as desire is a 
metonymy, even if man scoffs at the idea. 

Thus, if I am to rouse you to indignation over the fact that, after so many 
centuries of religious hypocrisy and philosophical posturing, no one has yet 
validly articulated what links metaphor to the question of being and 
metonymy to its lack, something of the object of this indignation must still be 
there — something that, as both instigator and victim, corresponds to it: 
namely, the man of humanism and the irremediably contested debt he has 
incurred against his intentions. 

T.t.y.e.m.u.p.t. 
May 14-26, 1957 

Related to this article is a presentation I made on April 23, 1960, to the Philo- 
sophical Society regarding the paper Chaim Perelman gave there on his theory 
of metaphor as a rhetorical function — found in his Traite de V argumentation. 
My presentation is included as an appendix (Appendix II) in this volume 
[Ecrits 1966]. 



Notes 

1. Codice Atlantico, 145. r. a., trans. Louise New York: Mouton, 1956), part II, chapters 1 
Servicen (Paris: Gallimard), vol. II, 400. to 4; see too the collection of translations into 

2. The theme was "Psychoanalysis and the French of his works that we owe to Nicolas 
sciences of man." Ruwet, Essais de linguistique generate (Paris: 

3. The talk took place on May 9, 1957, in the Minuit, 1963). 

Descartes Amphitheater at the Sorbonne, and 6. Recall that discussion about the need for 

discussion continued afterward over drinks. a new language in communist society really did 

4. "Die Frage der Laienanalyse," G JFXI V, take place, and that Stalin, much to the relief of 
281—83. those who lent credence to his philosophy, put 

5. This point — so useful in overturning the an end to it as follows: language is not a super- 
concept of "psychological function," which structure. 

obscures everything related to the matter — 7. By "linguistics" I mean the study of 

becomes clear as day in the purely linguistic existing languages [Ungues'] as regards their 

analysis of the two major forms of aphasia clas- structure and the laws they reveal; this does 

sified by one of the leaders of modern Unguis- not include the theory of abstract codes 

tics, Roman Jakobson. See the most accessible (incorrectly placed under the heading of com- 

of his works (coauthored by Morris Halle), munication theory), so-called information 

Fundamentals of Language ('s Gravenhage and theory (originating in physics), or any more 



440 



Ecrits 



or less hypothetically generalized semiology. 

8. Cf. St. Augustine's De Magistro; I ana- 
lyzed the chapter "De signif icatione locutionis" 
in my seminar on June 23, 1954. 

9. Thus I. A. Richards, author of a book 
about procedures appropriate for reaching this 
objective, shows us their application in another 
book. He selects for his purposes a page from 
Meng Tzu (Mencius, to the Jesuits) and calls the 
piece Mencius on the Mind, given its object. The 
guarantees provided of the purity of the exper- 
iment are nothing compared to the luxury of the 
approaches employed. And the man of letters, 
an expert on the traditional Canon that contains 
the text, is met right on the spot in Peking where 
our demonstration-model wringer has been 
transported, regardless of the cost. 

But we will be no less transported, though 
less expensively, upon witnessing the transfor- 
mation of a bronze, which gives off bell-tones 
at the slightest contact with thought, into a rag 
with which to wipe clean the slate of the most 
depressing British psychologism. And not, alas, 
without quickly identifying it with the author's 
own brain — all that remains of his object or of 
him after he has exhausted the meaning [sens] 
of the one and the common sense of the other. 

10. It is in this respect that verbal hallucina- 
tion, when it takes this form, sometimes opens 
a door that communicates with the Freudian 
structure of psychosis — a door which was hith- 
erto missed since it went unnoticed (see my 
Seminar from 1955-1956). 

11. I did so on June 6, 1956, taking as an 
example the first scene of Athaliah, incited, I 
confess, by an allusion — made in passing by a 
highbrow* critic in The New Statesman and 
Nation — to the "supreme bitchery" of Racine 's 
heroines, designed to dissuade us from making 
reference to Shakespeare's savage tragedies, 
which has become compulsory in analytic cir- 
cles where such references serve to whitewash 
the vulgarity of Philistinism. 

12. (Added in 1966:) The publication by 
Jean Starobinski, in Le Mercure de France (Feb- 
ruary 1964), of the notes left by Saussure on 
anagrams and their hypogrammatical use, from 
the Saturnine verses to the writings of Cicero, 
provide the corroboration I didn't have at the 



13. 1 pay homage here to what this formu- 
lation owes to Roman Jakobson, that is, to his 
written work, in which a psychoanalyst can 
always find something to structure his own 
experience, and which renders superfluous the 
"personal communications" that I could tout as 
much as anyone else. 

Indeed, one can recognize in such oblique 
forms of allegiance the style of that immortal 
couple, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, who are 
a set that cannot be broken up, not even by the 
imperfection of their destiny, for it lasts by the 
same method as Jeannot's knife, and for the 
very reason for which Goethe praised Shake- 
speare for presenting the character in their dou- 
blet: all by themselves they are the whole 
Gesellschaft, Society in a nutshell (Wilhelm 
Meisters Lehrjahre, Vol. 5, ed. Trunz [Hamburg: 
Christian Wegner Verlag], 299) — I mean the 
International Psychoanalytical Association. 

(We should extract the whole pas- 
sage from Goethe: Dieses leise 
Auftreten, dieses Schmiegen und 
Biegen, dies Jasagen, Streicheln und 
Schmeicheln, dieses Behendigkeit, dies 
Schwanzein, diese Allheit und Leerheit, 
diese rechtliche Schurkerei, diese 
Unfahigleit, wie kann sie durch einen 
Menschen ausgedruckt werden? Es soil- 
ten ihrer wenigstens ein Dutzend sein, 
wenn man sie haben konnte; denn sie 
bloss in Gesellschaft etwas, sie sind die 
Gesellschaft.) 

Let us be grateful, in this context, to the 
author of "Some Remarks on the Role of 
Speech in Psycho-Analytic Technique" (IJP 
XXXVII, 6 [1956]: 467) for taking the trouble 
to point out that his remarks are "based on" 
work by him that dates back to 1952. This no 
doubt explains why he has assimilated nothing 
of the work published since then, but which he 
is nevertheless aware of since he cites me as its 
publisher (sic. I know what "editor"* means). 

14. Esprit is clearly the equivalent of the 
German Wit\ with which Freud marked the aim 
of his third fundamental book on the uncon- 
scious. The far greater difficulty of finding an 
equivalent in English is instructive: "wit," 
weighed down by a discussion running from 



The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious 



441 



Davenant and Hobbes to Pope and Addison, 
left its essential virtues to "humor," which is 
something else. The only other choice is "pun," 
but its meaning is too narrow. 

15. Leo Strauss, Persecution and the Art of 
Writing (Glencoe, Illinois: The Free Press, 
1957). 

16. See the correspondence, in particular, 
letters 107 and 1 19 selected by its editors. 

17. This is the procedure by which a study 
ensures results through a mechanical explo- 
ration of the entire extent of its object's field. 

18. (Added in 1966:) By referring only to the 
development of the organism, the typology 
neglects the structure in which the subject is 
caught up in fantasy, the drive, and sublimation, 
respectively. I am currently developing the the- 
ory of this structure. 

19. The sign = designates congruence. 

20. Since S' designates, in this context, the 
term that produces the signifying effect (or sig- 
nifierness), one can see that the term is latent 
in metonymy and patent in metaphor. 

21. Things are altogether different if — in 
raising a question like "Why are there philoso- 
phers?" — I become more candid than usual, 
since I am raising not only a question that 
philosophers have been asking themselves since 
time immemorial, but also the one in which they 
are perhaps the most interested. 

22. (Added in December 1968:) This and the 



next paragraph were rewritten solely to achieve 
greater clarity of expression. 

23. "Fetischismus," GJFXIV, 311. 

24. One of my colleagues went as far as this 
thought in wondering if the id {Es) of Freud's 
last doctrine wasn't in fact the "bad ego." 
(Added in 1966:) You see the kind of people I 
had to work with. 

25. Note, nevertheless, the tone with which 
people spoke in that period of the impish pranks 
of the unconscious: Der Zufall und die Kobold- 
streiche des Unbewussten ("Chance and the Imp- 
ish Pranks of the Unconscious"), one of 
Silberer's titles, which would be absolutely 
anachronistic in the present context of soul- 
managers. 

26. I'll highlight the most recent in what 
flowed quite smoothly from Francois Mau- 
riac's pen, in the Figaro litteraire on May 25, by 
way of an apology for refusing "to tell us his 
life story." If one can no longer undertake to 
do this with the old enthusiasm, the reason, he 
tells us, is that, "for half a century, Freud, 
whatever we may think of him," has left his 
mark there. And after briefly yielding to the 
received idea that it would be to submit to the 
"history of our body," Mauriac quickly returns 
to what his writer's sensibility could not help 
but let slip out: our discourse, in endeavoring 
to be complete, would publish the deepest con- 
fessions of the souls of all our loved ones. 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible 531 

Treatment of Psychosis 

This article contains the most important material from the seminar 

I gave during the first two terms of the 1955— 1956 academic year, 

the material from the third term thus having been excluded. It was 

published in volume 4 of La. Psychanalyse. 

Hoc quod triginta tres per annos in ipso loco studui, et Sanctae Annae Genio 
loci, et dilectae juventuti, quae eo me sectata est, diligenter dedico. 



/. Toward Freud 

1. Half a century of Freudianism applied to psychosis has left the latter still 
to be reconceptualized, in other words, in statu quo ante. 

We might say that, prior to Freud, discussion of psychosis was unable to 
move beyond a theoretical framework that presented itself as psychology and 
was merely a "laicized" residue of what I will call the long metaphysical coc- 
tion of science in the School (with the capital S our reverence owes it). 

Now if our science, concerning the pkusis, in its ever purer mathematization, 
retains from this cuisine no more than a stench so subtle that one may legiti- 
mately wonder whether a substitution of person has not occurred, the same 
cannot be said concerning the antiphusis (that is, the living apparatus that one 
hopes is capable of taking the measure of the said pkusis), whose smell of burnt 
fat indubitably betrays the age-old practice of preparing brains in that cuisine. 

Thus the theory of abstraction, necessary to account for knowledge, has 
become fixed in an abstract theory of the subject's faculties, which the most 
radical sensationalist question begging has been unable to render more func- 
tional with regard to subjective effects. 

The ever-renewed attempts to correct its results by the various counter- 
weights of affect must, in fact, remain futile as long as one neglects to ask 532 
whether or not it is indeed the same subject that is affected. 



446 Ecrits 

2. This is the question one learns to avoid once and for all on one's school 
(with a lowercase s) bench: for even if alternations in the identity of the per- 
cipient are accepted, the latter's function in constituting the unity of the per- 
ceptum is not challenged. Thus diversity of structure in the perceptum affects 
only a diversity of register in the percipient — in the final analysis, that of the 
sensoriums. This diversity is always surmountable, in principle, provided the 
percipient remains at a level commensurate with reality. 

This is why those whose task it is to answer the question raised by the exis- 
tence of the madman have been unable to stop themselves from interposing 
between it and them those same school benches, which they find, in this case, 
to be a convenient wall behind which to take shelter. 

Indeed, I would dare to lump together, so to speak, all positions on the mat- 
ter, whether mechanistic or dynamic, whether they see the genesis of madness 
as based on the organism or the psyche, and its structure as based on disinte- 
gration or conflict. Yes, all of them, however ingenious they may be, insofar 
as, in the name of the obvious fact that a hallucination is a perceptum without 
an object, they confine themselves to asking the percipiens to account for this 
perceptum, without realizing that, in doing so, they skip a step — that of inquir- 
ing whether the perceptum itself bequeaths a univocal meaning to the percipi- 
ens who is asked here to explain it. 

This step should nevertheless seem legitimate in any unbiased examination 
of verbal hallucination, in that the latter is not reducible, as we shall see, to 
any particular sensorium, and especially not to any percipiens insofar as the per- 
cipiens would give it its unity. 

Indeed, it is a mistake to take verbal hallucination to be auditory in nature, 
when it is theoretically conceivable that it not be auditory at all (in the case of 
a deaf-mute, for example, or of some nonauditory register of hallucinatory 
spelling out of words), but above all if we consider that the act of hearing is 
not the same when it aims at the coherence of the verbal chain — namely, its 
overdetermination at each instant by the deferred action [apres-coup] of its 
sequence, and the suspension at each instant of its value upon the advent of a 
meaning that is always susceptible to postponement [renvoi] — and when it 
533 adjusts to sound modulation in speech, for the purpose of acoustic analysis, 

whether tonal or phonetic, or even of musical power. 

These highly abbreviated remarks would seem to suffice to bring out the 
different subjectivities we must consider when investigating the perceptum (and 
the extent to which they are misunderstood in patient interviews and the nosol- 
ogy of "voices"). 

But it might be claimed that we can reduce these differences in subjectiv- 
ity to levels of objectification in the percipiens. 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 443 

This is not so, however. For it is at the level at which subjective "synthe- 
sis" confers upon speech its full meaning that the subject manifests all the 
paradoxes to which he falls victim in this singular perception. The fact that 
these paradoxes already appear when it is the other who proffers speech is 
sufficiently manifested in the subject by the possibility of obeying the other 
insofar as the latter's speech orders him to listen and to be on guard; for by 
simply listening in, the subject falls under the sway of a suggestion from 
which he can only escape by reducing the other to being no more than the 
mouthpiece of a discourse that is not his own or of an intention that he sets 
aside in his discourse. 

But more striking still is the subject's relation to his own speech, in which 
what is important is somewhat masked by the purely acoustic fact that he can- 
not speak without hearing himself. Nor is there anything special in the behav- 
ior of consciousness about the fact that he cannot listen to himself without 
becoming divided. Clinicians did better when they figured out that verbal 
motor hallucinations are often accompanied by the subject's own partial 
phonatory movements. Yet they did not articulate the crucial point, which is 
that, since the sensorium is indifferent in the production of a signifying chain: 

(a) the signifying chain imposes itself, by itself, on the subject in its dimen- 
sion as voice; 

(b) it takes on, as such, a reality proportionate to the time, which is perfectly 
observable in experience, involved in its subjective attribution; 

(c) and its own structure, qua signifier, is determinant in this attribution, which 
is distributive as a rule — that is, it has several voices and thus renders 
equivocal the supposedly unifying percipiens. 

3. I will illustrate what I have just said with a phenomenon taken from one of 5 34 

my clinical presentations from 1955—1956, the very year of the seminar whose 
work I am presenting here. Let us say that such a find can only be the reward 
for complete, albeit enlightened, submission to the patient's properly subjec- 
tive positions, positions which are all too often forced by being reduced in the 
doctor/patient dialogue to the morbid process, thus increasing the difficulty 
of fathoming them due to a not unjustified reticence on the subject's part. 

It was a case of one of those shared delusions [delires a deux] — the typical 
case of which is the mother/ daughter couple, as I showed long ago — in which 
a feeling of being intruded upon, that had developed into a delusion of being 
watched, was but the development of the defense characteristic of an affective 
binary relation, open as such to every alienation. 

It was the daughter who, during my examination, presented me — as proof 



448 Ecrits 

of the insults to which she and her mother were subjected by their neigh- 
bors — a fact concerning the boyfriend of their female neighbor who was 
supposedly harassing them with her onslaughts, after they had had to break 
off an intimate friendship with her that was at first kindly received. This 
man — who was thus an indirect party to the situation and, moreover, a rather 
secondary figure in the patient's allegations — had, according to her, flung at 
her the offensive term "Sow!" as he passed her in the hallway of their apart- 
ment building. 

On hearing this, and being hardly inclined to see in it a retort to "Pig!" that 
would be too easy to extrapolate in the name of a projection which in such 
cases is never anything more than the psychiatrist's own projection, I asked 
her straight out what in herself had been proffered the moment before. Not 
in vain, for she conceded with a smile that, upon seeing the man, she had mur- 
mured the following words which, if she is to be believed here, gave no cause 
for offense: "I've just been to the pork butcher's . . ." 

At whom were these words aimed? She was hard pressed to say, giving me 
the right to help her. For their literal meaning, we cannot neglect the fact, 
among others, that the patient had suddenly taken leave of her husband and 
her in-laws — and thus given a marriage her mother disapproved of a conclu- 
535 sion that had not changed in the interim — due to the conviction she had formed 

that these country bumpkins were planning nothing less, in order to finish off 
this good-for-nothing city girl, than to carve her up piece by piece. 

But what difference does it make whether or not one has to resort to the 
fantasy of the fragmented body in order to understand how the patient, a pris- 
oner of the dyadic relationship, was responding once again here to a situation 
that was beyond her? 

For our present purposes, it is enough that the patient admitted that the sen- 
tence was allusive, even though she was unable for all that to demonstrate any- 
thing other than perplexity over which of the two people present or the one 
person absent was targeted by the allusion. For it thus appears that the "I," as 
subject of the sentence in direct speech, left in abeyance — in accordance with 
its function as a "shifter," as it is called in linguistics 1 — the designation of the 
speaking subject for as long as the allusion, in its conjuratory intention no 
doubt, itself remained oscillating. After a pause, this uncertainty came to an 
end with the apposition of the word "sow," itself too loaded with invective to 
follow the oscillation isochronously. This is how the discourse managed to 
realize its rejecting intention in the hallucination. In the locus where the 
unspeakable object was rejected into the real, a word made itself heard 
because, in coming to the place of what has no name, it was unable to follow 
the subject's intention without detaching itself from it by the dash that intro- 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 449 

duces the reply — opposing its disparaging antistrophe to the grumbling of the 
strophe that was thus restored to the patient with the index of the I, resem- 
bling in its opacity the exclamations of love, when, running short of signifiers 
to call the object of its epithalamion, it employs the crudest imaginary means: 

"I'll eat you up . . ." 

"My sweetie! [Ckou/]" 

"You'll love it..." 

"You dog, you! [£ar/]" 

4. I mention this example here only to show in a real-life case that the func- 
tion of unrealization is not entirely located in the symbol. For in order for its 
irruption in the real to be incontrovertible, the symbol need but present itself, 
as it commonly does, in the form of a broken chain. 2 536 

We also see here the effect every signifier has, once it is perceived, of arous- 
ing in the percipiens an assent composed of the awakening of the percipiens ' 
hidden duplicity by the signifier's manifest ambiguity. 

Of course, all of this can be considered to be a mirage from the classic per- 
spective of the unifying subject. 

But it is striking that this perspective, reduced to itself, offers only such 
impoverished views regarding hallucination, for example, that the work of a 
madman, as remarkable as Judge Schreber proves to be in his Memoirs of My 
Nervous Illness* after being well received, even before Freud, by psychiatrists, 
can be regarded, even after Freud, as a text worth reading as an introduction 
to the phenomenology of psychosis, and not simply for beginners. 4 

This work provided me with the basis for a structural analysis in my 
1955-1956 seminar on Freudian structures in the psychoses when, following 
Freud's advice, I reexamined it. 

The relation between the signifier and the subject that this analysis uncov- 
ers can be found — as is apparent in this preamble — in the very appearance of 
the phenomena, provided that, coming back to it from Freud's experience, 
one knows where it leads. 

But, if properly carried out, an approach that starts from the phenomenon 
leads back to this point, as was the case for me when my initial study of para- 
noia thirty years ago brought me to the threshold of psychoanalysis. 5 

Nowhere, in fact, is the fallacious conception of a psychical process in 537 

Jaspers' sense — in which a symptom is merely an index — more irrelevant than 
in dealing with psychosis, because nowhere is the symptom more clearly artic- 
ulated in the structure itself, assuming one knows how to read it. 

This makes it incumbent upon us to define this process by the most radi- 
cal determinants of man's relation to the signifier. 



45o Ecrits 

5. But we need not have reached this stage to be interested in the variety of 
forms verbal hallucinations assume in Schreber's Memoirs, or to recognize in 
them differences quite other than those by which they are "classically" clas- 
sified, according to the way they involve the percipiens (the degree of his 
"belief") or the latter's reality ("auditivation"): namely, differences that stem 
instead from their speech structure, insofar as this structure is already in the 
per cep turn. 

If we consider the text of the hallucinations alone, a distinction immediately 
arises for the linguist between code phenomena and message phenomena. 

Belonging to the code phenomena, in this approach, are the voices that use 
the Grundsprache, which I translate as "basic language" \langue-de-fond\ and 
which Schreber describes (S. 13) 6 as "a vigorous though somewhat antiquated 
German, which is especially characterized by its great wealth of euphe- 
misms." Elsewhere (S. 167) he ruefully refers to "its form, which is authentic 
on account of its characteristics of noble distinction and simplicity." 

These code phenomena are specified in locutions that are neological in both 
their form (new compound words, though the compounding here takes place 
in accordance with the rules of the patient's mother tongue) and usage. Hal- 
lucinations inform the subject of the forms and usages that constitute the neo- 
code: the subject owes to them, for example, first and foremost, the term 
Grundsprache that designates this neo-code. 

We are dealing here with something fairly akin to the messages that linguists 
call "autonymous," insofar as it is the signifier itself (and not what it signifies) 
538 that is the object of the communication. However, this peculiar but normal rela- 

tion of the message to itself is redoubled here, in that these messages are taken 
to be borne by beings whose relations are enunciated by the messages them- 
selves, in modes that prove to be quite analogous to the connections between 
signifiers. The term Nervenanhang, which I translate as "nerve-annexation," 
and which also comes from these messages, illustrates this remark insofar as 
passion and action between these beings are reduced to those annexed or dis- 
annexed nerves, but also insofar as these nerves, just like the divine rays 
(Gottesstrahlen) with which they are homogeneous, are nothing but the entifi- 
cation of the spoken words they bear (S. 130, which the voices formulate as: 
"Do not forget that the nature of the rays is that they must speak"). 

This is the system's relation to its own constitution as signifier, which should 
be filed under the question of metalanguage and which, in my opinion, 
demonstrates the impropriety of this notion if it is intended to define elements 
differentiated within language. 

Let us note, on the other hand, that we are presented here with phenom- 
ena that have mistakenly been called intuitive due to the fact that the effect of 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 45 1 

signification anticipates the development of signification therein. What is actu- 
ally involved is an effect of the signifier, insofar as its degree of certainty (sec- 
ond degree: signification of signification) takes on a weight proportional to 
the enigmatic void that first presents itself in the place of signification itself. 

What is amusing in this case is that it is precisely to the extent that the sig- 
nified high tension drops for the subject — that is, that the hallucinations turn 
into refrains, mere repetitions whose emptiness is imputed to beings devoid 
of intelligence and personality, or who are even altogether effaced from the 
register of being — it is to this very extent, as I was saying, that the voices high- 
light the Seelenauffassung, the "soul-conception" (in the basic language); this 
conception is manifested in a catalog of thoughts that is not unworthy of a 
book of classical psychology. This catalog is tied to a pedantic intention on 
the part of the voices, which does not stop the subject from making highly rel- 
evant comments on it. Note that the source of terms is always carefully ref- 
erenced in these comments; for example, when the subject uses the word Instani 
(S. 30 note; see also notes on pages 11 to 21), he emphasizes in a note: "this 539 

expression ... is mine." 

This is why the primordial importance of memory-thoughts (Erinnerungs- 
gedanken) in the psychical economy does not escape him, and he immediately 
offers proof of this in the poetic and musical use of modulating reprise. 

Our patient, who provides the priceless description of this "soul-concep- 
tion" as "a somewhat idealized representation which souls had formed of 
human life and thought" (S. 164), thinks that he has "gained insight into the 
nature of human thought processes and human feelings for which many a 
psychologist might envy me" (S. 167). 

I would agree all the more readily in that, unlike them, he does not imag- 
ine that he has wrested this knowledge, whose scope he assesses so humor- 
ously, from the nature of things, and in that, while he thinks that he must make 
use of it, it is, as I have just indicated, on the basis of a semantic analysis! 7 

But to return to the thread of my argument, let us turn to the phenomena 
that I will contrast with the preceding ones as message phenomena. 

The latter are interrupted messages, by means of which a relationship is 
sustained between the subject and his divine interlocutor, a relationship to 
which the messages give the form of a challenge* or an endurance test. 

Indeed, his partner's voice limits the messages in question to the beginning 
of a sentence whose complement of meaning poses, moreover, no problem to 
the subject, except for its harassing, offensive character, which is usually so 
idiotic as to discourage him. The valiance he displays by not faltering in his 
reply, and even in eluding the traps he is led into, is not the least important 
aspect for our analysis of the phenomenon. 



452 Ecrits 

But I will dwell here again on the very text of what might be called the hal- 
lucinatory provocation (or better, protasis). The subject gives us the follow- 
ing examples of such a structure (S. 217), 

1 . Nun will ich mich . . . ("Now I shall . . ."), 

2. Sie sollen ndmlich . . . ("You were to . . ."), 

3. Das will ich mir . . . ("I shall ..."), 

540 to take only these three — to which he must reply with their significant sup- 

plement, which to him is not open to doubt, namely: 

1 . "resign myself to being stupid," 

2. "be exposed (a word of the basic language) as denying God, as given to 
voluptuous excesses," not to mention other things, 

3. "think about that first." 

One might note that each sentence is interrupted at the point at which the 
group of words that one might call "index-terms" ends, the latter being those 
designated by their function in the signifier, according to the terminology 
employed above, as shifters* — that is, the terms in the code that indicate the 
subject's position on the basis of the message itself. 

After which, the properly lexical part of the sentence — in other words, 
the part that includes the words the code defines by their use, whether it is 
the shared code or the delusional code — remains elided. 

Aren't we struck by the predominance of the signifier's function in these 
two orders of phenomena, and even incited to seek what lies at the root of the 
association they constitute: that of a code constituted by messages about the 
code and of a message reduced to what, in*the code, indicates the message? 

All this would have to be carefully transcribed onto a graph, 8 the graph 
with which I have tried this year to represent the signifier's internal connec- 
tions, insofar as they structure the subject. 

For there is a topology here that is altogether different from the topology 
we might be led to imagine by the requirement of an immediate parallelism 
between the form of the phenomena and their pathways in the central nerv- 
ous system. 

But this topology — which follows the lines laid down by Freud when, after 
opening up the field of the unconscious with dreams, he set out to describe 
the dynamics of the unconscious, without feeling bound by any concern for 
cortical localization — is precisely what may best prepare the questions we 
should ask when investigating the surface of the cerebral cortex. 

For it is only after linguistic analysis of the phenomenon of language that 
one can legitimately establish the relation it constitutes in the subject and at 
the same time delimit the order of "machines" (in the purely associative sense 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis ^5j 

this term takes on in network theory in mathematics) that can bring about this 541 

phenomenon. 

It is no less remarkable that it was the Freudian experience that led the author 
of these lines in the direction presented here. Let us examine, then, what this 
experience contributes to our question. 

77. After Freud 

1 . What did Freud contribute here? I began by stating that, regarding the prob- 
lem of psychosis, his contribution led to backsliding. 

This is immediately apparent in the simplistic character of the mainsprings 
invoked in conceptions that all boil down to the following fundamental 
schema: how can the inside be shifted outside? Indeed, even though the sub- 
ject here encompasses an opaque id, it is nevertheless as an ego — that is, and 
this is clearly expressed in the current psychoanalytic orientation, as the same 
inexhaustible ^rajezWw — that he is invoked in explaining psychosis. Thisper- 
cipiens has total power over its no less unchanged correlate, reality, and the 
model for this power is derived from a fact accessible to everyday experience, 
that of affective projection. 

For what is noteworthy about current theories is the absolutely uncritical 
way in which the mechanism of projection is put to use in them. Everything 
objects to it, yet nothing stops them, least of all the obvious clinical fact that 
there is no relation between affective projection and its supposed delusional 
effects — between, for example, the jealousy of the unfaithful spouse and the 
jealousy of the alcoholic. 

Freud, in the essay in which he interprets the Schreber case, which is read 
badly when it is reduced to the rehashings that followed it, uses the form of a 
grammatical deduction in order to present the switching involved in the rela- 
tion to the other in psychosis. He employs the different ways of negating the 
proposition, "I love him," from which it follows that the negative judgment is 
structured in two stages: the first is a reversal of the value of the verb ("I hate 
him") or inversion of the gender of the agent or object ("It is not me — or It is 
not him — but her," or vice versa); the second is a reversal of subjects ("He 542 

hates me," "It is her that he loves," "It is she who loves me"). But no one pays 
any attention to the logical problems formally involved in this deduction. 

Furthermore, while Freud in this text expressly dismisses the mechanism 
of projection as insufficient to account for the problem — entering at this point 
into a very long, detailed, and subtle discussion of repression, which offers us, 
all the same, some toothing stones for our problem — suffice it to say that these 



454 Ecrits 

toothing stones continue to stand out inviolate above the clouds of dust raised 
on the psychoanalytic construction site. 

2. After that, Freud contributed "On Narcissism." It was put to the same use, 
namely, to a sort of pumping — a sucking in and spewing out, depending on 
the stages of the theorem — of libido by the percipiens, which is thereby capa- 
ble of inflating and deflating a windbag reality. 

Freud provided the first theory of the way in which the ego is constituted 
on the model of the other in the new subjective economy determined by the 
unconscious; the response was to acclaim the rediscovery in this ego of the 
good old reliable percipiens and of the synthesizing function. 

Is it surprising that the only use made of it regarding psychosis was to defin- 
itively foreground the notion of "loss of reality"? 

That's not all. In 1924 Freud wrote an incisive article, "The Loss of Real- 
ity in Neurosis and Psychosis," in which he directs our attention back to the 
fact that the problem is not that of the loss of reality, but of the mainspring of 
what takes its place. His words fell on deaf ears, since the problem had already 
been resolved: the prop room is inside and the props are taken out as the need 
arises. 

Such is, in fact, the schema with which even Katan remains satisfied — in 
his studies in which he examines so attentively the stages of Schreber's psy- 
chosis, guided by his concern to penetrate the prepsychotic phase — when he 
highlights the defense against instinctual temptation, against masturbation and 
homosexuality in this case, in order to justify the upsurge of hallucinatory phan- 
tasmagoria, which he considers to be a curtain interposed by the operation of 
the percipiens between the tendency and its real stimulus. 
543 What a relief this simplicity would have been to me at one time, if I had 

thought it sufficed to explain the problem of literary creation in psychosis! 

3. Yet can any problem still constitute an obstacle to the discourse of psy- 
choanalysis, when the fact that a tendency gets expressed in reality is consid- 
ered indicative of regression in the couple they form? What could possibly 
tire minds that let people talk to them of regression, without distinguishing 
between regression in structure, regression in history, and regression in devel- 
opment (which Freud always differentiates as topographical, temporal, or 
genetic)? 

I shall refrain from spending time here taking inventory of the confusion. 
It is old hat to those whom I train and would be of no interest to others. I will 
confine myself to pointing out, for their common meditation, the sense of unfa- 
miliarity that is produced — in those whose speculation has condemned itself 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 455 

to go around in circles between development and entourage — by the simple 
mention of characteristics that are nevertheless the very framework of the 
Freudian edifice: namely, the equivalence Freud maintains of the imaginary 
function of the phallus in the two sexes (long the despair of fans of false "bio- 
logical," that is naturalist, windows); the castration complex considered to be 
a normative phase of the subject's assumption [assomprion] of his own sex; the 
myth of the killing of the father rendered necessary by the constitutive pres- 
ence of the Oedipus complex in every personal history; and, "last but not . . .,"* 
the splitting brought about in love life by the instance, indeed the repetitive 
instance, of the object that is always to be refound as unique. Must we again 
recall the fundamentally dissident nature of Freud's notion of the drive, the 
theoretical disjunction between the tendency, its direction, and its object, and 
not only its original "perversion" but its involvement in a conceptual sys- 
tematic, a systematic whose place Freud indicated, from the very beginning 
of his work, under the heading of the sexual theories of children? 

Is it not clear that we have been far from all that for a long time now, in an 
educational naturism that no longer has any other principle than the notion of 
gratification and its counterpart, frustration, which is nowhere mentioned in 
Freud's work? 

The structures revealed by Freud no doubt continue to sustain — not only in 544 

their plausibility, but also in the way they are handled — the vague dynamisms 
with which contemporary psychoanalysis claims to orient its flow. A forsaken 
technique would merely be more capable still of performing "miracles" — were 
it not for the extra dose of conformism that reduces its effects to those of an 
ambiguous combination of social suggestion and psychological superstition. 

4. It is even striking that a demand for rigor is found only in those people 
whom the course of things keeps out of the mainstream in some respect, such 
as Ida Macalpine, who gives us cause to marvel, encountering, as we do in 
reading her work, a sound thinker. 

Her critique of the cliche that confines itself to the factor of the suppres- 
sion of a homosexual drive — which is, moreover, altogether undefined — to 
explain psychosis is brilliant, and she demonstrates it amply in the Schreber 
case itself. Homosexuality, which is supposedly the determining factor in para- 
noiac psychosis, is actually a symptom articulated in the psychotic process. 

This process had begun long before the first sign of it appeared in Schre- 
ber in the form of one of those hypnopompic ideas — which, in their fragility, 
present us with tomographies (as it were) of the ego — an idea whose imagi- 
nary function is sufficiently indicated to us by its form: that it would "be beau- 
tiful to be a woman submitting to the act of copulation" [S. 36]. 



456 Ecrits 

Macalpine, to introduce a valid criticism here, nevertheless seems to neg- 
lect the fact that, although Freud places considerable stress on the homosex- 
ual question, it is in order to show, first of all, that it conditions the idea of 
grandeur in delusion; but, more essentially, he indicates in it the mode of 
alterity by which the subject's metamorphosis occurs — in other words, the 
place where his successive delusional "transferences" occur. She would have 
done better to put her trust in the reason why Freud here again stubbornly 
insists on a reference to the Oedipus complex, which she does not accept. 

This difficulty would have led her to discoveries that would certainly have 
been illuminating to us, for everything still remains to be said about the func- 
tion of what is known as the inverted Oedipus complex. Macalpine prefers to 

545 reject all recourse to Oedipus here, making up for it with a procreation fan- 
tasy found in children of both sexes in the form of pregnancy fantasies — which, 
moreover, she considers to be related to the structure of hypochondria. 9 

This fantasy is, indeed, essential, and I will even add that in the first case 
in which I obtained this fantasy in a man, it was by a means that marked an 
important milestone in my career, and he was neither a hypochondriac nor a 
hysteric. 

Macalpine feels — rather subtly, indeed surprisingly so given the way things 
are today — a need to tie this fantasy to a symbolic structure. But in order to 
find a structure independent of the Oedipus complex, she goes off in search 
of ethnographic references, her assimilation of which is hard to gauge in her 
text. This involves the "heliolithic" theme, which has been championed by 
one of the most eminent supporters of the English diffusionist school. I am 
aware of the merit of these conceptions, but they do not seem to me to even 
remotely corroborate Macalpine 's idea that asexual procreation is a "primi- 
tive" conception. 10 

Macalpine 's error is seen elsewhere, in the fact that she arrives at a result 
that is diametrically opposed to the result she is seeking. 

By isolating a fantasy in a dynamic that she terms intrapsychic, in accor- 
dance with the conception of transference she introduces, she ends up desig- 
nating the psychotic's uncertainty about his own sex as the sensitive spot where 

546 the analyst must intervene, contrasting the felicitous effects of intervening there 
with the catastrophic effect — which is, in fact, constantly found in work with 
psychotics — of any suggestion that goes in the direction of getting the sub- 
ject to recognize his latent homosexuality. 

Now, uncertainty about one 's own sex is a common feature in hysteria, 
whose diagnostic encroachments Macalpine points out. 

The fact is that no imaginary formation is specific 1 1 or determinant in either 
the structure or dynamics of a process. And this is why one condemns oneself 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 45y 

to missing both of them when, in the hope of grasping them better, one flouts 
the symbolic articulation that Freud discovered at the same time as the uncon- 
scious that is, in effect, consubstantial with the unconscious. The necessity of 
this articulation is what he indicates to us in his methodical reference to the 
Oedipus complex. 

5. How can we hold Macalpine responsible for such neglect when, rather than 
being remedied, it has continued to grow in psychoanalysis? 

That is why, in order to define the minimal split, which is certainly called 
for, between neurosis and psychosis, psychoanalysts are reduced to deferring 
to the ego's responsibility regarding reality: this is what I call leaving the prob- 
lem of psychosis in statu quo ante. 

One point was, however, very precisely designated as the bridge across the 
border between the two domains. 

Analysts have even emphasized it in the most inordinate way concerning 
the question of transference in psychosis. It would be uncharitable to repeat 547 

here what has been said on the subject. I shall simply take the opportunity of 
paying homage to Macalpine 's intelligence, when she sums up a position in 
line with the genius deployed in psychoanalysis today in these terms: in short, 
psychoanalysts claim to be able to cure psychosis in all cases in which psy- 
chosis is not involved. 12 

It is on this point that Midas, laying down the law one day regarding the 
cases in which psychoanalysis is indicated, expressed himself thus: "It is clear 
that psychoanalysis is possible only with a subject for whom there is an other!" 
And Midas crossed the bridge back and forth thinking it to be a wasteland. 
How could he have done otherwise, since he was unaware that the river lay 
there? 

The term "other," never before heard by the psychoanalytic people, had 
no other meaning for them than the whispering of the reeds. 

III. With Freud 

1 . It is rather striking that a dimension that is felt to be that of something-Other 
[Autre-chose] in so many of the experiences men have — not at all without think- 
ing about them, rather in thinking about them, but without thinking that they 
are thinking, and like Telemachus thinking of the expense — has never been 
thought out to the point of being suitably stated by those whom the idea of 
thought assures that they are thinking. 

Desire, boredom, confinement, revolt, prayer, wakefulness (I would like 
us to pause here, since Freud explicitly refers to the latter by mentioning, in 



458 Ecrits 

the middle of his text on Schreber, a passage from Nietzsche's Zarathustra)^ 
and panic are evidence of the dimension of this Elsewhere and draw our atten- 
tion to it, not as mere moods that deadpan thinkers can put in their place, but 
much more so as permanent principles of collective organizations, without 
which it does not seem human life can maintain itself for long. 
548 It is probably not out of the question that the most thinkable one who thinks- 

about-thinking, thinking that he himself is this Other-thing \Autre-chose\ may 
have always been unable to tolerate this possible competition. 

But this aversion becomes perfectly clear once the conceptual connection, 
which nobody had yet thought of, was made between this Elsewhere and the 
locus, present for all of us and closed to each of us, in which Freud discovered 
that, without us thinking about it, and thus without anyone being able to think 
he thinks about it better than anyone else, it [fa] thinks. It thinks rather badly, 
but it thinks steadily. It is in these very terms that Freud announces the uncon- 
scious to us: thoughts that, while their laws are not exactly the same as those 
of our everyday thoughts, whether noble or vulgar, are certainly articulated. 

There is no longer any way, therefore, to reduce this Elsewhere to the imag- 
inary form of a nostalgia for some lost or future Paradise; what one finds there 
is the paradise of the child's loves, where — baudelaire de Dieu! — scandalous 
things happen. 

Moreover, if any doubt still remained in our minds, Freud called the locus 
of the unconscious ein anderer Schauplat^ another scene, borrowing a term 
that had struck him in a text by Fechner (who, in his experimentalism, is not 
at all the realist our textbooks suggest he is); Freud repeats it some twenty 
times in his early works. 

This spray of cold water having hopefully sharpened our wits, let us move 
on to the scientific formulation of the subject's relation to this Other. 

2. "In order to set down our ideas" and orient the souls who are lost here, I 
shall apply the said relation to the previously introduced L schema, which I 
will simplify as follows: 



£ Schema 




549 This schema signifies that the condition of the subject, S (neurosis or psychosis), 

depends on what unfolds in the Other, A. What unfolds there is articulated like 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 45$ 

a discourse (the unconscious is the Other's discourse [discours de l'Autre]) y whose 
syntax Freud first sought to define for those fragments of it that reach us in 
certain privileged moments, such as dreams, slips, and witticisms. 

Why would the subject be interested in this discourse if he were not a party 
to it? He is, indeed, insofar as he is drawn to the four corners of the schema: 
namely, S, his ineffable and stupid existence; a, his objects; a ', his ego, that is, 
his form as reflected in his objects; and A, the locus from which the question 
of his existence may arise for him. 

For it is an experiential truth for psychoanalysis that the question of the sub- 
ject's existence arises for him, not in the kind of anxiety it provokes at the level 
of the ego, which is only one element of his cortege, but as an articulated ques- 
tion — "What am I there?" — about his sex and his contingency in being: 
namely, that on the one hand he is a man or a woman, and on the other that he 
might not be, the two conjugating their mystery and knotting it in symbols of 
procreation and death. The fact that the question of his existence envelops the 
subject, props him up, invades him, and even tears him apart from every angle, 
is revealed to the analyst by the tensions, suspense, and fantasies that he 
encounters. It should be added that this question is articulated in the Other in 
the form of elements of a particular discourse. It is because these phenomena 
are organized in accordance with the figures of this discourse that they have 
the fixity of symptoms and that they are legible and dissolve when deciphered. 

3. I must therefore emphasize the fact that this question is not presented in the 
unconscious as ineffable and that this question is a calling into question 
there — that is, that prior to any analysis this question is articulated there in 
discrete elements. This is of capital importance, for these elements are the ones 
that linguistic analysis obliges us to isolate as signifiers, and they are grasped 
here functioning in their purest form at what is simultaneously the most unlikely 
and likely point: 

• the most unlikely, since their chain is found to subsist in an alterity with 
respect to the subject, which is as radical as that of the still indecipherable 550 
hieroglyphics in the desert's solitude; 

• the most likely, because only here can their function — that of inducing sig- 
nification into the signified by imposing their structure on it — appear quite 
unambiguously. 

For the furrows opened up by the signifier in the real world will certainly 
seek out the gaps — in order to widen them — that the real world as an entity 
[e'tant] offers the signifier, so much so that an ambiguity may well persist as 



460 Ecrits 

to whether the signifier does not, in fact, follow the law of the signified here. 
But this is not die case at the level of the calling into question, not of the 
subject's place in the world, but of his existence as a subject, a calling into 
question which, starting with him, will extend to his within-the-world rela- 
tion to objects, and to the existence of the world, insofar as its existence, too, 
can be called into question beyond its order. 

4. It is of the utmost importance to observe — in the experience of the uncon- 
scious Other where Freud is our guide — that the question does not find its 
outlines in protomorphic proliferations of the image, in vegetative intumes- 
cences, or in animastic halos radiating from the palpitations of life. 

This is the whole difference between Freud's orientation and that of Jung's 
school, which latches onto such forms: Wandlungen der libido. These forms may 
be brought to the fore in a mantic, for they can be produced using the proper 
techniques (promoting imaginary creations such as reveries, drawings, etc.) in 
a situable site. This site can be seen on my schema stretched between a and a — 
that is, in the veil of the narcissistic mirage, which is eminently suited to sus- 
taining whatever is reflected in it through its effects of seduction and capture. 

If Freud rejected this mantic, it was at the point at which it neglects the 
guiding function of a signifying articulation, which operates on the basis of 
its internal law and of material subjected to the poverty that is essential to it. 

Similarly, it is precisely to the extent that this style of articulation has been 
maintained, by virtue of the Freudian Word \yerbe\, even if it has been dis- 
membered, in the community that claims to be orthodox, that such a profound 
551 difference persists between the two schools — although, given where things 

now stand, neither school is in a position to say why. As a result, the level of 
their practice will soon seem to be reduced to the distance between the forms 
of reverie found in the Alps and the Atlantic. 

To borrow a formulation that delighted Freud when he heard it from 
Charcot, "That doesn't stop it from existing," it here being the Other, in 
its place, A. 

For if the Other is removed from its place, man can no longer even sustain 
himself in the position of Narcissus. The anima^ like a rubber band, snaps back 
to the animus and the animus to the animal, who between S and a maintains 
considerably closer "foreign relations" with its Umwelt than our own, with- 
out our being able to say, moreover, that its relation with the Other is nil, but 
simply that we only ever see it in sporadic sketches of neurosis. 

5. The L of the calling-into-question of the subject in his existence has a com- 
binatory structure that must not be confused with its spatial aspect. In this 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 461 

respect, it is the signifier itself that must be articulated in the Other, especially 
in its quaternary topology. 

To support this structure, we find here the three signifiers where the Other 
may be identified in the Oedipus complex. They suffice to symbolize the sig- 
nifications of sexual reproduction, under the relational signifiers of love and 
procreation. 

The fourth term is given by the subject in his reality, foreclosed as such in 
the system and entering into the play of signifiers only in the form of the 
dummy [mort], but becoming the true subject as this play of signifiers makes 
him signify. 

Indeed, this play of signifiers is not inert, since it is animated in each par- 
ticular case [partie] by the whole ancestral history of real others that the denom- 
ination of signifying Others involves in the Subject's contemporaneity. 
Furthermore, insofar as this play is properly instituted above and beyond each 
case, it already structures the three instances in the subject — (ideal) ego, real- 
ity, and superego — which were determined by Freud 's second topography. 

Moreover, the subject enters the game as the dummy [mort], but it is as a 552 

living being that he plays it; it is in his life that he must play the suit he calls 
trump at some point. He will do so by using a set* of imaginary figures, selected 
from among the innumerable forms of animastic relations, the choice of which 
involves a certain arbitrariness, since, in order to cover the symbolic ternary 
homologically, it must be numerically reduced. 

To do so, the polar relation — by which the specular image (of the narcis- 
sistic relationship) is linked, as unifying, to the set of imaginary elements of 
the so-called fragmented body — provides a couple that is not merely readied 
by a natural fit between development and structure to serve as a homologue 
for the symbolic Mother/ Child relation. While the imaginary couple of the 
mirror stage, through the counter-natural features it manifests, must be 
related to a specific prematurity of birth in man, it proves appropriate for pro- 
viding the imaginary triangle with the base that the symbolic relation may, in 
some sense, overlap (see the R schema). 

Indeed, it is by means of the gap in the imaginary opened up by this prema- 
turity, and in which the effects of the mirror stage proliferate, that the human 
animal is capable of imagining himself mortal — which does not mean that he 
could do so without his symbiosis with the symbolic, but rather that, without 
the gap that alienates him from his own image, this symbiosis with the symbolic, 
in which he constitutes himself as subject to death, could not have occurred. 

6. The third term of the imaginary ternary — the one where the subject is iden- 
tified, on the contrary, with his living being — is nothing but the phallic image, 



462 



Ecrits 



553 



whose unveiling in this function is not the least scandalous facet of the 
Freudian discovery. 

I will now inscribe here, as a conceptual visualization of this double ter- 
nary, what I shall henceforth call the R schema, which represents the lines that 
condition the perceptum — in other words, the object — insofar as these lines 
circumscribe the field of reality rather than merely depending on it. 

Thus, in considering the vertices of the symbolic triangle — I as the ego- 
ideal, M as the signifier of the primordial object, and P [tor pere\ as the posi- 
tion in A of the Name-of-the-Father — we can see how the homologous 
pinning of the signification of the subject S under the signifier of the phallus 
may have repercussions on the support of the field of reality delimited by the 
quadrangle Miml. The other two vertices of this quadrangle, i and /rc, repre- 
sent the two imaginary terms of the narcissistic relation: the ego [m for moi] 
and the specular image. 



^ Schema M i 




We can thus situate between i and M — that is, in a — the extremities of the 
segments Sz, Sa 1 , Sa 2 , Sa n , and SM, where we place figures of the imaginary 
other in the relationships of erotic aggression where they are realized. Simi- 
larly, we can situate between m and I, that is in a ', the extremities of segments 
S/72, Scz' 1 , Sa' 2 , Sa' n , and SI, where the ego is identified, from its specular Urbild 
to the paternal identification involved in the ego-ideal. 14 
554 Those who attended my 1956—1957 seminar know the use I made of the 

imaginary ternary laid out here — whose vertex, I, is really constituted by the 
child, qua desired — in order to restore to the notion of the Object Relation, 15 
somewhat discredited by the mass of nonsense that the term has been used to 
validate in recent years, the capital of experience that legitimately belongs to it. 

In effect, this schema allows us to show the relations that refer not to pre- 
oedipal stages — which are not, of course, nonexistent, but are analytically 
unthinkable (as is sufficiently obvious in Melanie Klein's faltering but not alto- 
gether misguided work) — but to the pregenital stages insofar as they are organ- 
ized by the retroactive effect of the Oedipus complex. 

The whole problem of the perversions consists in conceiving how the child, 
in its relationship with its mother — a relationship that is constituted in analy- 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 463 

sis not by the child 's biological dependence, but by its dependence on her love, 
that is, by its desire for her desire — identifies with the imaginary object of her 
desire insofar as the mother herself symbolizes it in the phallus. 

The phallocentrism produced by this dialectic is all that need concern us 
here. It is, of course, entirely conditioned by the intrusion of the signifier in 555 

man's psyche and strictly impossible to deduce from any preestablished har- 
mony between this psyche and the nature it expresses. 

This imaginary effect, which can be felt as a discordance only on the basis 
of a belief in a normativity proper to instinct, nevertheless gave rise to the long 
quarrel — which is now dead, but not without leaving wreckage in its wake — 
concerning the primary or secondary nature of the phallic phase. Even apart 
from the extreme importance of the question, this quarrel would warrant our 
interest due to the dialectical exploits it imposed on Ernest Jones in order to 
maintain, with the claim that he was in complete agreement with Freud, a posi- 
tion that was diametrically opposed to Freud 's — namely, a position that made 
him, with certain minor qualifications no doubt, the champion of the British 
feminists, enamored of their "to each his own" principle: boys have the dick, 
girls have the c . . . 

7. Freud thus unveiled the imaginary function of the phallus as the pivotal 
point in the symbolic process that completes, in both sexes, the calling into ques- 
tion of one 's sex by the castration complex. 

The current obscuring of this function of the phallus (reduced to the role 
of a part-object) in the analytic chorus is simply the continuation of the pro- 
found mystification in which culture maintains its symbol — in the sense in 
which paganism itself presented it only at the culmination of its most secret 
mysteries. 

In the subjective economy, commanded as it is by the unconscious, it is, in 
effect, a signification that is evoked only by what I call a metaphor — to be 
precise, the paternal metaphor. 

And this brings us back, since it is with Macalpine that I have chosen to 
dialogue, to her need to refer to a "heliolithism," by which she claims to see 
procreation codified in a preoedipal culture, where the father's procreative 
function is eluded. 

Anything that can be put forward along these lines, in whatever form, will 
only better highlight the signifying function that conditions paternity. 

For in another debate dating back to the time when psychoanalysts still puz- 
zled over doctrine, Ernest Jones, with a remark that was more relevant than 556 
his aforementioned one, contributed a no less inappropriate argument. 

Indeed, concerning the state of beliefs in some Australian tribe, he refused 



464 Ecrits 

to admit that any collectivity of men could overlook the fact of experience 
that — except in the case of an enigmatic exception — no woman gives birth 
without having engaged in coitus, or even be ignorant of the requisite lapse 
of time between the two events. Now the credit that seems to me to be quite 
legitimately granted to human capacities to observe reality [reel] is precisely 
what has not the slightest importance in the matter. 

For, if the symbolic context requires it, paternity will nevertheless be attrib- 
uted to the woman's encounter with a spirit at such and such a fountain or at 
a certain rock in which he is supposed to dwell. 

This is clearly what demonstrates that the attribution of procreation to the 
father can only be the effect of a pure signifier, of a recognition, not of the real 
father, but of what religion has taught us to invoke as the Name-of-the-Father. 

Of course, there is no need of a signifier to be a father, any more than there 
is to be dead, but without a signifier, no one will ever know anything about 
either of these states of being. 

Let me remind those who cannot be persuaded to seek in Freud's texts 
something to complement the wisdom that their coaches dispense to them, 
how insistently Freud stresses the affinity of the two signifying relations I just 
mentioned, whenever the neurotic subject (especially the obsessive) manifests 
this affinity through the conjunction of their themes. 

How, indeed, could Freud fail to recognize such an affinity, when the neces- 
sity of his reflection led him to tie the appearance of the signifier of the Father, 
as author of the Law, to death — indeed, to the killing of the Father — thus show- 
ing that, if this murder is the fertile moment of the debt by which the subject 
binds himself for life to the Law, the symbolic Father, insofar as he signifies 
this Law, is truly the dead Father. 

557 IV. Schreber 's Way 

1. We can now enter into the subjectivity of Schreber's delusion. 

The signification of the phallus, as I said, must be evoked in the subject's 
imaginary by the paternal metaphor. 

This has a precise meaning in the economy of the signifier, whose formal- 
ization I can only recall to mind here, but which is familiar to those who attend 
the seminar I am giving this year on unconscious formations. Namely, the for- 
mula for metaphor, or for signifying substitution'. 

y> x \s 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 466 

Here the capital Ss are signifiers, x is the unknown signification, and s is the 
signified induced by the metaphor, which consists in the substitution in the 
signifying chain of S for S'. The elision of S', represented in the formula by 
the fact that it is crossed out, is the condition of the metaphor's success. 

This applies thus to the metaphor of the Name-of-the-Father, that is, the 
metaphor that puts this Name in the place that was first symbolized by the 
operation of the mother's absence. 

Name-of-the-Father Mother's Desire _ „ , _ , / A \ 

r - 



Name-of-the-Father 



Mother's Desire Signified to the Subject \ Phallus / 

Let us now try to conceive of a circumstance of the subjective position in 
which what responds to the appeal to the Name-of-the-Father is not the 
absence of the real father, for this absence is more than compatible with the 
presence of the signifier, but the lack of the signifier itself. 

This is not a conception for which nothing has prepared us. The signifier's 
presence in the Other is, in effect, a presence that is usually closed off to the 
subject, because it usually persists there in a repressed (verdrdngt) state, and 
insists from that place so as to be represented in the signified by means of its 
repetition automatism (Wiederholungs^wang) . 

Let us extract from several of Freud 's texts a term that is sufficiently artic- 558 

ulated in them to render them unjustifiable if it does not designate in them a 
function of the unconscious that is distinct from the repressed. Let us take as 
demonstrated what constituted the crux of my seminar on the psychoses — 
namely, that this term, Verwerfung^ refers to the most necessary implication of 
Freud's thought when it grapples with the phenomenon of psychosis. 

It is articulated in this register as the absence of Bejahung — the judgment 
of attribution — which Freud posits as a necessary precedent for any possible 
application of Verneinung [negation], the latter, in contrast with Bejahung^ 
being the judgment of existence; meanwhile, the whole article in which he sep- 
arates out this Verneinung as an element of analytic experience demonstrates 
in Verneinung the owning [aveu] of the very signifier that Verneinung annuls. 

The primordial Bejahung thus also bears on the signifier, and other texts 
allow us to recognize this, in particular, Letter 52 of Freud 's correspondence 
with Fliess, in which it is expressly isolated as the term for an original per- 
ception by the name "sign," Zeichen. 

I will thus take Verwerfung to be "foreclosure" of the signifier. At the point 
at which the Name-of-the-Father is summoned — and we shall see how — a 
pure and simple hole may thus answer in the Other; due to the lack of the 



466 Ecrits 

metaphoric effect, this hole will give rise to a corresponding hole in the place 
of phallic signification. 

This is the only form in which it is possible for us to conceptualize some- 
thing whose outcome Schreber presents to us as that of an injury which he is 
in a position to reveal only in part, and in which, he says, the term "soul mur- 
der" (Seelenmord, S. 22), along with the names Flechsig and Schreber, plays 
an essential role. 16 

It is clear that what we are presented with here is a disturbance that occurred 
at the inmost juncture of the subject's sense of life. The censorship, which muti- 
lated the text of his Memoirs before the addition announced by Schreber to 
the rather roundabout explanations that he tried to give of the disturbance 's 
process, inclines me to think that he associated facts that could not be pub- 
559 lished due to the conventions of the time with the names of people who were 

still alive. The following chapter [chapter 3] is thus missing in its entirety and, 
to exercise his perspicacity, Freud had to confine himself to the allusion to 
Faust , Der Freischu\, and Byron's Manfred, the latter work (from which he 
assumes Ahriman, the name of one of the manifestations of God in Schreber's 
delusion, was borrowed) seeming to him to derive its full value in this refer- 
ence from its theme: the hero dies from the curse borne in him by the death 
of the object of fraternal incest. 

For my part — since like Freud I have chosen to trust in a text which, except 
for these mutilations, regrettable as they are, remains a document whose guar- 
antees of credibility place it among the finest — it is in the most highly devel- 
oped form of the delusion, with which the book coincides, that I will try to 
demonstrate a structure that will prove to be similar to the psychotic process 
itself. 

2. Following this line of approach, I will observe — with the hint of surprise 
that Freud sees as the subjective connotation of the unconscious when recog- 
nized — that the delusion deploys its whole tapestry around the power of cre- 
ation attributed to the words of which the divine rays (Gottesstrahlen) are the 
hypostasis. 

This begins as a leitmotiv in the first chapter, where the author first dwells 
on what is shocking to thought about the act of bringing something into exis- 
tence out of nothing, flying, as it does, in the face of the evidence that expe- 
rience provides to thought of the transformations of matter in which reality 
finds its substance. 

He emphasizes this paradox by contrasting it with ideas that are more famil- 
iar to the man he assures us he is, as if there were any need for it: a gebildet 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 46J 

German of the Wilhelmine era, raised on Haeckelian metascientism, to sup- 
port which he provides a list of readings, an occasion for us to fill out, by read- 
ing them, what Gavarni somewhere calls a courageous idea of Man. 17 

It is in this very paradox, reflected by the intrusion of a thought, for him 
hitherto unthinkable, that Schreber sees the proof that something must have 560 

happened that did not proceed from his own mind: a proof which, it seems, 
only the question begging highlighted above in the psychiatrist 's position gives 
us the right to resist. 

3. Having said this, let us for our part confine our attention to a sequence of 
phenomena that Schreber establishes in chapter 15 (S. 204—15). 

At this point in the book we know that the support for his side in the forced 
game of thought (Denlqwang), which God's words constrain him to play (see 
section 1.5 above), has a dramatic stake. God, whose powers of ignorance 
become apparent later, considering the subject to have been annihilated, 
leaves him in the lurch (liegen lassen) — a threat to which we will return fur- 
ther on. 

The fact that the effort to reply — which the subject is thus stuck on, so to 
speak, in this way in his being as a subject — eventually fails at a moment of 
"thinking nothing" (Nichtsdenken [S. 205]), which certainly seems to be the 
most humanly merited of rests (Schreber says [S. 47]), leads, according to 
him, to: 

(a) What he calls the bellowing-miracle (Brullenwunder) , a cry torn from his 
breast that surprises him beyond all warning, whether he is alone or with 
others who are horrified by the image he offers them of his mouth sud- 
denly agape before the unspeakable void, abandoned by the cigar that was 
stuck there a moment before; 

(b) The cries of "help" ("Hiilfe "rufen), made by "those of God's nerves sep- 
arated from the total mass," whose woeful tone is explained by the greater 
distance to which God withdraws [S. 206]; 

(two phenomena in which the subjective rending is indistinguishable enough 
from its signifying mode for me not to belabor the point); 

(c) The imminent appearance — in the occult zone of the perceptual field, in 
the hallway, or in the next room — of manifestations which, though not 
extraordinary, strike the subject as produced for him; 

(d) The appearance, at the next stage, from afar — in other words, out of the 



468 Ecrits 

range of the senses, in the park, in the real — of miraculous creations, that 
is, newly created beings, which, as Macalpine perspicaciously notes, 
always belong to flying species: birds or insects. 

561 Don't these latter meteors of the delusion appear as the trace of a furrow, 
or as a halo effect, showing the two moments at which, from out of its dark- 
ness, the signifier — which has fallen silent in the subject — first makes a glim- 
mer of signification spring forth at the surface of the real, and then causes the 
real to become illuminated with a flash projected from below its underpinning 
of nothingness? 

Thus, at the height of these hallucinatory effects, these creatures — which 
are the only ones that deserve to be called "hallucinations" if we rigorously 
apply the criterion that the phenomenon appear in reality — advise us to recon- 
sider in their symbolic solidarity the trio of Creator, Creature, and Created 
that separates out here. 

4. Indeed, it is from the position of the Creator that we will arrive at that of 
the Created, which subjectively creates the former. 

Unique in his Multiplicity, Multiple in his Unity (these are the attributes by 
which Schreber, like Heraclitus, defines him), this God — broken down, in 
effect, into a hierarchy of realms, which warrants a separate study of its own — 
degrades into beings that pilfer disannexed identities. 

Immanent in these beings, whose capture by their inclusion in Schreber's 
being threatens his integrity, God is not without the intuitive prop of a hyper- 
space, in which Schreber sees even signifying transmissions being conducted 
along filaments (Faden) that materialize the parabolic trajectory by which they 
enter his cranium through the occiput (S. 315). 

Yet, as time goes by, God, in his manifestations, allows the field of beings 
devoid of intelligence to expand ever further, beings who do not know what 
they are saying, inane beings, such as those "miracled birds," those "talking 
birds," those "forecourts of heaven" {Vorhofe des Himmels [S. 19]), in which 
Freud 's misogyny detected at first glance the silly geese that young girls were 
considered to be in the ideals of his time, finding his view confirmed by the 

562 proper names 18 the subject later gives them. Suffice it to say that, in my view, 
they are far more representative by virtue of their surprise at the similarity of 
vocables and the purely homophonic equivalences on which they rely in using 
them (Santiago = Carthago, Chinesenthum = Jesum Christum, etc., S. 210). 

Similarly, God's being in its essence withdraws ever further into the space 
that conditions it, a withdrawal that can be intuited in the increasing slowness 
of his speech, which even goes as far as a halting, stammered articulation of 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 469 

every letter of a word (S. 223). Indeed, were we to follow solely what this 
process indicates, we would regard this unique Other — with^which the sub- 
ject's existence is linked — as suited above all for emptying the places (S. 196 
note) in which the murmuring of words unfolds, were Schreber not careful to 
inform us, in addition, that this God is foreclosed from every other aspect of 
the exchange. He apologizes for doing so, but however sorry he may be about 
it, he nevertheless has to observe it: God is not simply impermeable to expe- 
rience; he is incapable of understanding a living man; he grasps him only from 
the outside (which certainly seems to be his essential mode); all interiority is 
closed off to him. A "writing-down-system" {Aufschreibesystem [S. 126]) — in 
which acts and thoughts are preserved — recalls, of course, in a displaced way, 
the notebook kept by the guardian angel from our catechized childhood, but 
beyond that we should note the absence of any trace of the sounding of loins 
or hearts (S. 20). 

Again, in the same way, after the purification of souls (Laiiterung) has abol- 
ished every remnant of their personal identity in them, everything will be 
reduced to the eternal subsistence of this verbiage, which is the sole means God 
has for knowing the very works that men's ingenuity has constructed (S. 300). 

How could I fail to note here that the grandnephew of the author of Novae 
species insectorum ( Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber) points out that none 
of the miracled creatures is of a new species, or to add — in opposition to 
Macalpine, who sees in them the Dove that conveys the fruitful tidings of the 
Logos from the Father's lap to the Virgin — that they remind me, rather, of 
the species a magician produces from out of the opening of his waistcoat or 
sleeve in great numbers? 

This leads me at last to the surprising conclusion that the subject who has 
fallen prey to these mysteries does not hesitate, Created being though he be, 563 

to use words to deal with the dismayingly silly traps set by his Lord, or to stand 
his ground in the face of the destruction he believes his Lord capable of initi- 
ating against him or anyone else, by virtue of a right that legitimates his doing 
so in the name of the Order of Things (Weltordnung) . The fact that this right 
is on his side is the reason for this unique victory of a creature whom a chain 
of disturbances has made succumb to his creator's "perfidy" (this word, which 
he lets slip out not without reservations, is in French in the original: S. 226). 

Isn't this recalcitrant created being, who holds out against his fall owing to 
the sole support of his Word and to his faith in speech, a strange counterpart 
to Malebranche 's continuous creation? 

This would warrant another look at the authors covered on the Baccalau- 
reate exam in philosophy, for we have perhaps been overly dismissive of those 
who did not help pave the way for homo psychologies, in which our era finds 



4jo Ecrits 

the measure of a humanism that is — don't you think? — perhaps somewhat 
pedestrian. 

Between Malebranche and Locke the cleverer is the crazier . . . 

Yes, but which one is it? There 's the rub, my dear colleague. Come on, 
drop that stiff manner. When will you feel at ease, then, here where you are 
on your home turf? 

5. Let us now try to locate the subject's position, as it is constituted here in 
the symbolic order, on the ternary that maps it in my R schema. 

It seems to me, then, that if the Created, I, takes the place here of the Law 
in P, which is left vacant, the place of the Creator is designated here by this 
liegen lassen, this fundamental leaving in the lurch, in which the absence that 
allowed the primordial symbolization, M, of the mother to be constructed 
appears to be unveiled, by virtue of the foreclosure of the Father. 

Between the two, a line — which would culminate in the Creatures of 
speech occupying the place of the child who doesn't come, dashing the sub- 
ject's hopes (see my postscript further on) — would thus be conceived as skirt- 
ing the hole excavated in the field of the signifier by the foreclosure of the 
Name-of-the-Father (see the I schema, page 571 below). 
564 It is around this hole, where the subject lacks the support of the signifying 

chain, and which need not, as can be observed, be ineffable to induce panic, 
that the whole struggle in which the subject reconstructed himself took place. 
He conducted this struggle honorably, and the "vaginas of heaven" (another 
meaning of the word Vorhofe mentioned above) — the cohort of miracled 
young girls who laid siege to the edges of the hole — commented on it in the 
clucks of admiration wrung from their harpies' throats: " Verfluchter Kerl/ One 
hell of a fellow!" In other words: What a great guy! Alas! It was by way of 
antiphrasis. 

6. For in the field of the imaginary, a gap had already recently opened up for 
him in response to the absence of the symbolic metaphor, a gap that could only 
find a way to be eliminated in the carrying out oiEntmannung (emasculation). 

This was at first horrifying to the subject, then it was accepted as a reason- 
able compromise (verniinftig, S. 177), and thereafter as an irremissible resolve 
(S. 179 note) and a future motive for a redemption concerning the entire world. 

Although we still are not off the hook regarding the term Entmannung, it 
will surely be less of a hindrance to us than it is to Macalpine, given her stand- 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 431 

point, as I have described it. No doubt she thought she was clarifying things 
by substituting the word "unmanning"* for "emasculation,"* which the trans- 
lator of volume III of the Collected Papers had innocently believed to suffice 
to render it; she even went so far as to try to ensure that the translation was 
altered in the authorized version then being prepared. Perhaps she was struck 
by some imperceptible etymological suggestion that differentiated the two 
terms, despite their identical usage. 19 

But to what avail? When she rejects as impropere 20 the calling into ques- 
tion of an organ which, in referring to the Memoirs, she considers to be des- 
tined only to a peaceful reabsorption into the subject's entrails, does she mean 
by this to depict the timorous slyness in which it takes refuge close to the body 
when he shivers with cold, or the conscientious objection the description of 
which the author of The Satyricon maliciously lingers over? 565 

Or could it perhaps be that she erroneously believes that the castration com- 
plex has always had something to do with real castration? 

She is no doubt justified in noticing the ambiguity there is in regarding as 
equivalent the subject's transformation into a woman fFerweiilichung) and 
castration [eviration] (for this is certainly the meaning of Entmannung). But 
she does not see that this ambiguity is that of the very subjective structure 
which produces it here: the latter implies that what borders, at the imaginary 
level, on the subject's transformation into a woman is precisely what makes 
him forfeit any inheritance from which he may legitimately expect the allot- 
ment of a penis to his person. This because, whereas being and having are 
mutually exclusive in theory, they overlap, at least as far as the result is con- 
cerned, when a lack is at stake. Which does not prevent the distinction 
between them from being decisive in what follows. 

As we can perceive if we note that the patient is destined to become a 
woman not because he is foreclosed from the penis, but because he has to be 
the phallus. 

The symbolic parity Madchen = Phallus — or, in English, the equation Girl 
= Phallus, in the words of Fenichel, 21 this equation providing him the theme 
of a worthy, albeit somewhat confused, essay — finds its root in the imaginary 
paths by which the child's desire manages to identify with the mother's want- 
to-be, into which she herself was, of course, inducted by the symbolic law in 
which this want is constituted. 

It is as a result of the same mainspring that, whether they like it or not, women 
in reality [reel] serve as objects for exchanges ordained by the elementary struc- 
tures of kinship, which are sometimes perpetuated in the imaginary, while what 
is simultaneously transmitted in the symbolic order is the phallus. 



4J2 Ecrits 

7. Here the identification, whatever it may be, by which the subject assumed 
[assume] his mother's desire, triggers, as a result of being shaken up, the dis- 

566 solution of the imaginary tripod (note that it was in his mother's apartment, 
where he had taken refuge, that the subject had his first attack of anxious con- 
fusion with suicidal raptus: S. 39-40). 

Divination by the unconscious no doubt warned the subject very early on 
that, unable to be the phallus the mother is missing, there remained the solu- 
tion of being the woman that men are missing. 

This is the meaning of his fantasy, his account of which has often been 
commented on and which I quoted above from the incubation period of his 
second illness — namely, the idea "that it would be beautiful to be a woman 
submitting to the act of copulation" [S. 36]. This is precisely the pons asino- 
rum of the Schreberian literature. 

Yet this solution was premature at the time because, regarding the Men- 
schenspielerei (a term that appeared in the basic language, meaning, in our 
contemporary idiom, brawling among men) that normally would have 
ensued, any attempt by Schreber to call upon real men was bound to fall flat, 
as it were, since they became as improbable as Schreber himself — that is, as 
devoid as he was of any phallus. This is because a stroke was omitted in the 
subject's imaginary — no less for them than for him — the stroke, parallel to 
the outline of their figure, that can be seen in a drawing by little Hans, which 
is familiar to connoisseurs of children's drawings. It was because others were, 
from then on, no more than "images of men cobbled together 1, 2, 3" [ "images 
d'kommes torchees a la six-quatre-deux"] — to combine, in this translation of 
flilchtig hingemachte Manner, Niederland's remarks on the uses oihinmachen 
and Edouard Pichon's inspired translation of the expression into French. 22 

The upshot being that matters might have stagnated in a rather dishonor- 
able fashion, had the subject not succeeded in brilliantly saving the day. 

He himself articulated the way out (in November 1895, that is, two years 
after the beginning of his illness) with the term Versohnung. The word has the 
meaning of expiation or propitiation and, given the characteristics of the basic 
language, must be drawn even more toward the primitive meaning oiSuhne, 

567 that is, sacrifice; instead, people have emphasized its meaning as compromise 
(reasonable compromise, with which the subject explains the accepting of his 
destiny; see page 564 above). 

Here Freud, going well beyond the subject's own rationalization, admits 
paradoxically that the "reconciliation" (since this flat meaning of the term Ver- 
sohnung is the one that was chosen in the French translation) highlighted by 
the subject finds its mainspring in the underhanded dealings of the partner 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 4J3 

involved in this reconciliation — namely, in the consideration that God's wife 
contracts, in any case, an alliance that would satisfy the most pernickety pride. 

I think we can say that Freud failed to live up to his own standards here, 
and in the most contradictory way, in that he accepts as a turning point of the 
delusion what he refused in his general conception — namely, to make the 
homosexual theme depend on the idea of grandeur (I will assume that my read- 
ers are familiar with his text). 

The reason for this failure is found in necessity, that is, in the fact that Freud 
had not yet formulated "On Narcissism: an Introduction" [1914]. 

8. Three years after 191 1 he probably would not have missed the true reason 
for the reversal in Schreber's sense of indignation — initially aroused in him 
by the idea of Entmannung — which was precisely the fact that in the interval 
the subject had died. 

This, at least, was the event that the voices — always informed by the right 
sources and ever constant in their information service — made known to him 
after the fact, complete with the date and name of the newspaper in which the 
event was announced in the obituaries (S. 81). 

We, on the other hand, can make do with the evidence provided by the 
medical certificates, which depict the patient to us as sunk in a catatonic stu- 
por at the relevant time. 

As is commonly the case, his memories of this time are plentiful. Thus we 
know that, modifying the custom according to which one departs this life feet 
first, our patient, so as to do it only in transit, took pleasure in keeping his feet 
out of it — that is, stuck out the window, under the tendentious pretext of expos- 
ing them to the cold (S. 172) — thus reviving perhaps (I will leave this to be 
gauged by those who will only be interested here in the imaginary avatar) the 568 

direction of his birth. 

But this is not a career that one takes up at a full fifty years of age without 
becoming disoriented to some degree. Hence the faithful portrait that the 
voices, annalists I would say, gave him of himself as a "leper corpse leading 
another leper corpse" (S. 92), a truly brilliant description, it must be admit- 
ted, of an identity reduced to a confrontation with its psychical double, but 
which, moreover, renders patent the subject's regression — a topographical, 
not a genetic, regression — to the mirror stage, insofar as the relationship to 
the specular other is reduced here to its mortal impact. 

This was also the time at which his body was merely an aggregate of colonies 
of foreign "nerves," a sort of dump for detached fragments of his persecutors' 
identities (S. chapter XIV). 



474 Ecrits 

It seems to me that the relation of all this to homosexuality, which is cer- 
tainly manifest in the delusion, requires a more advanced set of rules regarding 
the theoretical use that can be made of this reference. 

It holds great interest, since it is certain that the use of this term in inter- 
pretation may cause serious damage if it is not informed by the symbolic rela- 
tions that I consider determinant here. 

9. I believe that this symbolic determination is demonstrated in the form in 
which the imaginary structure comes to be restored. At this stage, the imagi- 
nary structure presents two facets that Freud himself distinguished. 

The first is that of a transsexualist practice, not at all unworthy of being 
related to "perversion," the features of which have been presented in many 
case histories since that time. 23 

Furthermore, I must point out how the structure I am isolating here may 
shed light on the highly unusual insistence displayed by the subjects of these 
case histories on obtaining their father's authorization for, one might even say 
his hands-on assistance with, their demands for the most radical rectifications. 

Be that as it may, we see our subject give himself over to an erotic activity 
569 which, he emphasizes, is strictly reserved for solitude, but whose satisfactions 

he nevertheless admits to — satisfactions his image in the mirror gives him, 
when, dressed in the cheap adornments of feminine finery, nothing in the upper 
part of his body, he says, seems to him incapable of convincing any possible 
aficionado of the female bust (S. 280). 

To which we must link, I believe, the development, alleged to be an endo- 
somatic perception, of the so-called nerves of female pleasure in his own integu- 
ment, particularly in those zones where they are supposed to be erogenous in 
women [S. 274]. 

One remark he makes — the remark that if he were to incessantly contem- 
plate woman's image, and never detach his thoughts from the prop of some- 
thing feminine, God's sensuality would be all the better served — turns our 
attention to the other facet of his libidinal fantasies. 

This facet links the subject's feminization to the coordinate of divine 
copulation. 

Freud very clearly saw in this the sense of mortification, when he stressed 
everything that links "soul- voluptuousness" (Seelenwollust), which is 
included in it, to "bliss" [beatitude] fSeligkeit), insofar as the latter is the state 
of deceased souls (abschiedenen IVesen). 

The fact that the now blessed voluptuousness should become the soul's bliss 
is, indeed, an essential turning point, and Freud, it should be noted, stresses 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 4j5 

its linguistic motivation when he suggests that the history of his language 
[langue] might shed some light on it. 24 

This is simply to make a mistake regarding the dimension in which the let- 
ter manifests itself in the unconscious, and which, in accordance with its own 
literal instance, is far less etymological (or diachronic, to be precise) than homo- 
phonic (synchronic). Indeed, there is nothing in the history of the German 
language [langue] that would allow us to relate selig to Seek, or to relate the 
happiness that transports lovers to "heaven" — insofar as it is this happiness to 
which Freud refers in the aria he quotes from Don Giovanni — to the happiness 
promised to the so-called "blessed" souls by their stay in heaven. The dead are 
selig in German only by virtue of a borrowing from Latin, and because of the 570 

Latin phrase "of blessed memory" (beatae memoriae, seliger Gedacktnis). Their 
Seelen have more to do with the lakes (Seen) in which they sojourned at one 
time than with anything like their bliss. The fact is that the unconscious is con- 
cerned more with the signifier than with the signified, and that the phrase, "feu 
monpere" ("my late father"), may mean there that my father was the fire of 
God [lefeu de Dieu\ or even give the order for him to be shot: Fire! 

But this digression aside, the fact remains that we are, here, in a beyond of 
the world, which easily accommodates an indefinite postponement of the real- 
ization of its goal. 

Once Schreber has completed his transformation into a woman, the act of 
divine fecundation will assuredly take place, although it is clear that God 
could not compromise himself by taking an obscure journey through the 
organs (S. 3). (Let us not forget God's aversion to the living being.) It is thus 
through a spiritual operation that Schreber will fe'el awakening in him the 
embryonic germ, whose stirrings he already experienced in the early stages 
of his illness. 

The new spiritual humanity of the Schreberian creatures will be entirely 
engendered through his womb, of course, so that the rotten and condemned 
humanity of the present age may be reborn. This is clearly a sort of redemp- 
tion — since this is how the delusion has been cataloged — but it aims only at 
the creature of the future, for the creature of the present is struck by a deca- 
dence that is correlative to the captation of the divine rays by the volup- 
tuousness that rivets them to Schreber (S. 51—52). 

In this, the mirage dimension becomes visible. It is further highlighted by 
the indefinite amount of time for which the promise is postponed, and is pro- 
foundly conditioned by the absence of mediation to which the fantasy bears 
witness. For we can see that this fantasy parodies the situation of the last sur- 
viving couple who, following some human catastrophe, would find themselves 



4J6 



Ecrits 



confronted with what is total in the act of animal reproduction, holding as they 
would the power to repopulate the earth. 

Here again one can place under the sign of the creature the turning point 
from which the line flees along its two branches, that of narcissistic jouissance 
and that of ideal identification — but in the sense in which its image is the decoy 
of the imaginary capture in which the two branches are rooted. And here, too, 
the line revolves around a hole, the very hole in which "soul-murder" has 
installed death. 
571 Was this other gulf formed by the simple effect in the imaginary of the futile 

appeal made in the symbolic to the paternal metaphor? Or must we conceive 
of it as produced at one remove by the elision of the phallus, which the sub- 
ject would like to reduce, in order to resolve it, to the lethal gap of the mirror 
stage? The link, which this time is a genetic one, between this stage and the 
symbolization of the Mother insofar as she is primordial would certainly have 
to be evoked to explain this solution. 

Can we locate the geometrical points of the R schema on a schema of the 
subject's structure at the end of the psychotic process? I shall try to do so in 
the I schema below. 



3 Schema 




572 



This schema no doubt suffers from the excess endemic to any formaliza- 
tion that is presented in the intuitive realm. 

In other words, the distortion that it manifests between the functions iden- 
tified here by the letters transferred to it from the R schema can only be gauged 
on the basis of its use in restarting the dialectic. 

Let me simply point out here — in the double curve that resembles a hyper- 
bola except for the slippage of the two curves along one of the guiding lines 
of their asymptote — the link made palpable, in the double asymptote that unites 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 477 

the delusional ego to the divine other, of their imaginary divergence in space 
and time to the ideal convergence of their conjunction. And let us not over- 
look the fact that Freud himself had an intuition of such a form, since he him- 
self introduced the term asymptotisch in this context. 25 

The entire width of the real creature, on the other hand, is interposed for 
the subject between the narcissistic jouissance of his image and the alienation 
of speech in which the ego-ideal has taken the place of the Other. 

The schema shows that the final state of the psychosis does not represent 
the frozen chaos encountered in the aftermath of an earthquake, but rather the 
bringing to light of lines of efficiency that makes people talk when it is a prob- 
lem with an elegant solution. 

It materializes in a signifying way what lies at the crux of the true fruitful- 
ness of Freud's research. For it is a fact that without any other support or prop 
than a written document — which is not only a testimony to, but also a prod- 
uct of, this final state of the psychosis — Freud shed the first light on the very 
evolution of the psychotic process, allowing us to elucidate its proper deter- 
mination, by which I mean the only organicity that is essentially involved in 
this process: the organicity that motivates the structure of signification. 

Condensed in the form of this schema, the relations emerge by which the 
signifier's induction effects, impacting the imaginary, bring about the 
upheaval in the subject that clinicians refer to as the "twilight of the world," 
necessitating new signifying effects in response. 

In my seminar I showed that the symbolic succession of the anterior realms, 
and then the posterior realms of God, the lower and the upper, Ahriman and 
Ormuzd, and their shifts in "policy" (a word of the basic language) with respect 
to the subject, provide these very responses at the various stages of the imag- 
inary dissolution — which, moreover, the patient's memories and the medical 
certificates connote sufficiently — in order to restore order in the subject there. 

Regarding the question that I am foregrounding here concerning the sig- 
nifier's alienating impact, I will refer to the low point that came on a night in 573 
July of 1894 when Ahriman, the lower God, revealing himself to Schreber in 
the most impressive trappings of his power, addressed him with a simple and, 
according to the subject, common word of the basic language: Luderl 16 

To translate the word we must do more than simply look it up in the Sachs- 
Villatte dictionary, to which the French translator confined his efforts. 
Niederland's reference to "lewd" in English, meaning whore, does not seem 
acceptable to me as an attempt to convey the sense of spineless or slut, which 
is what it means when used as an obscene insult. 

But if we take into account the archaism indicated as characteristic of the 
basic language, I believe we can justifiably link this term to the root of the 



4j8 Ecrits 

French leurre, and of the English "lure,"* which is certainly the best ad 
hominem address to be expected coming from the symbolic: the Other with a 
capital O can be awfully impertinent. 

There remains the disposition of the field R in the schema, inasmuch as this 
disposition represents the conditions in which reality was restored for the sub- 
ject: for him a sort of island, the consistency of which is imposed on him after 
proving its constancy, 27 which, to my mind, is linked to what makes it inhab- 
itable for him, but which also distorts it — namely, eccentric reshapings of the 
imaginary, I, and of the symbolic, S, which reduce reality to the field of the 
skew between them. 

The subordinate conception that we must have of the function of reality in 
the process, in both its cause and effects, is what is important here. 

I cannot elaborate here on the question, which is nevertheless crucial, of 
what we are for the subject, we whom he addresses as readers, nor on the ques- 
tion of what remains of his relationship with his wife, for whom his book was 
initially intended, whose visits during his illness were always greeted by him 
574 with the most intense emotion, and for whom, he asserts, alongside the most 

decisive admission of his delusional vocation, "I retain my former love in full" 
(S. 179 note). 

The maintenance of the trajectory, Saa 'A, in the I schema symbolizes there 
the opinion I have formed, on the basis of my examination of this case, that 
the relation to the other qua relation to one 's semblable, and even a relation 
as elevated as that of friendship in the sense in which Aristotle makes it the 
essence of the conjugal link, are perfectly compatible with the skewing of the 
relation to the Other with a capital and all the radical anomalies it brings 
with it — qualified, improperly but not without some relevance as a first 
approximation, in the old clinical jargon as a "partial delusion." 

Nonetheless, it would be better to consign this schema to the garbage heap, 
if, like so many others, it prompted anyone to forget, because of an intuitive 
image, the analysis on which this image is based. 

Indeed, one need but think about it to realize how satisfied Macalpine — my 
interlocutor here whose authentic reflection I will praise now one last time — 
would be with it, by simply misrecognizing what made me construct it. 

What I am asserting here is that, in recognizing the drama of madness, rea- 
son is doing what it likes best, sua res agitur, because it is in man's relation to 
the signifier that this drama is situated. 

The danger people mention of becoming as mad as the patient no more 
intimidates me than it did Freud. 

Like Freud, I hold that we must listen to the speaker, when what is at stake 
is a message that does not come from a subject beyond language, but from 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 479 

speech beyond the subject. For it is then that we will hear this speech, which 
Schreber picked up in the Other, when from Ahriman to Ormuzd, from the 
evil God to the absent God, it carries the summons in which the very law of 
the signifier is articulated: "A Her Unsinn hebtsich auf/" "All nonsense cancels 
itself out!" (S. 182-83 and 312). 

Here we encounter anew (leaving to those who will concern themselves 
with me later the task of figuring out why I have left it in abeyance for ten 
years) what I said in my dialogue with Henri Ey: "Not only can man's being 
not be understood without madness, but it would not be man's being if it did 575 

not bear madness within itself as the limit of his freedom." 28 

V, Postscript 

Following in Freud's footsteps, I teach that the Other is the locus of the kind 
of memory he discovered by the name "unconscious," memory that he 
regards as the object of a question that has remained unanswered, insofar as 
it conditions the indestructibility of certain desires. I will answer this question 
with the conception of the signifying chain, inasmuch as — once this chain has 
been inaugurated by primordial symbolization (made manifest in the Fort! Da! 
game, which Freud elucidated as lying at the origin of repetition automa- 
tism) — it develops in accordance with logical connections whose hold on that 
which is to be signified, namely, the being of entities, is exerted through the 
signifying effects I describe as metaphor and metonymy. 

It is an accident in this register and in what occurs in it — namely, the fore- 
closure of the Name-of-the-Father in the place of the Other — and the failure 
of the paternal metaphor that I designate as the defect that gives psychosis its 
essential condition, along with the structure that separates it from neurosis. 

This thesis, which I am contributing here as a question prior to any possi- 
ble treatment of psychosis, has a dialectic that can be pursued beyond this point: 
but I shall stop it here and say why. 

First, because it is worth indicating what can be discovered by my halting 
here. 

A perspective that does not distinguish Schreber's relationship with God 
on the basis of its subjective impact marks this relationship with negative fea- 
tures which make it appear as a mixture rather than as a union of being with 
being, and which — in the voracity that accommodates disgust there and in the 
complicity that tolerates its exaction — show nothing, to call things by their 
rightful names, of the Presence and Joy that illuminate mystical experience. 
This opposition is not only demonstrated but founded by the astonishing 
absence in this relationship of the Du, in French of the Tu — certain languages 5 76 



480 Ecrits 

[Ungues] reserving a vocable (e.g., Thou*) for God 's appeal and for the appeal 
to God — which is the signifier of the Other in speech. 

We are familiar with the false modesties that are considered proper in sci- 
ence in this regard; they accompany pedantry's false thoughts when it invokes 
the ineff ability of lived experience, or even "morbid consciousness," in order 
to disarm the effort it spares itself — namely, the effort that is required at the 
point at which it is not ineffable precisely because it [fa] speaks; at which lived 
experience, far from separating us, is communicated; and at which subjectiv- 
ity surrenders its true structure, that structure in which what can be analyzed 
is identical to what can be articulated. 

Thus from the same vantage point to which delusional subjectivity has 
brought us, I will turn to scientific subjectivity: I mean the subjectivity that 
the scientist at work in science shares with the man of the civilization that 
supports it. I will not deny that I have seen enough on this score in our time 
to wonder about the criteria by which this man — with a discourse on free- 
dom that must certainly be called delusional (I devoted one of my seminars 
to it), with a concept of the real in which determinism is no more than an alibi 
that quickly becomes anxiety provoking when one tries to extend its field to 
chance (I had my audience experience this in a preliminary experiment), and 
with a belief that unites men, half the universe at least, under the symbol of 
Father Christmas (which no one can overlook) — would stop me from situat- 
ing him, by legitimate analogy, in the category of social psychosis which, if I 
am not mistaken, Pascal established before me. 

There is no doubt but that such a psychosis may turn out to be compatible 
with what is called an orderly state of affairs, but that does not authorize the 
psychiatrist, even if he is a psychoanalyst, to trust in his own compatibility 
with this orderly state to believe that he is in possession of an adequate idea 
of the reality to which his patient supposedly proves to be unequal. 

Under these conditions, he would perhaps do better to jettison this idea 
from his assessment of the foundations of psychosis: which brings us back to 
the objective of its treatment. 

To gauge the length of the path that separates us from it, suffice it to men- 

577 tion the mass of delays with which its pilgrims have marked it. Everyone knows 

that no discussion of the mechanism of transference, however learned it may 

be, has succeeded in stopping it from being conceived in practice as a relationship 

whose terms are purely dyadic and whose substratum is utterly confused. 

If we simply consider transference on the basis of its fundamental nature 
as a repetition phenomenon, let me raise the question of what it is repeating 
in the persecuting persons Freud designates as its effect here. 

I can just imagine the lame reply: "Following your approach, a paternal 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 481 

failing no doubt." In this vein, there has been no shortage of accounts of every 
kind: and the psychotic's "entourage" has been minutely scrutinized for all the 
so-called biographical and characterological tidbits the anamnesis enabled 
people to extract from the dramatis personae, even from their "interpersonal 
relations." 29 

Let us nevertheless proceed according to the structural terms I have outlined. 

For psychosis to be triggered, the Name-of-the-Father — verworfen, fore- 
closed, that is, never having come to the place of the Other — must be sum- 
moned to that place in symbolic opposition to the subject. 

It is the lack of the Name-of-the-Father in that place which, by the hole that 
it opens up in the signified, sets off a cascade of reworkings of the signifier 
from which the growing disaster of the imaginary proceeds, until the level is 
reached at which signifier and signified stabilize in a delusional metaphor. 

But how can the Name-of-the-Father be summoned by the subject to the 
only place from which it could have come into being for him and in which it 
has never been? By nothing other than a real father, not at all necessarily by 
the subject's own father, but by One-father [Un-pere]. 

Yet this One-father must still come to that place to which the subject could 
not summon him before. For this, the One-father need but situate himself in 
a tertiary position in any relationship that has as its base the imaginary cou- 
ple a-a ' — that is, ego-object or ideal-reality — involving the subject in die field 
of eroticized aggression that it induces. 578 

We should try to detect this dramatic conjuncture at the beginning of each 
case of psychosis. Whether the conjuncture presents itself to a woman who 
has just given birth, in her husband's face, to a penitent confessing her sins in 
the person of her confessor, or to a girl in love in her encounter with "the 
young man's father," it will always be found, and it will be found more easily 
if one allows oneself to be guided by "situations" in the novelistic sense of the 
term. It should be noted in passing that these situations are the novelist's true 
resource — namely, the resource that brings out the "depth psychology" to 
which no psychological perspective can give him access. 30 

To move on now to the principle of foreclosure (Verwerfung) of the Name- 
of-the-Father, it must be admitted that the Name-of-the-Father redoubles in 
the Other's place the very signifier of the symbolic ternary, insofar as it con- 
stitutes the law of the signifier. 

Provisionally admitting this can cost nothing, it seems, to those who — in 
their quest for the "environmental" coordinates of psychosis — wander like 
lost souls from the frustrating mother to the overfeeding mother, feeling nev- 
ertheless that in directing their attention to the father's situation, they are burn- 
ing, as one says in the game of hide-the-thimble. 



482 Ecrits 

Even so, in this groping search for a paternal failing — the range of which 
is unsettling, including as it does the thundering father, the easy-going father, 
the all-powerful father, the humiliated father, the rigid father, the pathetic 
father, the stay-at-home father, and the father on the loose — it would proba- 
bly be excessive to expect the following remark to provide a jolt of any kind: 
The effects of prestige that are at stake in all of this — and in which (thank 
heaven!) the ternary relation of the Oedipus complex is not entirely omitted, 
since the mother's reverence is regarded as decisive in it — boil down to the 
rivalry between the two parents in the subject's imaginary. In other words, 
they boil down to what is articulated in the question that regularly, not to say 
obligatorily, seems to be raised in any self-respecting childhood: "Whom do 
you love more, daddy or mommy?" 

My aim in drawing this parallel is not to reduce anything; quite the con- 
trary, for this question — in which the child never fails to concretize the dis- 
579 gust he feels at his parents' childishness — is precisely the question with which 

the real children, who are the parents (in this sense, there are no other chil- 
dren in the family but the parents), try to mask the mystery of their union, or 
disunion as the case may be: namely, the mystery of what their kid clearly knows 
to be the real problem and poses to himself as such. 

People will say that they are emphasizing the bond of love and respect by 
which the mother does or does not situate the father in his ideal place. It is 
curious, I would reply first, that they do not make much of the same bonds in 
the opposite direction, proving that the theory is complicit in the veil thrown 
over the parents' coitus by childhood amnesia. 

But what I want to stress is that we should concern ourselves not only with 
the way the mother accommodates the father as a person, but also with the 
importance she attributes to his speech — in a word, to his authority — in other 
words, with the place she reserves for the Name-of-the-Father in the promo- 
tion of the law. 

Further still, the father's relation to this law must be considered in its own 
right, for one will find in it the reason for the paradox whereby devastating 
effects of the paternal figure are found with particular frequency in cases where 
the father really functions as a legislator or boasts that he does — whether he 
is, in fact, one of the people who makes the laws or presents himself as a pil- 
lar of faith, as a paragon of integrity or devotion, as virtuous or a virtuoso, as 
serving a charitable cause whatever the object or lack thereof that is at stake, 
as serving the nation or birth rate, safety or salubrity, legacy or law, the pure, 
the lowest of the low, or the empire. These are all ideals that provide him with 
all too many opportunities to seem to be at fault, to fall short, and even to be 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 483 

fraudulent — in short, to exclude the Name-of-the-Father from its position in 
the signifier. 

This result can be obtained with still less, and no one who practices child 
analysis will deny that children see right through hypocritical behavior, so 
much so that it can be devastating to them. But who articulates that the lie thus 
perceived implies a reference to the constitutive function of speech? 

It thus turns out that a little severity is not excessive if we are to give the 
most accessible experience its true meaning. The consequences that may be 580 

expected of it in clinical examination and analytic technique can be gauged 
elsewhere. 

I am giving here only what is needed to perceive the clumsiness with which 
the best inspired authors handle what they find most valuable in following 
Freud on the ground of the preeminence that he grants to the transference of 
the relation to the father in the genesis of psychosis. 

Niederland provides a remarkable example of this when he draws attention 
to the delusional genealogy Schreber attributes to Flechsig. This genealogy 
is constructed with the names of Schreber's own ancestors, Gottfried, Got- 
tlieb, Fiirchtegott, and, above all, Daniel, which is handed down from father 
to son and whose meaning in Hebrew he gives in order to show — in their con- 
vergence on the name of God (Gott) — a symbolic chain that is important in 
that it manifests the function of the father in the delusion. 31 

But failing to distinguish in it the instance of the Name-of-the-Father — 
and to recognize it, it obviously does not suffice that it be visible here to the 
naked eye — Niederland misses the opportunity to grasp the chain in which 
the erotic aggressions experienced by the subject are woven together, and 
thereby to contribute to putting what must properly be termed "delusional 
homosexuality" in its place. 

How, then, could he have dwelt on what is concealed in the statement quoted 
above from the first lines of Schreber's second chapter 32 — one of those state- 
ments so obviously made in order not to be heard that they must catch our ear. 
What, to take it literally, is the meaning of the fact that the author equally links 
the names Flechsig and Schreber to soul murder in his bid to take us to the 
crux of the abuse of which he is the victim? We must leave something for future 
commentators to elucidate. 

Just as uncertain is the attempt, made by Niederland in the same article, to 
specify — starting with the subject this time, no longer with the signifier (these 
terms are, of course, foreign to him) — the role of the paternal function in trig- 
gering the delusion. 

Indeed, if Niederland claims that what occasioned the psychosis was the 581 



484 Ecrits 

mere assumption [assomption] of paternity by the subject, which is the theme 
of his essay, then it is contradictory on his part to regard as equivalent the dis- 
appointment Schreber mentions of his hopes of becoming a father and his 
appointment to the High Court, his title as Senatsprasident emphasizing the 
quality of (conscripted) Father that it assigns him — this being the sole reason 
Niederland gives for his second illness, the first being explained analogously 
by our author by the failure of his candidacy for the Reichstag. 

Whereas reference to the tertiary position, to which the signifier of pater- 
nity is summoned in all such cases, would be correct and would eliminate this 
contradiction. 

But from the standpoint of my thesis, it is the primordial foreclosure (Ver- 
werfung) that dominates everything with its problem, and the preceding con- 
siderations do not leave me unprepared. 

For if we refer to the work of Daniel Gottlob Moritz Schreber — the 
founder of an Institute of Orthopedics at the University of Leipzig, an edu- 
cator, or, better still, an "educationalist"* as they say in English, a social 
reformer "with an apostle-like mission to bring health, happiness and bliss to 
the masses" (sic, Memoirs, l) 33 through physical culture, the initiator of those 
allotment gardens, intended to preserve in the employee a vegetable garden 
idealism, which in Germany are still known as Schreber garten, not to mention 
the forty editions of Medical Indoor Gymnastics, of which the little "men cob- 
bled together 1, 2, 3" that illustrate it are more or less explicitly mentioned by 
Schreber (S. 166) — we will be able to consider as having been exceeded the 
limits at which the native and the natal give way to nature, the natural, natur- 
ism, and even naturalization; at which virtue turns into vertigo, legacy into 
league, and salvation into saltation; at which the pure verges on the evil realm; 
and at which we will not be surprised if the child, like the apprentice sailor of 
Pre vert's famous catch, sends packing (verwerfe) the whale of imposture, after 
having, according to the wit of this immortal piece, seen right through the pop 
[perce la trame de pere enpari\. 
582 There can be no doubt that the figure of Professor Flechsig, with his 

researcher's gravity (Macalpine 's book contains a photograph that shows him 
profiled against a colossal enlargement of a cerebral hemisphere), did not suc- 
ceed in supplementing the suddenly perceived void constituted by the inau- 
gural Verwerfung ( "Kleiner Flechsig!" "Little Flechsig!" proclaim the voices). 

At least, this is Freud's conception, insofar as it designates the transference 
the subject developed to Flechsig as the factor that precipitated the subject into 
psychosis. 

Thanks to which, a few months later, the divine jaculations make their con- 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 485 

cert heard in the subject in order to tell the Name-of-the-Father to go fuck 
itself, with the Name of God 34 right behind it, and to found the Son in his cer- 
tainty that at the end of his trials, he could do no better than to "go" 35 on the 
whole world (S. 226). 

The last word with which our century's "inner experience" has yielded us 
its computation was thus articulated fifty years ahead of its time by the theod- 583 

icy to which Schreber was exposed: "God is a whore." 36 

This is the term in which the process by which the signifier was 
"unleashed" in the real culminates, after the Name-of-the-Father began to col- 
lapse — the latter being the signifier which, in the Other, qua locus of the sig- 
nifier, is the signifier of the Other qua locus of the law. 

I will leave this question prior to any possible treatment of the psychoses 
at that for the time being. It is a question that introduces, as we see, the con- 
ception to be formed of the handling of the transference in such treatment. 

To say what we can do in this area would be premature, because it would 
now be to go "beyond Freud," and it is out of the question to go beyond Freud 
when psychoanalysis after Freud has, as I have said, returned to a pre- 
Freudian stage. 

At least this is what keeps me from any other objective than that of restor- 
ing access to the experience Freud discovered. 

For to use the technique he instituted outside the experience to which it 
applies is as stupid as to toil at the oars when one's ship is stuck in the sand. 



December 1957-January 1958 



Notes 



1. Roman Jakobson borrows this term which I discussed the example of the "normal" 
from Jespersen to designate those words in vocalization of "la paixdu soir." 

the code that take on meaning only from the 3. Denkwurdigkeiten eines Nervenkranken, 
coordinates (attribution, date, and place of von Dr. jur. Daniel Paul Schreber, Senatsprasi- 
emission) of the message. According to dent beim kgl. Oberlandesgericht Dresden a-D. 
Pierce's classification, they are "index- (Leipzig: Oswald Mutze, 1903), a French trans- 
symbols." Personal pronouns are the best lation of which I prepared for the use of my 
example: the difficulties involved in their group. 

acquisition and their functional deficiencies 4. This is, notably, the opinion expressed by 

illustrate the problematic generated by these the authors of the English translation of these 

signifiers in the subject. (Roman Jakobson, Memoirs, which was published the year of my 

"Shifters, Verbal Categories, and the Russian seminar (see Memoirs of My Nervous Illness, 

Verb," Russian Language Project, Depart- trans. Ida Macalpine and Richard Hunter, Lon- 

ment of Slavic Languages and Literatures, don: W. M. Dawson & Sons), in their intro- 

Harvard University, 1957.) duction, p. 25. They also give an account of the 

2. See the seminar held February 8, 1956, in book's success on pages 6-10. 



486 



Ecrits 



5. This was my doctoral thesis in medicine, 
entitled De la psychose paranol'aque dans ses rap- 
ports avec la personnalite, which Professor 
Heuyer, in a letter to me, judged very perti- 
nently in these terms: "One swallow does not 
make a summer," adding, in connection with 
my bibliography, "If you've read all that, I pity 
you." In fact, I had read it all. 

6. The parentheses including the letter S fol- 
lowed by numbers will be used here to refer to 
the corresponding page of the original edition 
of the Denkwiirdigkeiten, the original pagina- 
tion being fortunately provided in the margins 
of the English translation. 

7. Note that my homage here is merely an 
extension of that of Freud, who did not shy 
away from recognizing in Schreber's delusion 
itself a foreshadowing of the theory of the 
libido (GJT VIII, 315). 

8. See Ecrits 1966, 808. 

9. He who wishes to prove too much goes 
astray. Thus Macalpine — who, by the way, 
advisedly dwells on the nature, said by the 
patient himself to be far too persuasive (S. 39), 
of the suggestive enthusiasm in which Profes- 
sor Flechsig indulges (everything indicates that 
he was usually calmer) with Schreber regard- 
ing the benefits of a sleep-cure that he proposes 
to him — Macalpine, as I was saying, interprets 
at length the themes of procreation, which she 
considers to have been suggested by this dis- 
course (see Memoirs, "Translators' Analysis of 
the Case," page 396, lines 12 and 21). She bases 
her case on the use of the verb "to deliver,"* to 
designate the effect on his problems to be 
expected from the treatment, and on that of the 
adjective "prolific,"* with which she translates, 
extremely loosely I might add, the German 
term, ausgiebig, applied to the sleep in question. 

Now the term "to deliver"* is indisputable 
considering what it translates, for the simple 
reason that there is nothing here to translate. I 
scoured the German text searching for it. The 
verb was simply forgotten by either the author 
or the typesetter, and Macalpine, in her work 
of translation, restored it for us unbeknown to 
herself. The happiness she must later have felt 
upon finding that it fit the bill so well was surely 
well deserved! 

10. Memoirs, 361, 379-80. 



11. I would ask Macalpine (see Memoirs, 
391—92) whether the number nine, insofar as it 
is involved in such diverse durations as nine 
hours, nine days, nine months, and nine years, 
which she underscores at every point in the 
patient's anamnesis — finding it again in the 
time on the clock up until which his anxiety 
postponed the beginning of the aforementioned 
sleep-cure, and even in the hesitation between 
four and five days that recurs several times in 
one and the same period of his personal recol- 
lection — must be conceived as forming part as 
such (that is, as a symbol) of the imaginary rela- 
tion she isolates as a procreation fantasy. 

The question is of concern to everyone, for 
it differs from the use Freud, in the Wolf Man 
case, makes of the form of the Roman numeral 
V, presumably recalled as having been seen at 
the end of the clock hand during a scene the 
Wolf Man witnessed at age one and a half, find- 
ing it anew in the opening and shutting of a but- 
terfly's wings, in a girl's spread legs, etc. 

12. See Memoirs, 13-19. 

13. "Before Sunrise," "Vor Sonnenauf- 
gang," in Also sprach Zarathustra, Part III. It is 
the fourth song in this third part. 

14. It is interesting to situate object a in the 
R schema so as to shed light on what it con- 
tributes regarding the field of reality (a field 
that bars it). 

However much emphasis I have placed on 
developing it since I wrote this article — by stat- 
ing that this field functions only when obtu- 
rated by the screen of fantasy — it still requires 
a great deal of attention. 

There may be some point in indicating 
that — while it was enigmatic at the time, even 
though it is perfectly legible to anyone who 
knows what came later, as is the case if one 
claims to be basing oneself on it — what the R 
schema lays flat is a cross-cap. 

In particular, the points and I did not choose 
the letters that correspond to them at random 
(or for fun) — m M and i I, which are those by 
which the only valid cut in this schema (the cut 
mi, MI ) is framed, suffice to indicate that this 
cut isolates a Mobius strip in the field. 

This says it all, since this field will hence- 
forth be the mere placeholder of the fantasy 
whose entire structure is provided by this cut. 



On a Question Prior to Any Possible Treatment of Psychosis 48J 



I mean that only the cut reveals the struc- 
ture of the entire surface, because it is able to 
detach from it the following two heterogeneous 
elements (noted in my algorithm ($0 a ) °f ^ an_ 
tasy): $ — the barred S of the strip to be 
expected here where it in fact turns up, that is, 
covering the field R of reality — and a, which 
corresponds to the fields I and S. 

It is thus as representation's representative 
in fantasy — that is, as the originally repressed 
subject — that #, the barred S of desire, props 
up the field of reality here; and this field is sus- 
tained only by the extraction of object a, which 
nevertheless gives it its frame. 

Measuring in increments [echelons] that are 
all vectorialized by an intrusion into the field 
R of the field I alone, which is articulated 
clearly in my text only as the effect of narcis- 
sism, shows that it is obviously out of the ques- 
tion that I wanted to bring back in, through 
some back door, the notion that these effects 
("system of identifications," as we read) can 
theoretically ground reality in any way what- 
soever. 

Those who have attended my topological 
presentations (which are justified by nothing 
but the structure, that remains to be articulated, 
of fantasy) must surely know that there is noth- 
ing measurable that need be preserved in the 
structure of the Mobius strip, and that this 
structure boils down — like the real with which 
we are concerned here — to the cut itself. 

This note indicates the current stage of my 
topological work (July 1966). 

15. The title of that seminar. 

16. Here is the text: Einleitend habe ich da^u 
{w bemerken, dass bei der Genesis der betreffenden 
Entwicklung deren erste Anfdnge weit, vielleicht 
bis^um \%.Jahrhundert\uruckreichen, einertheils 
die Namen Flechsigund Schreber (my empha- 
sis) (wahrscheinlichnichtin der Beschrdnkung auf 
je ein Individuum der betreffenden Familien) und 
anderntheils der Begrijf des Seelenmords (in 
"Sperrdruck" [emphasized] in the original) eine 
Hauptrolle spielen. 

1 7. See, in particular, Ernst Haeckel's Natur- 
liche Schopfungsgeschichte (Berlin, 1872) and 
Otto Casari's Urgeschichte der Menschheit 
(Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1877). 

18. The relationship between the proper 



name and the voice must be situated in lan- 
guage 's two-axis structure of message and 
code, to which I have already referred. See sec- 
tion 1.5 above. It is this structure that makes 
puns on proper names into witticisms. 

19. Memoirs, 398. 

20. This is the spelling of the English word 
currently in use in Hugues Salel's admirable 
verse translation of the first ten songs of the 
Iliad; it should suffice to ensure that this 
spelling survives in French. 

21. "Die symbolische Gleichung Madchen 
= Phallus," Int. Zeitschrift fiir Psychoanalyse 
XXII (1936), since translated into English as 
"The Symbolic Equation: Girl = Phallus" and 
published in PQXX, 3 (1949): 303-24. French 
allows us to translate the term more appropri- 
ately as pucelle ["maid," "maiden," or "vir- 
gin"]- 

22. See W. G. Niederland, "Three Notes on 
the Schreber Case," PQXX, 4 (1951): 579-91. 
Edouard Pichon is the author of the translation 
into French of these terms as "Shadows of men 
thrown together 1, 2, 3." 

23. See Jean-Marc Alby's highly remarkable 
thesis, "Contribution a Petude du transsexual- 
isme," Paris, 1956. 

24. See Freud, Psychoanalytische Bemerkun- 
gen iiber einem autobiographisch beschriebenen 
Fall von Paranoia, GJFVIII, 264, fnl. 

25. Freud, GJFVIII, 284 and note. 

26. S. 136. 

27. At the acme of imaginary dissolution, the 
subject showed, in his delusional apperception, 
odd recourse to the following criterion of real- 
ity, which is to always return to the same place, 
and why the stars eminently represent it: this 
is the theme designated by his voices as "tying- 
to-the-planets" {Anbinden an Erden, S. 125). 

28. "Remarks on Psychical Causality" 
(Paper given on September 28, 1946, at the 
Journees de Bonneval); see Ecrits 1 966, 1 5 1-93. 

29. See Andre Green's thesis, Le milieu 
familial des schi^ophrenes (Paris, 1957), a work 
whose clear merit would not have suffered if 
surer landmarks had guided him toward greater 
success — in particular, in approaching what he 
bizarrely terms "psychotic fracture." 

30. 1 wish the best of luck to the student of 
mine who followed up this remark, wherein lit- 



488 



Ecrits 



erary criticism can rest assured it holds a thread 
that will not lead it astray. 

31. Niederland, "Three Notes." 

32. This sentence is quoted in the footnote 
on page 558 above. 

33. In a note on the same page, Macalpine 
quotes the title of one of this author's books, 
Glilckseligkeitslehre filr das physische Leben des 
Menschen, namely, "Course in Blessed Felicity 
for the Physical Life of Men." 

34. S. 194. Die Redensart "Ei verflucht" . . . 
war noch ein Uberbleibsel der Grundsprache, in 
welcher die Worte "Ei verflucht, das sagt sich 
schwer" jedesmal gebraucht werden, wenn irgend 
ein mit der Weltordnung unertrdgtiche Erschein- 
ung in das Bewusstsein der Seelen trat, {. B. "Ei 
verflucht, das sagt sich schwer, dass der Hebe Gott 
sichf. . . liisst. " 

35. I think I can borrow this euphemism 
from the Grundsprache 's own register, which the 
voices and Schreber himself nevertheless 
uncharacteristically dispense with here. 

I think I can better fulfill the duties of sci- 
entific rigor by pointing out the hypocrisy 
which, in this detour as in others, reduces what 
Freudian experience demonstrates to some- 
thing benign, nay, inane. I mean the indefin- 
able use ordinarily made of references like the 
following: "At this moment in his analysis, the 
patient regressed to the anal phase." I'd like to 



see the analyst's face if the patient started 
"straining," or even just slobbering, on his 
couch. 

All this is but a concealed return to the sub- 
limation that finds shelter in the inter urinas et 
faeces nascimur, implying here that this sordid 
origin concerns only our bodies. 

What analysis uncovers is something alto- 
gether different. It is not man's rags, but his 
very being that takes up its position among the 
scraps in which his first frolics found their 
cortege — inasmuch as the law of symboliza- 
tion, in which his desire must become engaged, 
catches him in its net by the position as part- 
object in which he offers himself up on coming 
into the world, into a world where the Other's 
desire lays down the law. 

This relationship is, of course, clearly artic- 
ulated by Schreber in what he relates — to put 
it in such a way as to leave no room for ambi- 
guity — to the act of shitting: namely, the fact 
of feeling the elements of his being, whose dis- 
persal into the infinitude of his delusion con- 
stitutes his suffering, coming together in it. 

36. In the form: Die Sonne ist eine Hure (S. 
384). For Schreber, the sun is God's central 
aspect. The inner experience I am speaking of 
here is a reference to Georges Bataille 's work. 
In Madame Edwarda, he describes the odd 
extremity of this experience. 



The Direction of the Treatment and the 585 

Principles of Its Power 



Paper given at the Royaumont Colloquium held July 10-13, 1958 ' 



/. Who Analyses Today? 

1 . People say that an analysis bears the marks of the analysand as a person as 
if it were self-evident. But they think they are being audacious if they take an 
interest in the effects that the analyst as a person may have on an analysis. 
This, at least, explains the shudder that runs through us when trendy remarks 
are made about countertransference, which contribute, no doubt, to masking 
its conceptual impropriety: just think of the highmindedness we display when 
we show that we ourselves are made of the same clay as those we shape! 

That was a nasty thing to say. Yet it barely suffices for those it targets, given 
that people now go about proclaiming, under the aegis of psychoanalysis, that 
they are working toward "the patient's emotional reeducation" [22]. 2 

Situating the analyst's action at this level implies a position based on a prin- 
ciple, with respect to which anything that might be said about countertrans- 
ference, even if it were not futile, would merely serve as a diversion. For the 
imposture that I wish to dislodge here now lies beyond this. 3 

I am not, for all that, denouncing the anti-Freudian aspects of contempo- 
rary psychoanalysis. Indeed, we should be grateful to the partisans of the lat- 
ter for throwing down their mask in this regard, priding themselves, as they 
do, on going beyond what they, in fact, know nothing about, having retained 586 

just enough of Freud's doctrine to sense how significantly what they are led 
to enunciate about their experience diverges from it. 



490 Ecrits 

I intend to show how the inability to authentically sustain a praxis results, 
as is common in the history of mankind, in the exercise of power. 

2. Assuredly, a psychoanalyst directs the treatment. The first principle of this 
treatment, the one that is spelled out to him before all else, and which he finds 
throughout his training, so much so that he becomes utterly imbued with it, is 
that he must not direct the patient. The direction of conscience, in the sense of 
the moral guidance a faithful Catholic might find in it, is radically excluded here. 
If psychoanalysis raises problems for moral theology, they are not those of the 
direction of conscience — which, let me remind you, also raises problems. 

The direction of the treatment is something else altogether. It consists, first 
of all, in getting the subject to apply the fundamental rule of psychoanalysis, 
that is, the directives whose presence at the heart of what is called "the ana- 
lytic situation" cannot be neglected, under the pretext that the subject would 
best apply them without thinking about it. 

These directives are initially laid out to the patient in the form of instruc- 
tions which, however little the analyst comments on them, convey, even in the 
very inflections of his statement of them, the doctrine the analyst himself has 
arrived at. Which does not mean that the analyst remains unscathed by the 
mass of prejudices that await him in the patient, based on the idea the latter 
has been allowed to form of the procedures and aim of the psychoanalytic enter- 
prise by the spreading of notions about analysis in his culture. 

This is already enough to show us that, from the initial directives on, the 
problem of direction cannot be formulated along the lines of univocal com- 
munication — a fact that forces us to go no further in our discussion of this 
stage and to shed light on it by what follows it. 

Let me simply state that, if we reduce it to its truth, this stage consists in 
getting the patient to forget that it is merely a matter of words, but that this 
does not excuse the analyst for forgetting it himself [16]. 

3. In any case, I announced that I intended to approach the topic from the ana- 
lyst 's vantage point. 

587 Let us say that in the capital outlay involved in the common enterprise, the 

patient is not alone in finding it difficult to pay his share. The analyst too must 
pay: 

• pay with words no doubt, if the transmutation they undergo due to the ana- 
lytic operation raises them to the level of their effect as interpretation; 

• but also pay with his person, in that, whether he likes it or not, he lends it 
as a prop for the singular phenomena analysis discovered in transference; 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 491 

• can anyone forget that he must pay for becoming enmeshed in an action 
that goes right to the core of being (Kern unseres JVesens^ as Freud put it 
[6]) with what is essential in his most intimate judgment: could he alone 
remain on the sidelines? 

Let those who support my cause not be concerned at the thought that I am 
exposing myself here once again to adversaries who are always only too happy 
to dismiss me for my metaphysics. 

For it is at the heart of their claim to be satisfied with effectiveness that a 
statement like "the analyst cures not so much by what he says and does as by 
what he is" [22] can be made. Nobody, apparently, demands an explanation 
from the author for such a remark, any more than one appeals to his sense of 
modesty when, with a tired smile directed at the ridicule he incurs, he puts his 
trust in goodness, his own goodness (we must be good, there being no tran- 
scendence in this context), to put an end to a dead-end debate about transfer- 
ence neurosis. 4 But who would be so cruel as to question someone buckling 
under the weight of his luggage, when his posture clearly indicates that it is 
full of bricks? 

Yet being is being, regardless of who invokes it, and we have the right to 
ask what it is doing here. 

4. So I shall cross-examine the analyst again, insofar as I myself am one, in 
order to note that the more his being is involved, the less sure he is of his action. 

As an interpreter of what is presented to me in words or deeds, I choose my 
own oracle and articulate it as I please, sole master of my ship after God; and 588 

while, of course, I am far from able to weigh the whole effect of my words, I am 
well aware of the fact and strive to attend to it. In other words, I am always free 
in the timing and frequency, as well as in the choice of my interventions, so much 
so that it seems that the rule has been entirely designed so as not to interfere in 
any way with my activity as an executor — to which corresponds the aspect of 
"material," which is how my action here takes up what it produces. 

5. In handling transference, on the other hand, my freedom is alienated by 
the splitting my person undergoes in it, and everyone knows that it is here that 
the secret of analysis must be sought. This does not prevent people from believ- 
ing they are making progress with the following learned remark: that psy- 
choanalysis must be studied as a situation involving two persons. To be sure, 
conditions are placed on it that restrict its movements, but the situation thus 
conceived nevertheless serves to articulate (and with no more artifice than the 
aforementioned "emotional reeducation") the principles for training the so- 



492 Ecrits 

called "weak" ego, by an ego that one likes to believe capable of carrying out 
such a project because it is strong. That such a view is not expressed without 
a certain embarrassment is shown by the strikingly clumsy repentances that 
are offered, like that of the author who specifies that he does not compromise 
on the need for a "cure from the inside" [22]. 5 But it is all the more significant 
to observe that the subject's assent, referred to in this passage, comes only sec- 
ondarily, from an effect that was at first imposed. 

It is not for my own pleasure that I point out these deviations, but rather to 
use their pitfalls as markers for our route. 

In fact, every analyst (even those who wander off course in this way) always 
experiences the transference in wonder at this least expected effect of a rela- 
tionship between two people that would seem to be like any other. He tells 
himself that he is dealing here with a phenomenon for which he is not respon- 
sible, and we know with what insistence Freud stressed the spontaneity of its 
appearance in the patient. 
589 For some time now, analysts — in the heartrending revisions they treat us 

to — have willingly insinuated that this insistence, with which they for so long 
built a wall around themselves, expressed a flight on Freud's part from the 
commitment that the notion of situation presupposes. "We are, you see, up to 
date," they seem to say. 

But it is rather the facile excitement of their gesture in dumping feelings, 
which they class under the heading of their countertransference, onto one side 
of the scales — the situation balancing out due to the weight of those feelings — 
that to me is evidence of a troubled conscience corresponding to a failure to 
conceptualize the true nature of transference. 

One cannot reason from the fantasies the analysand gets propped up to the 
analyst's person in the same way as an ideal player guesses his opponent's inten- 
tions. There is probably always an element of strategy, but one should not be 
deceived by the metaphor of the mirror, appropriate as it may be to the smooth 
surface the analyst presents to the patient. An impassive face and sealed lips 
do not have the same purpose here as in bridge. Instead, the analyst enlists the 
aid of what in bridge is called the dummy [le mort\ but he does so in order to 
bring out the fourth player who is to be the analysand 's partner here, and whose 
hand the analyst, by his maneuvers, strives to get the analysand to guess: such 
is the restraint — of abnegation, as it were — that is imposed on the analyst by 
the stakes of the game in analysis. 

One might pursue the metaphor by deducing his game therefrom accord- 
ing to whether he places himself "to the right" or "to the left" of the patient — 
in other words, in a position to play his cards after or before the fourth player, 
that is, before or after the latter by using the dummy. 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 49J 

But what is certain is that the analyst's feelings have only one possible place 
in the game, that of the dummy; and that if the dummy is revived the game 
will proceed without anyone knowing who is leading it. 

This is why the analyst is less free in his strategy than in his tactics. 

6. Let us go further. The analyst is even less free in what dominates both his 
strategy and tactics — namely, his politics, where he would do better to take 
his bearings from his want-to-be than from his being. 

To put it another way: his action concerning the patient will escape him 
along with the idea he forms of his action, as long as he does not reconsider 
its point of departure in terms of what makes his action possible and does not 
preserve the paradox of its quadripartition, in order to revise at the core the 590 

structure by which all action intervenes in reality. 

For contemporary psychoanalysts, this relationship to reality is self-evident. 
They gauge the patient's defections from it using the authoritarian principle 
that has been employed by educators since time immemorial. They simply 
rely on training analysis to ensure its maintenance at a sufficient rate among 
analysts, about whom one can't help feeling that, in facing the problems of 
humanity that are addressed to them, their views are sometimes a bit parochial. 
This is merely to push the problem back to an individual level. 

And it is hardly reassuring — when they describe the procedure of analy- 
sis as the reduction in the subject of deviations, attributed to his transference 
and his resistances, but mapped in relation to reality — to hear them gush about 
the "perfectly simple situation" that is provided by analysis as a means of assess- 
ing those deviations. Come now! The educator is hardly ready to be educated 
if he can judge so superficially an experience that he, too, must nevertheless 
have undergone. 

From such an assessment, one assumes that these analysts would have pro- 
vided this experience with other means if they had had to depend on their own 
sense of reality to invent it themselves: a priority shocking to imagine. They 
half-suspect as much, and that is why they are so punctilious about preserv- 
ing its forms. 

One understands why, in order to prop up so obviously precarious a con- 
ception, certain individuals on the other side of the Atlantic felt the need to 
introduce a stable value here, a standard by which to measure reality [reel]: 
the autonomous ego*. It is the supposedly organized set of the most disparate 
functions that lend their support to the subject's feeling of innateness. It is 
regarded as autonomous because it is supposed to be sheltered from the per- 
son's internal conflicts ("nonconflictual sphere"*) [14]. 

One recognizes here a worn-out mirage that the most academic introspec- 



494 Ecrits 

tive psychology had already rejected as untenable. Yet this regression is cele- 
brated as a return to the fold of "general psychology." 

Be that as it may, it solves the problem of the analyst's being. 6 A team of 
egos*, no doubt less equal than autonomous (but by what stamp of origin do 

591 they recognize each other in the sufficiency of their autonomy?), offers itself 
to Americans to guide them toward happiness*, without upsetting the 
autonomies, whether egoistic or not, that pave with their nonconflictual 
spheres the American way* of getting there. 

7. Let me summarize. If an analyst dealt only with resistances, he would look 
twice before hazarding an interpretation, which he in fact does, but this pru- 
dence would suffice. 

However, this interpretation, if he gives it, will be received as coming from 
the person the transference imputes him to be. Will he agree to take advan- 
tage of this error concerning who he is? Psychoanalytic morals do not forbid 
it, on the condition that he interpret this effect, failing which the analysis would 
remain at the level of crude suggestion. 

This is an indisputable position, except that the analyst's speech is still heard 
as coming from the transferential Other, and the subject's exit from the trans- 
ference is thus postponed ad infinitum. 

It is therefore because of what the subject imputes the analyst to be (his 
being being elsewhere) that an interpretation may come back to the place from 
which it can bear upon the distribution of responses. 

But who will say what the analyst is there, and what remains of him when 
he is up against the wall of the task of interpreting? Let him dare say it him- 
self if the fact that he is a man is all he has by way of an answer. Whether he 
has any or not would then be all there is to it: yet it is here that he beats a retreat, 
not only on account of the impudence of the mystery, but because in this hav- 
ing, it is being that is at stake, and how! We shall see later that this "how" is 
no easy matter. 

Thus he prefers to fall back on his ego, and on the reality about which he 
knows a thing or two. But here he is, then, at the level of "I" and "me" with 
his patient. How can he manage it if they're at each other's throats? It is here 
that we astutely count on the secret contacts we must have on the inside — 
named, in this case, the healthy part of the ego, the part that thinks like us. 

We might conclude that this brings us back to our initial problem — namely, 
how to reinvent analysis. 

592 Or to recast it: by treating transference as a particular form of resistance. 
Many profess to do so. It is to them that I would ask the question that forms 

the title of this chapter: Who is the analyst? He who interprets by taking advan- 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 495 

tage of the transference? He who analyzes transference as resistance? Or he 
who imposes his idea of reality? 

It is a question that may pinch a bit harder those to whom it is addressed, 
and be less easy to sidestep than the question, "Who is speaking?" which one 
of my students blared into their ears regarding the patient. For their impatient 
answer — "An animal of our species" — to a changed question would be more 
annoyingly tautological, to have to say: "Me [moi]" 

And that's all there is to it. 

77. What Is the Place of Interpretation? 

1 . The preceding does not answer all the questions that occur to a novice. But 
in gathering together the problems currently raised concerning the direction 
of an analysis, insofar as this currency reflects contemporary practice, I think 
I have kept everything in proportion. 

Which is to say, the smaller place occupied by interpretation in present-day 
psychoanalysis — not that people no longer know the meaning of interpreta- 
tion, but they seem to be embarrassed when they approach it. No author tack- 
les interpretation without first distinguishing it from every other form of verbal 
intervention that does not constitute interpretation: explanations, gratifica- 
tions, responses to demands, and so on. This process becomes revealing when 
it gets close to the center of interest. It stipulates that even something said to 
lead the subject to an insight* into one of his behaviors, especially its signifi- 
cation as resistance, may be given any other name, "confrontation," for exam- 
ple, if only confrontation of the subject with his own words, without deserving 
the name "interpretation," simply because it is a clarifying statement. 

It is touching to see an author attempt to storm Gestalt theory to find in it 
a metaphor that would allow him to express what interpretation brings by way 
of resolution to an ambiguity of intention, and by way of closure to an incom- 593 

pleteness that is nevertheless achieved only after the fact [2]. 

2. One senses that what is slippery here is the nature of the transmutation that 
occurs in the subject; this is all the more painful for thought in that it eludes 
thought at the very moment thought shifts into action. Indeed, no index suf- 
fices to show where interpretation operates, unless one accepts in all its radi- 
cal implications a concept of the function of the signif ier, which grasps where 
it is that the subject subordinates himself to the signifier to so great an extent 
that he is suborned by it. 

In order to decipher the diachrony of unconscious repetitions, interpreta- 
tion must introduce into the synchrony of signifiers that come together there 



496 Ecrits 

something that suddenly makes translation possible — this is precisely what is 
allowed by the function of the Other in the possession of the code, it being in 
relation to that Other that the missing element appears. 

This importance of the signifier in the localization of analytic truth appears 
implicitly when an author holds firmly to the internal coherence of analytic 
experience in defining aporias. One should read Edward Glover to gauge the 
price he pays for not having the term "signifier" at his disposal. In articulat- 
ing the most relevant views, he finds interpretation everywhere, even in the 
banality of a medical prescription, being unable to set any limits to it. He even 
goes so far as to say, quite simply — without our being sure he knows what he 
is saying — that symptom formation is an inexact interpretation on the sub- 
ject's part [13]. 

Conceived of in this way, interpretation becomes a sort of phlogiston: it is 
manifest in everything that is understood rightly or wrongly, as long as it feeds 
the flame of the imaginary, of that pure display which, going by the name of 
aggressiveness, flourishes in the technique of that period (1931 — new enough 
to still be current today [13]). 

It is only insofar as interpretation culminates in the here and now of this 
game that it can be distinguished from the reading of the signatura rerum, 
regarding which Jung tries to outdo Bohme. To follow it there would hardly 
suit the being of our analysts. 

But to keep time with Freud requires a very different tablature, one for which 
it is useful to know how to take the clock apart. 

594 3. My doctrine of the signifier is first of all a discipline, in which those I train 

have to familiarize themselves with the ways the signifier effects the advent 
of the signified, which is the only way of conceiving how it is that interpreta- 
tion, by inscribing itself therein, can produce anything new. 

For interpretation is not grounded in some assumption of divine archetypes, 
but in the fact that the unconscious has the radical structure of language and 
that a material operates in the unconscious according to certain laws, which 
are the same laws as those discovered in the study of natural languages 
[langues] — that is, languages [langues] that are or were actually spoken. 

The phlogiston metaphor, which was suggested to me a moment ago by 
Glover, derives its appropriateness from the error it evokes: signification no 
more emanates from life than phlogiston escapes from bodies in combustion. 
We should speak of signification rather as of the combination of life with the 
O atom of the sign 7 — the sign insofar as it first of all connotes presence or 
absence, by essentially introducing the and that links them, since in connot- 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 497 

ing presence or absence, it institutes presence against a background of 
absence, just as it constitutes absence in presence. 

One will recall that with characteristic sureness of step in his field, Freud, 
seeking a model of repetition automatism, stopped at the crossroads formed 
by a game of occultation and an alternating scansion of two phonemes, whose 
conjugation by a child made a striking impression on him. 

At the same time, we also see in the game that the value of the object is 
insignificant (the object the child causes to appear and disappear), and that 
phonetic perfection is less important than phonemic distinction — no one 
would dispute that Freud was right to translate it immediately by the Fort! Da! 
of the German he as an adult spoke [9]. 

This is the point of insemination for a symbolic order that preexists the 
infantile subject and in accordance with which he has to structure himself. 

4. I will spare myself the task of providing the rules of interpretation. It is not 

that they cannot be formulated, but their formulations presuppose develop- 595 

ments that I cannot presume to be known, since I cannot give a condensed 
account of them here. 

I will confine myself to remarking that, in reading the classical commen- 
taries on interpretation, I always regret how little is made of the very facts 
people supply. 

To give an example, everyone acknowledges in his own way that to con- 
firm that an interpretation is well founded, it is not the conviction with which 
it is received by the subject that counts, its well-foundedness instead being 
gauged by the material that emerges afterward. 

But psychologizing superstition has such a powerful grip on our minds that 
people always seek out the phenomenon of well-foundedness in the subject's 
assent, entirely overlooking the consequences of what Freud says about 
Verneinung [negation] as a form of avowal — to say the least, negation by the 
subject cannot be treated as equivalent to drawing a blank. 

This is how theory translates the way in which resistance is engendered in 
practice. It is also what I am trying to convey when I say that there is no other 
resistance to analysis than that of the analyst himself. 

5. The problem is that contemporary authors seem to have gotten the 
sequence of analytic effects backward. According to them, interpretation is 
but hesitant stammering compared to the opening up of a broader relation- 
ship in which, at last, we understand each other ("from the inside," no doubt). 

Interpretation becomes necessary here because the subject's weakness 



498 Ecrits 

requires our assistance. It is also something that is very difficult to get his weak- 
ness to swallow without rejecting it. It is both at once — in other words, a very 
awkward means. 

But what we have here is only the effect of the analyst's passions: his fear, 
which is not of making a mistake but of displaying his ignorance; his taste, 
which is not to satisfy but not to disappoint; his need, which is not to govern 
but to keep the upper hand. It has nothing to do with countertransference on 
the part of this or that analyst; it has to do with the consequences of the dyadic 
relation, if the therapist does not overcome it, and how could he overcome it 
when he views it as the ideal of his action? 

Primum vivere^ no doubt: a break must be avoided. That the practice of 

596 common decency should be classified as a technique to be taught so that breaks 

are avoided is one thing. But to confuse this physical necessity, the patient's 

presence at his appointment, with an analytic relationship is a mistaken notion 

that will mislead the novice for a long time. 

6. From this point of view, transference becomes the analyst's security, and 
the subject's relation to reality [reel] becomes the terrain on which the outcome 
of the battle is determined. Interpretation, which was postponed until the trans- 
ference was consolidated, now becomes subordinate to its liquidation. 

As a result, interpretation is absorbed into a kind of "working through"* — 
that one can quite simply translate by "work of transference" [travail du trans- 
fer^ — which serves as an alibi for a sort of revenge the analyst takes for his 
initial timidity, that is, for an insistence that opens the door to all kinds of forc- 
ing, placed under the banner of "strengthening the ego" [21—22]. 

7. But has anyone observed, in criticizing Freud's approach, as presented for 
example in the case of the Rat Man, that what surprises us as a preliminary 
indoctrination is due simply to the fact that Freud proceeds in exactly the oppo- 
site order? For he begins by introducing the patient to an initial situating of 
his position in reality \reel\ even if this situating leads to a precipitation — I 
would even go so far as to say a systematization — of symptoms [8]. 

Another well-known example: Freud brings Dora to realize that she has 
done more than merely participate in the great disorder of her father's world, 
whose damaging consequences she complains of — she has made herself its 
linchpin, and it could not have continued without her connivance [7]. 

I have long stressed the Hegelian procedure at work in this reversal of posi- 
tions of the beautiful soul in relation to the reality he accuses. The point is not 
to adapt him to it, but to show him that he is only too well adapted to it, since 
he assists in its very fabrication. 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 499 

But the path to be followed with the other ends here. For the transference 
has already done its job, demonstrating that what is at stake is something alto- 
gether different than relations between the ego and the world. 

Freud does not always seem to find his way about very well in the trans- 
ference in the cases he describes. And that is why they are so precious. 597 

For he immediately recognized that the crux [principe] of his power lay in 
the transference — in which respect it did not differ from suggestion — but also 
that this power only gave him a way out of the problem on the condition that 
he not use it, for it was then that it took on its whole transferential development. 

From then on he no longer addressed the person who was in his proxim- 
ity, which is why he refused to work face to face with him. 

Interpretation in Freud's work is so bold that, in popularizing it, we no 
longer recognize its import as mantic. When Freud exposes a tendency — what 
he calls Trieb, which is altogether different from an instinct — the freshness of 
the discovery prevents us from seeing the advent of a signifier that the Trieb 
in itself implies. But when Freud brings to light what can only be called the 
subject's lines of fate, what we ponder is Tiresias' face confronting the ambi- 
guity where his verdict operates. 

For the lines that are divined here have so little to do with the subject's ego, 
or with anything he may make present here and now in the dyadic relation, 
that in the case of the Rat Man, it is by a direct hit on the pact that presided 
over his parents' marriage (that is, on something that occurred well before the 
Rat Man was born) that Freud finds several conditions intermingled in it — 
honor just barely saved, emotional betrayal, social compromise, and prescribed 
debt, of which the great compulsive scenario that led the patient to him seems 
to be the cryptographic copy — and finally manages to explain the impasses 
in which the Rat Man's moral life and desire go astray. 

But the most striking thing about it is that access to this material was ren- 
dered possible only by an interpretation in which Freud relies too heavily on 
the idea that the Rat Man's father had prohibited his son from marrying the 
girl to whom he was sublimely devoted, in order to explain the impossibility 
that seems to have blocked this relationship for him in every way. An inter- 
pretation which, to say the least, is inexact, since it is contradicted by the real- 
ity it presumes, but which is nevertheless true in the sense that, in it, Freud 
evinces an intuition that anticipates my own contribution regarding the func- 
tion of the Other in obsessive neurosis. I have demonstrated that this function 
may be served, in obsessive neurosis, by a dead man [un mort\ and that in this 598 

case it could not be better served than by the father, insofar as the Rat Man's 
father had, by his death, acceded to the position Freud recognized as that of 
the absolute Father. 



5oo Ecrits 

8. I will ask those who have read my work and who have attended my semi- 
nar to forgive me for citing examples with which they are already familiar. 

I am doing so not only because I cannot make use of my own analyses to 
demonstrate the level interpretation reaches — when the interpretation, prov- 
ing to be coextensive with the subject's history, cannot be communicated in 
the communicating milieu in which many of my analyses take place without 
the risk of betraying the subject's identity. For I have succeeded at times in 
saying enough about a case without saying too much, that is, in conveying my 
example without anyone, except the person in question, recognizing it. 

Nor is it because I regard the Rat Man as a case that Freud cured — for if I 
were to add that I do not think that the analysis is entirely unconnected with 
the tragic conclusion of his story by death on the battlefield, what an oppor- 
tunity for contempt I would be offering to those who wish to find fault! 

What I am saying is that it is in a direction of the treatment, ordered, as I 
have just shown, in accordance with a process that begins with rectification of 
the subject's relations with reality \reel\ and proceeds to development of the 
transference and then to interpretation, that is situated the horizon at which 
the fundamental discoveries, which we are still living off, surrendered them- 
selves to Freud concerning the dynamics and structure of obsessive neurosis. 
Nothing more, but nothing less either. 

The question now is whether we have lost this horizon by reversing this 
order. 

9. What we can say is that the new pathways by which the approach laid out 
by the discoverer has supposedly been authenticated are proof of termino- 
logical confusion that can only be exposed in particular cases. I will thus take 
an example that has already contributed to my teaching; it has, of course, been 
chosen from a first-rate author who, by virtue of his background, is particu- 
larly attuned to the dimension of interpretation. I am referring to Ernst Kris 
and to a case which — he does not hide the fact — he took over from Melitta 
Schmideberg [15]. 

599 h concerns a subject inhibited in his intellectual life and particularly inca- 

pable of publishing his research on account of an impulse to plagiarize, which, 
it seems, he was unable to control. Such was the subjective drama. 

Melitta Schmideberg had understood it as the recurrence of an adolescent 
delinquency [25]; the subject stole sweets and books, and it was from this angle 
that she had undertaken the analysis of the unconscious conflict. 

Ernst Kris gently approaches the case anew in accordance with a more 
methodical interpretation, one that proceeds from the surface to the depths, 
he says. The fact that he credits this interpretation to "ego* psychology" a la 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5oi 

Hartmann, whose supporter he felt he had to become, is incidental to an assess- 
ment of what takes place. Ernst Kris changes perspective on the case and claims 
to give the subject insight* for a new departure on the basis of a fact that is 
merely a repetition of his compulsion, but regarding which Kris quite com- 
mendably does not content himself with what the patient says. And when the 
patient claims to have taken, in spite of himself, the ideas for a piece that he 
has just completed from a book which, on being remembered, enabled him to 
check it after the fact, Kris looks at the evidence and discovers that nothing 
has apparently gone beyond what is implied by a shared field of research. In 
short, having assured himself that his patient is not a plagiarist when he thinks 
he is, he sets out to show him that he wants to be one in order to prevent him- 
self from really being one — which is what we call analyzing the defense before 
the drive, the latter being manifested here in an attraction to others' ideas. 

This intervention may be presumed to be erroneous, owing simply to the 
fact that it presupposes that defense and drive are concentric, the one being 
molded, as it were, around the other. 

What proves that it is, in fact, erroneous is the very thing Kris thinks con- 
firms his intervention — namely, that just when he feels he can ask the patient 
what he thinks of the tables being turned in this way, the patient, daydream- 
ing for a moment, replies that for some time, on leaving his sessions, he has 
wandered along a street full of attractive little restaurants, scrutinizing their 
menus in search of his favorite dish: fresh brains. 

An admission which, rather than sanctioning the felicity of the interven- 
tion by way of the material it contributes, seems to me to have the corrective 
value of an acting out* in the very report he gives of it. 600 

The post-session condiment the patient sniffs out seems to me rather to tell 
the dinner host that the condiment had been sorely lacking during the meal. 
However compulsive he may be about smelling it, it is a hint*; being a transi- 
tory symptom, no doubt, it warns the analyst that he is barking up the wrong 
tree. 

Indeed, you are barking up the wrong tree, I would continue, addressing 
the late Ernst Kris, as I remember him at the Marienbad Congress where, the 
day after my address on the mirror stage, I took my leave, anxious as I was to 
get a feeling for the spirit of the time — a time full of promises — at the 
Olympics in Berlin. He kindly objected, "£a ne se fait pas!" ("That isn't 
done!"), having already acquired that penchant for the respectable that per- 
haps influenced his approach here. 

Was this what misled you, Ernst Kris, or was it simply that while your inten- 
tions may have been upright, and your judgment indubitably so as well, things 
themselves were askew? 



5o2 Ecrits 

It's not the fact that your patient doesn't steal that is important here. It's 
that he doesn't . . . Not "doesn't": it's that he steals nothing. And that's what 
you should have conveyed to him. 

Contrary to what you believe, it's not his defense against the idea of steal- 
ing that makes him believe he is stealing. It's that he may have an idea of his 
own which never occurs to him or barely crosses his mind. 

It is thus useless to engage him in a process of separating out what more or 
less original ideas his friend filches from him when they chew the fat together, 
which God himself could not determine. 

Couldn't this craving for fresh brains refresh your own concepts, and remind 
you of the function of metonymy in Roman Jakobson's work? I shall return 
to this later. 

You speak of Melitta Schmideberg as if she had confused delinquency with 
the id. I am not so sure, and the wording of the title of the article in which she 
discusses this case suggests a metaphor to me. 

You treat the patient as if he were obsessed, but he throws you a line with 
his food fantasy, giving you the opportunity to be a quarter-of-an-hour ahead 
601 of the nosology of your time by providing a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa 

[anorexie mentale]. You would simultaneously refresh, by giving them back 
their true meaning, this couple of terms which current usage has reduced to 
the dubious status of an etiological indication. 

Anorexia, in this case, concerns the mental realm, concerns the desire on 
which the idea lives, and this leads us to the scurvy that rages on the raft on 
which I embark him with the skinny virgins. 

Their symbolically motivated refusal seems to me to have a good deal to 
do with the patient's aversion to what he thinks. His daddy, you tell us, was 
not very resourceful when it came to ideas. Could it be that the grandfather, 
who was celebrated for his ideas, disgusted him of them? How can we know? 
You are surely right to make the signifier "grand," included in die kinship 
term ["grandfather"], nothing less than the origin of the rivalry played out 
with the father over who could catch the biggest [le plus grand] fish. But this 
purely formal challenge* seems to me rather to mean: nothing doing. 

Your progress, supposedly from the surface, thus has nothing in common 
with subjective rectification, highlighted above in Freud's method, where, 
moreover, it isn't motivated by any kind of topographical priority. 

The fact is that this rectification is also dialectical in Freud 's work. It takes 
off from the subject's own words in order to come back to them, which means 
that an interpretation can be exact only by being ... an interpretation. 

To side here with the objective situation is going too far, if only because 
plagiarism is relative to the customs in force. 8 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5oj 

But the idea that the surface is the level of the superficial is itself danger- 
ous. 

Another topology is necessary if we are not to be mistaken as to the place 
of desire. 

To wipe desire off the map [carte] when it is already covered over in the 602 

patient's landscape is not the best way of following Freud's teaching. 

Nor is it a way of getting rid of depth, for it is on the surface that depth is 
seen, as when one 's face breaks out in pimples on holidays. 

777. Where Do We Stand Regarding Transference? 

1 . We must look to the work of my colleague, Daniel Lagache, for an accu- 
rate history of the writings devoted — around Freud while he was pursuing 
his work and since he bequeathed it to us — to transference, which Freud dis- 
covered [18]. Lagache 's work aims to go much further, by introducing struc- 
tural distinctions into the phenomenon's function that are essential for its 
critique. Suffice it to recall the highly relevant alternative he presents — 
regarding the ultimate nature of transference — between the need for repeti- 
tion and the repetition of need. 

Such work, whose consequences I believe I have been able to draw out in 
my teaching, shows very clearly, by means of the ordering it introduces, to 
what extent the aspects on which discussion focuses are often partial, and par- 
ticularly to what extent the ordinary use of the term "transference," even in 
psychoanalysis, cannot free itself from its most questionable approach, which 
is also its crudest: to make transference into the succession or sum total of pos- 
itive or negative feelings the patient has for his analyst. 

To assess where we stand regarding transference in our scientific commu- 
nity, it could be said that there has been no agreement nor light shed on the 
following points where they would, nevertheless, seem necessary: Is it the same 
effect of the relation with the analyst that is manifested in the initial infatua- 
tion observed at the beginning of treatment and in the web of satisfactions that 
make this relation so difficult to break off when transference neurosis seems 
to go beyond strictly analytic means? And is it the relation with the analyst 
and its fundamental frustration which, in the second phase of analysis, sus- 
tains the scansion — frustration, aggression, and regression — in which the most 
fruitful effects of analysis are supposed to occur? How is the subordination of 
phenomena to be conceptualized when their movement is traversed by fan- 
tasies that openly involve the figure of the analyst? 603 

The reason for these persistent obscurities has been formulated in an excep- 
tionally perspicacious study: at each of the stages at which an attempt has been 



504 Ecrits 

made to reappraise the problems of transference, the divergences in technique 
that made this task so urgent have not given way to a true critique of the notion 
itself [20]. 

2. The notion I want to get at here is so central to analytic action that it may 
serve as a gauge of the partiality of the theories that have taken the time to 
conceptualize it. That is, we will not be misled if we judge their partiality on 
the basis of the handling of transference these theories imply This pragma- 
tism is justified. For the handling of transference and one's notion of it are 
one and the same, and however little this notion is elaborated in practice, it 
cannot but align itself with the partialities of the theory. 

On the other hand, the simultaneous existence of these partialities does not 
necessarily mean that they complete each other. This confirms the fact that 
they suffer from a central defect. 

In order to introduce a little order here already, I will reduce these partial- 
ities of the theory to three, even if it means giving in to taking sides to some 
degree, less serious as it is only for the purposes of exposition. 

3. I will link geneticism — in the sense that it tends to ground analytic phe- 
nomena in the developmental moments involved in those phenomena and to 
feed on the so-called direct observation of the child — to a specific technique, 
one that centers this procedure on the analysis of the defenses. 

This link is obvious from a historical perspective. One might even say that 
it has no other foundation, since it is constituted only on the basis of the fail- 
ure of the solidarity it presupposes. 

One can locate its beginnings in the legitimate credence lent to the notion 
of an unconscious ego with which Freud reoriented his doctrine. To move from 
that notion to the hypothesis that the defense mechanisms that were grouped 
under ego functioning ought themselves to be able to reveal a comparable law 
of appearance — one that even corresponds to the succession of phases by which 
Freud had attempted to connect the emergence of the drives with physiology — 
604 was the step Anna Freud, in her book The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defense 

[4], proposed to take in order to put it to the test of experience. 

It could have occasioned a fruitful critique of the relations between devel- 
opment and the obviously more complex structures Freud introduced into psy- 
chology. But the sights were lowered; it was so much more tempting to try to 
insert the defense mechanisms into the observable stages of sensorimotor devel- 
opment and progressive abilities of intelligent behavior — those mechanisms 
supposedly separating out in the course of their progress. 

One might say that the hopes Anna Freud placed in such an exploration 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5o5 

were dashed: nothing emerged from this line of approach that could inform 
technique, even though the details gleaned from a type of child observation 
informed by analysis were sometimes very suggestive. 

The notion of pattern*, which serves here as an alibi for the failed typol- 
ogy, sponsors a technique which, in seeking to detect a pattern* that isn't cur- 
rent, willingly judges it on the basis of its deviation from a pattern* that finds 
in its conformism the guarantees of its conformity. One cannot recall without 
a sense of shame the criteria of success in which this trumped-up work cul- 
minates: the achievement of a higher income and the safety valve of an affair 
with one 's secretary, regulating the release of forces that are strictly under 
wraps in marriage, career, and political community. These do not seem to me 
to be of sufficient dignity to require an appeal — articulated in the analyst's 
planning* and even in his interpretation — to the Discord of the life and death 
instincts, even if only to decorate one 's words with the pretentious term "eco- 
nomic," and to pursue it, in an utter and complete misunderstanding of 
Freud's thought, as the play of a couple offerees that are homologous in their 
opposition. 

4. The second trend where we see what slips away from transference seems 
less degraded in its analytic relief — namely, that based on object relations. 

This theory, however much it has degenerated in France in recent years, 
has, like geneticism, a noble origin. It was Karl Abraham who opened up this 
field and the notion of the part-object is his original contribution. This is not 
the place to demonstrate its value. I am more interested in indicating its con- 
nection with the partiality of that aspect of transference which Abraham iso- 605 
lates, promoting it in its opacity as the ability to love — as if that were a 
constitutional facet of the patient in which one could read the degree of his 
curability, and, in particular, the only aspect concerning which the treatment 
of psychosis would fail. 

In fact, we have two equations here: the so-called sexual transference (Sex- 
ualiibertragung) is at the heart of the love that in French has been called amour 
objectal, object love (Objektliebe); and the capacity for transference is a meas- 
ure of the patient's access to reality [reel]. I cannot stress too strongly that this 
merely begs the question. 

In contradistinction to the presuppositions of geneticism, which is supposed 
to be based on an order of formal emergences in the subject, Abraham's per- 
spective can be explained by a finality that is authorized because it is instinc- 
tual, in that it is embellished by the maturation of an ineffable object, the Object 
with a capital O, that governs the phase of "objectality" (significantly distin- 
guished from objectivity by its affective substance). 



5o6 Ecrits 

This ectoplasmic conception of the object quickly revealed its dangers when 
it degenerated into the crude dichotomy expressed in the opposition between 
pregenital character and genital character. 

This elementary theme was summarily developed by attributing to pre- 
genital character a slew of features — projective unrealism, greater or lesser 
degrees of autism, restriction of satisfactions by the defenses, and the wrap- 
ping of the object in doubly protective insulation when it comes to the destruc- 
tive effects that connote it — in other words, an amalgamation of all the defects 
in the object-relation with a view to showing the reasons for the extreme 
dependence of the subject that results therefrom. A picture that would be use- 
ful, despite its tendency to be confused, if it did not seem designed to serve as 
a negative for the puerility of the following: "the passage from the pregenital 
form to the genital form," in which the drives "are no longer characterized by 
an uncontrollable, unlimited, unconditional need for possession, involving a 
destructive element. They are truly tender and loving, and if the subject still 
does not prove to be 'oblative' — that is, disinterested — and if these objects" 
(here the author recalls my remarks) "are just as profoundly narcissistic 
objects as they were before, he is now capable of comprehension and adapta- 
606 tion to the other. Moreover, the intimate structure of these object relations 

shows that the object's own pleasure is indispensable to the subject's happi- 
ness. The object's preferences, desires, and needs (what a hodgepodge!) 9 are 
taken into consideration to the highest degree." 

However, this does not prevent the ego from having "a stability that runs 
no risk of being compromised by the loss of a significant Object. It remains 
independent of its objects." 

"Its organization is such that the mode of thought it employs is essentially 
logical. It does not spontaneously present regression to an archaic mode of 
apprehending reality, affective thinking and magical belief playing only an 
absolutely secondary role here; symbolization does not go beyond the extent 
and importance it has in normal life (!!). 10 The style of relations between 
subject and object is one of the most highly evolved (sicj" n 

This is the promise held out to those who "at the end of a successful analy- 
sis .. . realize the enormous difference between what they used to believe sex- 
ual joy to be and what they now experience" [21, page 55]. 

One is led to understand that for those who have this joy from the outset, 
"genital relations are, in short, untroubled" [21]. 

Untroubled except for conjugating themselves irresistibly in the verb "to 
bang your behind on the chandelier," which marks a place here for the future 
scholiast to find his eternal opportunity. 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5oy 

5. Although we must agree with Abraham when he suggests that the typical 
object-relation is manifested in the activity of the collector, perhaps the rule 
of that relation is not given in this edifying antinomy, but is to be sought, rather, 
in some impasse that is constitutive of desire as such. 

What makes it such that the object presents itself as broken and decom- 
posed is perhaps something other than a pathological factor. And what does 
this absurd hymn to the harmony of genital relations have to do with reality 
[reel]? 

Must we erase the Oedipal drama from our experience when it had to be 
forged by Freud precisely to explain the barriers and debasements (Erniedri- 607 

gungen) so common in the sphere of love, even the most fulfilled? 

Is it our job to disguise Eros, the black God, as the Good Shepherd *s curly- 
haired sheep? 

Sublimation may be at work in the "oblation" that radiates from love, but 
we should try to go a little further into the structure of the sublime and not 
confuse it with the perfect orgasm — an equation Freud, in any case, opposed. 

The worst thing is that the souls who overflow with the most natural ten- 
derness are led to wonder whether they satisfy the delusional normalism of 
the genital relation — an unheralded burden which we have loaded onto the 
shoulders of the innocent, like those cursed by the Evangelist. 

Yet in reading our work, should any of it survive into a time when people 
will no longer know what these effervescent words corresponded to in prac- 
tice, people might imagine that our art was designed to revive sexual hunger 
in those afflicted with retardation of the sexual gland — to the physiology of 
which we have, nevertheless, made no contribution, and of which we need 
know very little indeed. 

6. At least three sides are needed to make a pyramid, even a heretical one. The 
side that closes the dihedron I have described here in the gap left in the con- 
ception of transference, strives, one might say, to join the edges together. 

If transference derives its power from being brought back to the reality of 
which the analyst is the representative, and if the goal is to ripen the Object 
in the hothouse of a confined situation, the analysand is left with only one 
object to sink his teeth into, if you will allow me the expression, and that is the 
analyst. 

Hence the third mistake on my list — the notion of inter subjective intro- 
jection — because it is unfortunately installed in a dyadic relation. 

For we are certainly dealing with a unitive pathway, concerning which the 
various theoretical sauces that accompany it, depending on the topography 



5o8 Ecrits 

they refer to, can but retain the metaphor, varying it according to the level of 
the operation regarded as serious: introjection for Ferenczi, identification with 
the analyst's superego for Strachey, and terminal narcissistic trance for Balint. 

608 I am trying to draw attention to the substance of this mystical consumma- 
tion and if, once again, I must criticize what is happening right in front of my 
nose, it is because analytic experience is known to draw its strength from the 
particular. 

The importance given in treatment to the fantasy of phallic devouring, the 
brunt of which is borne by the image of the analyst, seems worthy of note to 
me because it tallies so well with a conception of the direction of the treatment 
that is entirely based on setting the distance between the patient and the ana- 
lyst, the latter as the object of the dyadic relation. 

For, however deficient the theory with which an author systematizes his 
technique, the fact remains that he really does analyze people, and that the 
coherence revealed in the error is the guarantor here of the wrong turn prac- 
tice has taken. 

It is the privileged function of the signifier "phallus" in the subject's way 
of being present in desire that is illustrated here, but in an experience that might 
be called blind — failing any orientation regarding the true relations in the ana- 
lytic situation, which, like any other situation involving speech, can only be 
crushed if one tries to inscribe it in a dyadic relation. 

Since the nature of symbolic incorporation is not recognized, for good 
reason, and since it is ruled out that anything real should be consummated in 
analysis, it is clear — from the elementary landmarks of my teaching — that 
anything that occurs that is not imaginary can no longer be recognized. For 
it is not necessary to know the floor plan of a house to bang one's head 
against its walls: indeed, one can do so very well without it. 

I myself suggested to this author, at a time when we used to discuss things, 
that if one confines oneself to an imaginary relation between objects there 
remains nothing but the dimension of distance to order it. I wasn't expecting 
him to agree with me. 

To make distance the sole dimension in which the neurotic's relations with 
the object are played out generates insurmountable contradictions that can be 
seen clearly enough both in the system and in the opposite directions differ- 
ent authors derive from the same metaphor to organize their impressions. Too 
much and too little distance from the object sometimes appear to be confounded 

609 so thoroughly as to become confused. And it was not distance from the object, 
but rather its excessive intimacy with the subject that seemed to Ferenczi to 
characterize the neurotic. 

What determines what each author means is his technique, and the tech- 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5o<) 

nique of "bringing- together" \rapprocher\ however priceless an effect the 
untranslated French term may have in a paper written in English, reveals in 
practice a tendency that verges on obsession. 

It is hard to believe that the ideal prescribed by this author of reducing this 
distance to zero ("nil" in English) stops him from seeing that his theoretical 
paradox converges here. 

Be that as it may, there is no doubt that this distance is taken as a universal 
parameter, regulating variations in the technique (however incomprehensible 
the debate on their magnitude may seem) for dismantling neurosis. 

What such a conception owes to the specific conditions of obsessive neu- 
rosis is not to be ascribed entirely to the object. 

It does not even seem to have to its credit any notable privilege regarding 
the results it obtains in the treatment of obsessive neurosis. For if I can, as Kris 
did, mention an analysis which I took over from another analyst, I can attest 
that such a technique, in the hands of an analyst of indisputable talent, suc- 
ceeded in producing — in a clinical case of pure obsession in a man — the irrup- 
tion of an infatuation which, while Platonic, was no less unbridled, and which 
proved no less irreducible even though it was directed at the first object of the 
same sex that happened to be at hand in his circle. 

To speak of transitory perversion here may satisfy a militant optimist, but 
only at the cost of failing to recognize, in this atypical restoration of the overly 
neglected third party to the relation, that one should not pull too hard on the 
strings of proximity in the object-relation. 

7. There is no limit to the eroding of analytic technique through its decon- 
ceptualization. I have already referred to what was found in a "wild" analy- 
sis, about which, to my pained astonishment, no supervisor had become 
alarmed. To be able to smell one 's analyst seemed in one work to be an achieve- 
ment to be taken literally, as an indication of the felicitous outcome of the trans- 
ference. 

One can perceive here a sort of involuntary humor, which is what makes 
the example so valuable. It would have delighted Jarry. It is, in fact, merely 
the consequence one can expect from comprehending the development of the 6 1 o 

analytic situation in terms of reality [reel]: and it is true that, taste apart, the 
olfactory is the only dimension that allows one to reduce distance to zero (nil*), 
this time in reality [reel]. Whether it provides a guide for the direction of the 
treatment and the principles of its power is more dubious. 

But that a stale smell should waft into a technique that is conducted largely 
by "following one's nose," as they say, is not simply ridiculous. The students 
who attend my seminar will recall the smell of urine that marked the turning 



5 zo Ecrits 

point in a case of transitory perversion, which I dwelt on in order to criticize 
this technique. It cannot be said that the turning point was unconnected with 
the incident that motivated the case study, since it was in looking through a 
crack in the wall of a water* closet to spy on a woman pissing that the patient 
suddenly transposed his libido, without anything, it seems, predestining it for 
this — infantile emotions bound up with the fantasy of the phallic mother hav- 
ing until then taken the form of a phobia [23]. 

It is not a direct connection, however, no more than it would be correct to 
see in this voyeurism an inversion of the exhibition involved in the atypia of 
the phobia — which was the correct diagnosis — underlying the patient's anx- 
iety at being teased for being too tall. 

As I said, the analyst to whom we owe this remarkable publication proves 
her rare perspicacity by returning again and again, to the point of tormenting 
the patient, to the interpretation she made of a certain suit of armor — which 
appeared in a dream chasing him and armed, moreover, with a syringe con- 
taining insecticide — as a symbol of the phallic mother. 

"Should I have talked about his father instead?" she wondered. She justi- 
fied not doing so by the fact that the real father had been deficient [carence] in 
the patient's history. 

My students can deplore here the fact that the teaching of my seminar was 
unable to help her at the time, since they know by what principles I have taught 
them to distinguish between the phobic object as an all-purpose signifier to 
make up for [supplier] the Other's lack and the fundamental fetish in every 
perversion as an object perceived in the signifier's cut. 

Failing that, shouldn't this gifted novice have recalled the dialogue between 
6n the suits of armor in Andre Breton's "Discours sur le peu de realite"? That 

would have put her on the right track. 

But how could we hope for such a thing when this analysis was, in super- 
vision, given a direction that inclined her to constantly harass the patient to 
bring him back to the real situation? How can we be surprised that, unlike the 
Queen of Spain, the analyst has legs, when she herself emphasizes it in the 
harshness of her calls to order, that is, to the present? 

Naturally, this procedure played a part in the benign outcome of the act- 
ing out* under examination here: since the analyst — who was, moreover, aware 
of the fact — was thus constantly intervening in a castrating manner. 

But why, then, attribute this role to the mother, when everything in the 
anamnesis of this case indicates that she always acted, rather, as a go-between? 

The faltering Oedipus complex was compensated for, but always in the 
form, which is disarming here in its naivete, of an entirely forced, if not arbi- 
trary, reference to the analyst's husband — a situation encouraged here by the 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5i i 

fact that it was he, himself a psychiatrist, who provided the analyst with this 
particular patient. 

This is not a common situation. In any case, it is to be impugned as lying 
outside the analytic situation. 

My reservations about its outcome are not entirely due to the graceless 
detours of the treatment, and the patient's joke — probably not devoid of mal- 
ice — about the fee for the last session being misappropriated to pay for 
debauchery is not a bad omen for the future. 

The question that can be raised is that of the boundary between analysis 
and reeducation when the very process of analysis is guided by a predominant 
solicitation of its real effects. This can be seen by comparing the biographical 
facts in this case with the transference formations: the contribution made by 
the deciphering of the unconscious is truly minimal. So minimal that one won- 
ders whether the lion's share of the unconscious does not remain intact in the 
encystment of the enigma which — labeled transitory perversion here — is the 
subject of this instructive paper. 

8. Lest the lay reader be misled, let me say that I wish in no way to disparage 
a work to which Virgil's epithet improbus can rightly be applied. 

My only purpose is to warn analysts of the decline their technique suffers 612 

when they misrecognize the true place in which its effects are produced. 

While they are tireless in their attempts to define it, one cannot say that in 
falling back on positions of modesty, or even taking fictions as their guide, the 
analytic experience they develop is always unfruitful. 

Geneticism-based research and direct observation are far from having 
cut themselves off from a properly analytic spirit. When I discussed object- 
relation themes one year in my seminar, I showed the value of a conception 
in which child observation is nourished by the most accurate reconsidera- 
tion of the function of mothering in the genesis of the object: I mean the 
notion of the transitional object, introduced by D. W. Winnicott, which is 
key in explaining the genesis of fetishism [27]. 

The fact remains that flagrant uncertainties in the reading of the major 
Freudian concepts correspond to weaknesses that plague analytic practice. 

What I want to convey is that the more impasses researchers and groups 
encounter in conceptualizing their action in its authenticity, the more they end 
up forcing their action into the direction of the exercise of power. 

They substitute this power for the relation to being where their action takes 
place, making its means — especially those of speech — fall from their veridical 
eminence. This is why it is a sort of return of the repressed, however strange it 
maybe, which — owing to pretensions hardly disposed to encumber themselves 



5i2 Ecrits 

with the dignity of these means — occasions the linguistic error of referring to 
being as though it were a fact of reality, when the discourse that reigns there 
rejects any questioning that a fine platitude would not have already recognized. 

IV. How to Act with One's Being 

1 . The question of the analyst's being arose very early in the history of analy- 
sis. And it should come as no surprise that it was introduced by the analyst 

613 most tormented by the problem of analytic action. Indeed, it can be said that 
Ferenczi's article, "Introjection and Transference," dating back to 1909 [3], 
was inaugural here and that it anticipated by many years all the themes later 
developed on the basis of the second topography. 

Although Ferenczi conceives of transference as the introjection of the doc- 
tor's person into the patient's subjective economy, it is not introjection of this 
person as a prop for a repetitive compulsion or ill-adapted behavior, or as a 
fantasy figure. What he means is the absorption into the subject's economy 
of everything the psychoanalyst makes present in the duo as the here and now 
of an incarnated problematic. Doesn't Ferenczi reach the extreme conclusion 
that the treatment can only be complete if the doctor avows to the patient the 
sense of abandonment the doctor himself is liable to suffer? 12 

2. Must one pay this comical price for the subject's want-to-be to simply be 
recognized as the heart of analytic experience, as the very field in which the 
neurotic's passion is deployed? 

Apart from the Hungarian school, whose embers are now dispersed and 
soon to be mere ashes, only the English, with their cold objectivity, have been 
able to articulate this gap — to which the neurotic, in wanting to justify his 
existence, attests — and hence to implicitly distinguish the relation to the 
Other, in which being finds its status, from the interpersonal relation, with its 
warmth and lures. 

It should suffice to cite Ella Sharpe and her pertinent remarks in following 
the neurotic's true concerns [24]. The strength of her remarks lies in a sort of 
naivete reflected in the justly famous brusqueness of her style as both thera- 
pist and writer. She is quite out of the ordinary in going as far as vainglory 
when she requires the analyst to be omniscient if he is to read the intentions 
of the analysand's discourse correctly. 

We must credit her for having given a literary background pride of place 
in training institutes, even if she does not seem to realize that, in the minimal 

614 reading list she proposes, there is a predominance of imaginative works in 
which the phallus as a signifier plays a central role beneath a transparent veil. 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 513 

This simply proves that her choice is no less guided by analytic experience 
than her recommendation is felicitous. 

3. It is again by the British, whether by birth or by adoption, that the end of 
analysis has been most categorically defined as the subject 's identification with 
the analyst. Certainly, opinion varies as to whether it is his ego or superego 
that is involved. It is not that easy to master the structure Freud isolated in the 
subject, unless you distinguish therein the symbolic from the imaginary and 
the real. 

Let us simply say that statements made with such a view to affront are not 
forged without some pressure on those who proffer them. The dialectic of fan- 
tasy objects promoted in practice by Melanie Klein tends to be translated in 
the theory in terms of identification. 

For these objects, whether part-objects or not, but certainly signifying 
objects — the breast, excrement, and the phallus — are no doubt won or lost by 
the subject; he is destroyed by them or preserves them, but above all he is these 
objects, according to the place where they function in his fundamental fan- 
tasy. This form of identification merely demonstrates the pathology of the 
path down which the subject is pushed in a world where his needs are reduced 
to exchange values — this path itself finding its radical possibility only in the 
mortification the signifier imposes on his life by numbering it. 

4. It would seem that the psychoanalyst, if he is simply to help the subject, 
must be spared this pathology, which, as we see, depends on nothing less than 
an iron-clad law. 

This is why people imagine that a psychoanalyst should be a happy man. 
Indeed, is it not happiness that people ask him for, and how could he give it, 
commonsense asks, if he does not have a bit of it himself? 

It is a fact that we do not proclaim our incompetence to promise happiness 
in an era in which the question of how to gauge it has become so complicated — 
in the first place, because happiness, as Saint- Just said, has become a political 
factor. 

To be fair, humanist progress from Aristotle to St. Francis (de Sales) did 615 

not fill the aporias of happiness. 

It is a waste of time, as we know, to look for a happy man's shirt, and what 
is called a happy shade is to be avoided for the ills it propagates. 

It is certainly in the relation to being that the analyst has to find his oper- 
ating level, and the opportunities training analysis offers him for this purpose 
are not only to be calculated as a function of the problem which is supposedly 
already resolved for the analyst who is guiding him. 



514 Ecrits 

There are misfortunes of being that the prudence of colleges and the false 
shame that ensures domination dare not excise from one. 

An ethics must be formulated that integrates Freud 's conquests concern- 
ing desire: one that would place at the forefront the question of the analyst's 
desire. 

5. If one is attuned to the resonance of earlier work, one cannot fail to be struck 
by the decline in analytic speculation, especially in this area. 

Because they understand a lot of things, analysts on the whole imagine that 
to understand is an end in itself, and that it can only be a happy end.* The 
example of physical science may show them, however, that the most impres- 
sive successes do not require that one know where one is going. 

To think, it is often better not to understand; and one can gallop along, under- 
standing for miles and miles, without the slightest thought being produced. 

This, indeed, was how the behaviorists began: "give up understanding." 
But since they had no other thoughts concerning our particular subject mat- 
ter, which is antiphusis, they adopted the course of using, without under- 
standing it, what we understand — a source of renewed pride for us. 

A sample of the kind of morality we are capable of producing is provided 
by the notion of oblativity. It is an obsessive 's fantasy misunderstood by one- 
self: "everything for the other, my semblable," one propounds with this 
notion, without recognizing here the anxiety that the Other (with a capital 0) 
inspires by not being a semblable. 

616 6. I don't claim to teach psychoanalysts what thinking is. They know. But it 

is not as if they came to understand it by themselves. They learned their les- 
son from psychologists. Thought is a first try at action, they dutifully repeat. 
(Freud himself falls into this trap, which does not stop him from being a 
doughty thinker, whose action culminates in thought.) 

In truth, to analysts thought is an action that undoes itself. This leaves some 
hope that, if one makes them think about it by taking it up again, they will 
come to rethink it. 

7. The analyst is the man to whom one speaks and to whom one speaks freely. 
That is what he is there for. What does this mean? 

Everything that can be said about the association of ideas is mere dressing 
up in psychologistic clothing. Induced plays on words are far removed from 
it; because of their protocol, moreover, nothing could be less free. 

The subject invited to speak in analysis does not really display a great deal 
of freedom in what he says. Not that he is bound by the rigor of his associa- 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5i5 

tions: they no doubt oppress him, but it is rather that they lead to a free speech, 
a full speech that would be painful to him. 

Nothing is to be feared more than saying something that might be true. For 
it would become entirely true if it were said, and Lord knows what happens 
when something can no longer be cast into doubt because it is true. 

Is that the procedure used in analysis — a progress of truth? I can already 
hear the philistines whispering about my intellectualistic analyses: whereas I, 
to the best of my knowledge, am at the very forefront in preserving what is 
unsay able there. 

I know better than anyone that we listen for what lies beyond discourse, if 
only I take the path of hearing, not that of auscultating. Yes, certainly not the 
path of auscultating resistance, blood pressure, opisthotonos, pallor, and adre- 
nal discharge (sic) by which a stronger (resic) ego should be reformed: what I 
listen to is based on hearing [ce quej'ecoute est d'entendement]. 

Hearing does not force me to understand. The fact remains that what I hear 
is a discourse, even if it is as seemingly nondiscursive as an interjection. For 
an interjection is linguistic in nature and not an expressive cry. It is a part of 
speech that is just as important as any other in its syntactic effects in a given 
language [langue]. 

In what I indubitably hear, I have nothing to find fault with if I understand 617 

none of it, or if I do understand something I am sure to be mistaken. This need 
not stop me from responding to it. That's what happens outside analysis in 
such cases. Instead I keep quiet. Everybody agrees that I frustrate the 
speaker — him first, but me too. Why? 

If I frustrate him it is because he is asking [demande] me for something. To 
answer him, in fact. But he knows very well that it would be but words. And 
he can get those from whomever he likes. It's not even certain that he'd be 
grateful to me if they were fine words, let alone if they were lousy. It's not 
these words he's asking for [demande]. He is simply demanding of me . . ., by 
the very fact that he is speaking: his demand is intransitive — it brings no object 
with it. 

Of course, his demand is deployed against the backdrop of an implicit 
demand, the one for which he is here: the demand for me to cure him, to reveal 
him to himself, to introduce him to psychoanalysis, to help him qualify as an 
analyst. But, as he knows, this demand can wait. His present demand has noth- 
ing to do with that — it is not even his own, for after all I am the one who offered 
to let him speak. (Only the subject is transitive here.) 

In short, I have succeeded in doing what in the field of ordinary commerce 
people would like to be able to do with such ease: out of supply [ojfre] I have 
created demand. 



5i6 Ecrits 

8. But it is, one might say, a radical demand. 

Ida Macalpine is no doubt right in wanting to seek the motor force of trans- 
ference in the fundamental rule of psychoanalysis alone. But she errs in 
attributing the unobstructed path toward infantile regression to the absence 
of all objects [20]. This would rather seem to be an obstacle thereto, for, as 
everyone knows — child analysts more than anyone — it takes a lot of little 
objects to keep up a relationship with a child. 

By means of demand, the whole past begins to open up, right down to ear- 
liest infancy. The subject has never done anything but demand, he could not 
have survived otherwise, and we take it from there. 

This is the way that analytic regression can occur and does in fact present 
itself. People talk about it as if the subject began acting like a child. That no 
doubt happens, and such playacting does not bode very well. It differs, in any 
case, from what is usually observed in what passes for regression. For regres- 
618 sion displays nothing other than a return to the present of signifiers used in 

demands that have exceeded their statute of limitations. 

9. To return to our point of departure, this situation explains primary trans- 
ference and the love by which it is sometimes declared. 

For if love is giving what you don't have, it is certainly true that the sub- 
ject can wait to be given it, since the psychoanalyst has nothing else to give 
him. But he does not even give him this nothing, and it is better that way — 
which is why he is paid for this nothing, preferably well paid, in order to show 
that otherwise it would not be worth much. 

Although primary transference most often remains little more than a 
shadow, that doesn't stop this shadow from dreaming and reproducing its 
demand when there is nothing left to demand. This demand will simply be all 
the purer since it is empty. 

It may be objected that the analyst nevertheless gives his presence, but I 
believe that his presence is initially implied simply by his listening, and that 
this listening is simply the condition of speech. Why would analytic technique 
require that he make his presence so discreet if this were not, in fact, the case? 
It is later that his presence will be noticed. 

In any case, the most acute sense of his presence is tied to a moment at which 
the subject can only remain silent — that is, when he backs away from even the 
shadow of demand. 

Thus the analyst is he who sustains demand, not, as people say, to frustrate 
the subject, but in order to allow the signifiers with which the latter's frustra- 
tion is bound up to reappear. 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5iy 

10. It is worth recalling that it is in the oldest demand that primary identifica- 
tion is produced, the one that occurs on the basis of the mother's omnipotence — 
namely, the one that not only makes the satisfaction of needs dependent upon 
the signifying apparatus, but also that fragments, filters, and models those needs 
in the defiles of the signifier's structure. 

Needs become subordinate to the same conventional conditions as does the 
signifier in its double register: the synchronic register of opposition between 
irreducible elements, and the diachronic register of substitution and combi- 
nation, through which language, while it does not fulfill all functions, struc- 619 
tures everything in interpersonal relations. 

Hence the oscillation found in Freud's statements concerning relations 
between the superego and reality. The superego is not, of course, the source 
of reality, as he says somewhere, but it lays down its pathways, before refind- 
ing in the unconscious the first ideal marks in which the tendencies are con- 
stituted as repressed in the substitution of the signifier for needs. 

1 1 . There is thus no need to look any further for the mainspring of identifi- 
cation with the analyst. That identification may assume very different forms, 
but it will always be an identification with signifiers. 

As an analysis proceeds, the analyst deals in turn with all the articulations 
of the subject's demand. But, as I will explain later, he must respond to them 
only from his position in the transference. 

Who, in fact, doesn't emphasize the importance of what might be called 
analysis' permissive hypothesis? But we need no particular political regime 
for that which is not forbidden to become obligatory. 

Analysts who might be said to be fascinated by the consequences of frus- 
tration merely maintain a position of suggestion that reduces the subject to 
going back through his demand. That must be what they mean by emotional 
reeducation. 

Goodness is no doubt more necessary there than it is elsewhere, but it can- 
not cure the evil it engenders. The analyst who wants what is good for the sub- 
ject repeats what he was trained in and sometimes even twisted by. The most 
aberrant education has never had any other motive than the subject's own good. 

A theory of analysis is conceived, which — unlike the delicate articulation of 
Freudian analysis — reduces the mainspring of symptoms to fear. It engenders 
a practice on which what I have elsewhere called the obscene, ferocious figure 
of the superego is stamped, and in which there is no other way out of transfer- 
ence neurosis than to sit the patient down by the window and point out the bright 
side of things to him, adding: "Go for it. You're a good kid now" [22]. 



5i8 Ecrits 

620 V. Desire Must Be Taken Literally 

1 . A dream, after all, is but a dream, we hear people say these days [22]. Does 
it mean nothing that Freud recognized desire in dreams? 

Desire, not tendencies. For we must read the Traumdeutung [The Interpre- 
tation of Dreams] to know what is meant by what Freud calls "desire" there. 

We must pause at the vocable Wunsch, and its English translation, "wish,"* 
to distinguish them from the French desir [desire], given that the sound of damp 
firecrackers with which the German and English words fizzle out suggests any- 
thing but concupiscence. Their French equivalent is voeu. 

These voeux may be pious, nostalgic, annoying, or mischievous. A lady 
may have a dream that is motivated by no other desire than to provide Freud, 
who has explained to her his theory that dreams are desires, with proof that 
they are nothing of the kind. What we must keep in mind here is that this desire 
is articulated in a very cunning discourse. But in order to understand what 
desire means in Freud's thought, it is just as important to perceive the conse- 
quences of the fact that he was satisfied to recognize the dream's desire and 
the confirmation of his law in that cunning discourse. 

For he takes its eccentricity still further, since a dream of being punished 
may, if it likes, signify a desire for what the punishment suppresses. 

But let us not stop at the labels on the drawers, although many people con- 
fuse them with the fruits of science. Let us read the texts; let us follow Freud's 
thinking in the twists and turns it imposes on us, and not forget that, in deplor- 
ing them himself compared with an ideal of scientific discourse, he claims that 
he was forced into them by his object of study. 13 

We see then that this object is identical to those twists and turns, since at 
the first turning point of his book, when dealing with an hysteric's dream, he 
stumbles upon the fact that, by displacement, in this case specifically by allu- 
sion to another woman's desire, a desire from the day before is satisfied in the 
dream — a desire that is sustained in its eminent position by a desire that is of 
621 quite a different order, since Freud characterizes it as the desire to have an 

unsatisfied desire [7]. 14 

One should try and count the number of referrals [renvois] made here to 
bring desire to a geometrically higher power. A single index would not suf- 
fice to characterize the exponent. For it would be necessary to distinguish two 
dimensions in these referrals: a desire for desire, in other words, a desire sig- 
nified by a desire (the hysteric's desire to have an unsatisfied desire is signi- 
fied by her desire for caviar: the desire for caviar is its signifier), is inscribed 
in the different register of a desire substituted for a desire (in the dream, the 
desire for smoked salmon, characteristic of the patient's female friend, is sub- 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5 19 

stituted for the patient's own desire for caviar, which constitutes the substitu- 
tion of a signifier for a signifier). 15 

2. What we thus find is in no way microscopic, no more than there is any need 
of special instruments to recognize that a leaf has the structural features of the 
plant from which it has been detached. Even if one had never seen a plant with 
its leaves, one would realize at once that a leaf is more likely to be part of a 
plant than a piece of skin. 

The desire in the hysteric's dream, but also any other bit of nothing in its 
place in this text by Freud, summarizes what the whole book explains about 
mechanisms said to be unconscious — condensation, sliding, etc. — by attest- 
ing to their common structure: namely, desire's relation to the mark of lan- 
guage that specifies the Freudian unconscious and decenters our conception 
of the subject. 

I think that my students will appreciate the kind of access I provide here to 
the fundamental opposition between the signifier and the signified, lan- 
guage's powers stemming from that opposition, as I show them. While con- 
ceptualizing the exercise of those powers, I nevertheless leave them with their 
work cut out for them. 

Let me recall to mind here the automatic functioning of the laws by which 622 

the following are articulated in the signifying chain: 

(a) the substitution of one term for another to produce a metaphorical effect; 

(b) the combination of one term with another to produce a metonymical 
effect [17]. 

If we apply them here, we see that, insofar as in our patient's dream smoked 
salmon — the object of her friend 's desire — is all the patient has to offer, Freud, 
in positing that smoked salmon has been substituted here for caviar, which he 
takes to be the signifier of the patient's desire, proposes that the dream be 
viewed as a metaphor of desire. 

But what is metaphor if not a positive meaning effect, that is, a certain access 
gained by the subject to the meaning of her desire? 

The subject's desire being presented here as what is implied by her (con- 
scious) discourse, thus, as preconscious — which is obvious since her husband 
is willing to satisfy her desire, though it is important to the patient, who has 
persuaded him that she has such a desire, that he not do so, but you still have 
to be Freud to articulate this as the desire to have an unsatisfied desire — one 
still must go further to figure out what such a desire means in the unconscious. 

For a dream is not the unconscious but, as Freud tells us, the royal road to 
it. This confirms that the unconscious proceeds on the basis of metaphorical 
effects. Dreams lay bare such effects. To whom? I shall return to that shortly. 



5zo Ecrits 

Let us note for the moment that the desire in question, while signified as 
unsatisfied, is signified thusly by the signifier "caviar," insofar as the signi- 
fier symbolizes this desire as inaccessible; note too, however, that as soon as 
this desire slides, qua desire, into the caviar, the desire for caviar becomes this 
desire 's metonymy — rendered necessary by the want-to-be in which this desire 
sustains itself. 

Metonymy is, as I have been teaching you, an effect which is rendered pos- 
sible by the fact that there is no signification that does not refer to another sig- 
nification; the most common denominator of those significations is produced 
in it — namely, the scant meaning (commonly confused with what is mean- 
ingless), I repeat, the scant meaning that turns out to be at the root of this 
desire, conferring upon it the hint of perversion one is tempted to point to in 
the present case of hysteria. 
623 The truth of this appearance is that desire is the metonymy of the want- 

to-be. 

3. Let us now return to the book known in French as The Science of Dreams 
(Traumdeutung) > though "Mantic" or, better still, "Signifierness" would be 
more suitable translations than "Science." 

Freud in no way claims here to solve all the psychological problems dreams 
pose. Read it and you will note that Freud does not touch on such rarely explored 
questions (studies on space and time in dreams, on the sensory stuff of dreams, 
and on color or atonal dreams are rare or at least contribute little; are smell, taste, 
and the graininess of touch present like dizziness, turgidity, and heaviness are?). 
To say that Freud's doctrine is a psychology is a crude equivocation. 

Freud can hardly be said to leave himself open to such an equivocation. He 
tells us, on the contrary, that he is only interested in the dream's "elaboration." 
What does that mean? Exactly what I translate as the dream's "linguistic struc- 
ture." How could Freud have become aware of that structure when it was only 
later articulated by Ferdinand de Saussure? It is all the more striking that Freud 
anticipated it as that structure overlaps Freud 's own terms. But where did he 
discover it? In a signifying flow whose mystery lies in the fact that the subject 
doesn't even know where to pretend to be its organizer. 

To get him to refind himself therein as desiring is the opposite of getting 
him to recognize himself therein as a subject, for the brook of desire runs as 
if along a branch line of the signifying chain, and the subject must take advan- 
tage of a crossover in order to catch hold of his own feedback*. 

Desire merely subjugates what analysis subjectivizes. 

4. This brings me back to the question left unanswered above: "To whom 
does the dream reveal its meaning before the analyst comes on the scene?" 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5zi 

This meaning exists prior both to its being read and to the science of its 
deciphering. 

Both show that the dream is designed for the recognition — but my voice 
falters before finishing — of desire. For desire, assuming that Freud is right 
about the unconscious and that analysis is necessary, can only be grasped in 
interpretation. 

But to return to what I was saying before, the elaboration of the dream is 
nourished by the desire . . . why does my voice fail to complete the thought? — 
for recognition — as if the second word ["recognition"] were extinguished 624 

which, when it was the first earlier, resorbed the other ["desire"] in its light. 
For it is not by sleeping that one gets oneself recognized. And the dream, Freud 
tells us, without seeming to see the slightest contradiction therein, serves above 
all the desire to go on sleeping. It involves the narcissistic withdrawal of libido 
into oneself and the decathexis of reality. 

It is, in any case, a fact of experience that when my dream begins to coin- 
cide with my demand (not with reality, as is improperly said, which can safe- 
guard my sleep) — or with what proves to be equivalent to it here, the other's 
demand — I wake up. 

5. A dream, after all, is but a dream. Those who now disdain it as a tool in 
analysis have found, as we have seen, surer and more direct roads by which 
to bring the patient back to sound principles and normal desires, those that 
satisfy true needs. Which needs? Why, everyone 's needs, my friend. If that 
is what frightens you, have faith in your psychoanalyst and climb the Eif- 
fel Tower to see how beautiful Paris is. Too bad some people jump over 
the railing on the first deck, precisely those whose needs have all been 
restored to their proper proportions. A negative therapeutic reaction, I 
would call it. 

Thank God not everyone takes refusal that far! Nevertheless, the symptom 
grows back like a weed: repetition compulsion. 

But that, of course, is no more than a misconception: one does not get bet- 
ter because one remembers. One remembers because one gets better. Since 
this formulation was found, there has no longer been any question regarding 
the reproduction of symptoms, but only regarding the reproduction of ana- 
lysts; the reproduction of patients has been resolved. 

6. Thus a dream is but a dream. A certain psychoanalyst who has the nerve 
to teach has even gone so far as to write that dreams are produced by the ego. 
This proves that we run no great risk in wanting to wake men from their 
dreams: the latter are pursued in broad daylight and by those who rarely 
indulge in dreaming. 



5zz Ecrits 

But even these men, if they are psychoanalysts, must read Freud on dreams, 

625 because otherwise it is not possible either to understand what he means by the 
neurotic's desire, repression, the unconscious, interpretation, or analysis 
itself, or to close in on anything whatsoever related to his technique or doc- 
trine. We shall see how much is contained in the short dream I borrowed above 
for the purposes of this discussion. 

For the desire of our witty hysteric (Freud is the one who characterizes her 
as such) — I mean her waking desire, that is, her desire for caviar — is the desire 
of a woman who is fulfilled and yet does not want to be. For her butcher of a 
husband never neglects to dot the i's and cross the t's when it comes to pro- 
viding her the kinds of satisfaction everyone needs; nor does he mince words 
with a painter who flatters him, God knows with what obscure intent, regard- 
ing his interesting mug, saying, "Nothing doing! A nice piece of ass is what 
you need, and if you expect me to get it for you, you can stick it you know where." 

Here's a man a woman should have nothing to complain about, a genital 
character, who must appropriately ensure that when he fucks his wife, she has 
no need to jerk off afterward. Moreover, Freud does not hide from us the fact 
that she is very taken with him and teases him all the time. 

But there it is: she does not want to be satisfied regarding her true needs 
alone. She wants other needs that are gratuitous and, in order to be quite sure 
that they are gratuitous, not to satisfy them. This is why the question "What 
does the witty butcher's wife desire?" can be answered as follows: "Caviar." 
But this answer is hopeless because she also does not want any. 

7. This is not the whole of her mystery. Far from being imprisoned by this 
impasse, she finds the key to her freedom in it, the key to the field of the desires 
of all the witty hysterics in the world, whether butchers' wives or not. 

This is what Freud perceives in one of those sidelong glances by which he 
discovers the truth, shattering in passing the abstractions with which positivist 
thinkers willingly explain everything: in this case, imitation, a concept so dear 
to Tarde. We must bring to bear in this particular case the linchpin Freud pro- 
vides here of hysterical identification. If our patient identifies with her friend, 
it is insofar as she is inimitable in her unsatisfied desire for that salmon — may 

626 God damn it if it is not He himself who smokes it! 

Thus the patient's dream is a response to her friend's request [demanded 
which is to come dine at the patient's house. And what could possibly make 
her friend want to do so, apart from the fine dinners served there, if not the 
fact — not overlooked by the butcher's wife — that her husband always praises 
her friend? Now, as her friend is thin, her figure is not likely to attract him, 
relishing only curves as he does. 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5 '23 

Couldn't it be that he too has a desire that remains awry when all in him is 
satisfied? It is the same mechanism that, in the dream, thwarts her own request 
[demande] due to her friend's desire. 

For despite the precision with which the request [Jemande] is symbolized 
by the newborn accessory, the telephone, it is all for naught. The patient's call 
does not go through; a fine thing it would be, indeed, for the other [her friend] 
to fatten up so that her husband could feast on her! 

But how can another woman be loved (doesn't the mere fact that her hus- 
band holds her friend in high regard suffice to give the patient pause for 
thought?) by a man who cannot be satisfied with her (he being an "ass man" 
[Vhomme a la tranche deposterieur])? This is the precise formulation of the ques- 
tion that is, generally speaking, the question involved in hysterical identification. 

8. The subject becomes this question here. In this respect, the woman identi- 
fies with the man and the slice [tranche] of smoked salmon comes to occupy 
the place of the Other's desire. 

This desire not sufficing for anything (how can all the people be served 
with this single slice of smoked salmon?), "I must, in the end (and at the end 
of the dream), give up my desire to throw a dinner party (that is, give up my 
search for the Other's desire, which is the secret of my own). Everything goes 
wrong, and you say that a dream is the fulfillment of a desire! How do you 
explain that one, professor?" 

Challenged in this way, psychoanalysts stopped responding a long time ago, 
having themselves given up pondering their patients' desires; analysts reduce 
their patients' desires to demands, which simplifies the task of converting them 
into the analysts' own demands. "Isn't that the reasonable road to take?" — so 
they adopted it. 

But sometimes desire cannot be conjured away quite so easily, being all too 
visible, smack in the middle of the scene on the banquet table as we see it here, 
in the form of a salmon, which happens to be a pretty fish; it suffices to pres- 
ent it, as they do in restaurants, under a thin cloth for the unveiling to equal 627 
that carried out at the culmination of the mysteries of Antiquity. 

To be the phallus, even a somewhat skinny one — isn't that the final iden- 
tification with the signifier of desire? 

That doesn't seem self-evident in the case of a woman, and there are those 
among us who prefer to have nothing further to do with this obscure discourse. 
Are we going to have to spell out the role of the signifier only to find our- 
selves saddled with the castration complex and — God spare us! — penis envy, 
when Freud, having come to this crossing, no longer knew which way to turn, 
perceiving only the desert of analysis beyond it? 



524 Ecrits 

Yes, but he led them to that crossing, and the place was less infested than 
transference neurosis, which reduces you to chasing the patient away, begging 
him to go slowly so as to take his flies with him. 

9. Let us nevertheless articulate what structures desire. 

Desire is what manifests itself in the interval demand excavates just shy of 
itself, insofar as the subject, articulating the signifying chain, brings to light 
his lack of being [manque a etre] with his call to receive the complement of this 
lack from the Other — assuming that the Other, the locus of speech, is also the 
locus of this lack. 

What it is thus the Other's job to provide — and, indeed, it is what he does 
not have, since he too lacks being — is what is called love, but it is also hate 
and ignorance. 

Those passions for being are, moreover, evoked by any demand beyond 
the need articulated in that demand, and the more the need articulated in that 
demand is satisfied, the more the subject remains deprived of those passions. 

Furthermore, the satisfaction of need appears here only as a lure in which 
the demand for love is crushed, throwing the subject back into a kind of 
sleep in which he haunts the limbo realm of being, letting it speak in him. 
For the being of language is the nonbeing of objects, and the fact that desire 
was discovered by Freud in its place in dreams — which have always been 
the bane of all attempts by thought to situate itself in reality — suffices to 
instruct us. 

To be or not to be, to sleep, perchance to dream — even the supposedly sim- 
plest dreams of the child (as "simple" as the analytic situation, no doubt) sim- 
628 ply display miraculous or forbidden objects. 

10. But the child does not always fall asleep in this way in the bosom of being, 
especially if the Other, which has its own ideas about his needs, interferes and, 
instead of what it does not have, stuffs him with the smothering baby food it 
does have, that is, confuses the care it provides with the gift of its love. 

It is the child who is the most lovingly fed who refuses food and employs 
his refusal as if it were a desire (anorexia nervosa). 

This is an extreme case where one grasps as nowhere else that hate is the 
payback for love, but where it is ignorance that is not pardoned. 

Ultimately, by refusing to satisfy the mother's demand, isn't the child requir- 
ing the mother to have a desire outside of him, because that is the pathway 
toward desire that he lacks? 

1 1 . Indeed, one of the principles that follows from these premises is that: 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 525 

• if desire is an effect in the subject of the condition — which is imposed on 
him by the existence of discourse — that his need pass through the defiles 
of the signifier; 

• and if, as I intimated above, by opening up the dialectic of transference, we 
must establish the notion of the Other with a capital O as being the locus 
of speech's deployment (the other scene, ein anderer Schauplat^ of which 
Freud speaks in the Traumdeutung); 

then it must be posited that, as a characteristic of an animal at the mercy of 
language, man's desire is the Other's desire. 

This concerns a totally different function than that of primary identifica- 
tion mentioned above, for it does not involve the assumption by the subject of 
the other's insignia, but rather the condition that the subject find the consti- 
tutive structure of his desire in the same gap opened up by the effect of signi- 
fies in those who come to represent the Other for him, insofar as his demand 
is subjected to them. 

Perhaps we can catch a glimpse in passing of the reason for this effect of 
occultation that caught our attention regarding the recognition of desire in the 629 

dream. The desire in the dream is not owned [assume] by the subject who says 
"I" in his speech. Articulated, nevertheless, in the locus of the Other, it is dis- 
course — a discourse whose grammar Freud began to enunciate as such. This 
is why the wishes it constitutes have no optative inflection to alter the indica- 
tive in which they are formulated. 

A linguistic point of view would allow us to see that what is called the aspect 
of the verb is here that of the perfective [accompli] (the true meaning of Wun- 
scherfilllung [wish-fulfillment]). 

It is this ex-sistence (Entstellung) 16 of desire in the dream that explains how 
the dream's signifierness masks its desire, whereas its motive vanishes as being 
simply problematic. 

1 2. Desire is produced in the beyond of demand, because in linking the subject's 
life to its conditions, demand prunes it of need. But desire is also excavated in 
the [area] shy of demand in that, as an unconditional demand for presence and 
absence, demand evokes the want-to-be in the three figures of the nothing that 
constitutes the ground for the demand for love, for the hatred that goes so far 
as to negate the other's being, and for the unspeakableness of what is not known 
[s 'ignore] in its request. In this aporia incarnate — of which one might metaphor- 
ically say that demand borrows its heavy soul from the hardy offshoots of the 
wounded tendency, and its subtle body from death as it is actualized in the sig- 
nifying sequence — desire asserts itself as an absolute condition. 



5z6 Ecrits 

Less still than the nothing that circulates in the round of significations that 
stir men up, desire is the wake left behind by its trajectory and like the signi- 
fied brand on the speaking subject's shoulder. It is not so much a pure pas- 
sion of the signified as a pure action of the signifier, which stops at the moment 
when the living being, having become a sign, renders this action meaningless 
[insignifiante]. 

This moment of cutting is haunted by the form of a bloody scrap: the pound 
630 of flesh that life pays in order to turn it into the signifier of signifiers, which 

it is impossible to restore, as such, to the imaginary body; it is the lost phallus 
of embalmed Osiris. 

1 3. The function of this signifier as such in desire 's quest is, as Freud detected, 
the key to what we need to know in order to terminate our analyses — and no 
artifice can make up for it if we are to achieve this end. 

To give some idea of this function, I will describe an incident that occurred 
at the end of the analysis of an obsessive, that is, after a great deal of work in 
which I did not confine myself to "analyzing the subject's aggressiveness" (in 
other words, to pounding away at his imaginary aggressions), but in which he 
was made to recognize the part he had played in the destructive game foisted 
by one of his parents on the other parent's desire. He surmised his power- 
lessness to desire without destroying the Other, thus destroying his own desire 
insofar as it was the Other's desire. 

To arrive at this stage, he was shown how at every moment he manipulated 
the situation so as to protect the Other, by our exhausting in the transference 
work [travail de transfert] (Durcharbeitung) all the artifices of a verbalization 
that distinguished the other from the Other (with a lowercase o and a capital 
O), and that, from the spectator's box reserved for the Other's (with a capital 
O) boredom, made him arrange the circus games between the two others (lit- 
tle a and the ego, its shadow). 

Of course, it was not enough to go around in circles in some well-explored 
area of obsessive neurosis to bring him to this traffic circle, or to know this 
traffic circle in order to lead him to it by a route that is never the most direct. 
One does not simply need the blueprints to a reconstructed labyrinth, nor even 
a pile of blueprints that have already been worked up. What is needed above 
all is the general combinatory that no doubt governs their variety, but that 
also, even more usefully, accounts for the illusions or, better, shifts in the 
labyrinth that take place right before one 's very eyes. For there is no shortage 
of either in obsessive neurosis, which is an architecture of contrasts that have 
not yet been sufficiently noticed and that cannot simply be attributed to dif- 
fering facades. Amid so many seductive, insurgent, and impassive attitudes, 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5zy 

we must grasp the anxieties that are bound up with performance, the grudges 

that do not prevent generosity (imagine claiming that obsessives are lacking 631 

in oblativity!), and the mental infidelities that sustain infrangible loyalties. All 

this moves as a unit in an analysis, though not without local wilting; the great 

mass of it nevertheless remains. 

Here my subject was at the end of his rope, having reached the point of 
playing a game of three-card monte with me that was of a rather peculiar kind, 
in that it revealed a structure of desire. 

Let's say that being of mature years, as the comical expression goes, and of 
a disillusioned turn of mind, he would have willingly misled me into thinking 
his menopause was the cause of the impotence that struck him, and accused 
me of the same. 

In fact, redistributions of libido are not brought about without certain 
objects losing their position, even if the position itself is permanent. 

In short, he was impotent with his mistress and, having gotten it into his 
head to use his discoveries about the function of the potential third party in 
the couple, he suggested that she sleep with another man to see. 

Now, if she remained in the place assigned to her by his neurosis, and if his 
analysis affected her in that position, it was because of the peace she had no 
doubt made long ago with the patient's desires, but even more so with the 
unconscious postulates maintained by those desires. 

It will thus come as no surprise that, without wasting any time — indeed, 
that very night — she had a dream, which she recounted to our crestfallen 
patient hot off the presses. 

In the dream she had a phallus — she sensed its shape under her clothing — 
which did not prevent her from having a vagina as well, nor, especially, from 
wanting this phallus to enter it. 

On hearing this, my patient's powers were immediately restored and he 
demonstrated this brilliantly to his shrewd paramour. 

What interpretation is indicated here? 

You will have guessed from the request [demande] my patient had made of 
his mistress that he had been trying for a long time to get me to ratify his 
repressed homosexuality. 

This was an effect of Freud's discovery of the unconscious, one that he was 
very quick to anticipate: among the regressive demands, the demand for fables 
will be sated with the truths spread by analysis itself. Analysis, upon its return 
from America, exceeded his expectations. 

But I remained, as you may well have expected, rather off-putting on that 632 

point. 

Note that the dreamer was no more indulgent in this regard, since her see- 



528 Ecrits 

nario excluded any coadjutor. This would guide even a novice to trust only 
in the text, if he is trained according to my principles. 

Yet I am not analyzing her dream, but rather its effect on my patient. 

It would run counter to my practice to get him to see in the dream a truth 
that is less widely known in analytic history as it is one of my own contribu- 
tions: that the refusal of castration, if there is any such thing, is first and 
foremost a refusal of the Other's castration (of the mother's, first of all). 

True opinion is not science, and conscience without science is but com- 
plicity with ignorance. Our science is transmitted only by articulating what is 
particular in the situation. 

Here the situation is unique in showing the figure that I state in these terms: 
unconscious desire is the Other's desire — since the dream was designed to sat- 
isfy the patient's desire beyond his request \demande\, as is suggested by the fact 
that it succeeds in doing so. Although it is not one of the patient's dreams, it may 
be no less valuable to us since, while it was not addressed to me as it was to the 
analysand, it addressed the analysand just as well as the analyst could have. 

It was an opportunity to get the patient to grasp the function the phallus as 
a signifier serves in his desire. For it is as a signifier that the phallus operates 
in the dream in order to enable him to recover the use of the organ it repre- 
sents, as I will show by the place the dream aims at in the structure in which 
his desire is caught up. 

Apart from what the woman dreamt, there is the fact that she talked to him 
about it. Was the fact that she presented herself, in this discourse, as having a 
phallus the only way in which her erotic value was restored to her? Having a 
phallus was not, in effect, enough to restore to her an object position that 
allowed her to fit a fantasy on the basis of which my patient, as an obsessive, 
could maintain his desire in an impossibility that preserved its metonymic con- 
ditions. The latter governed a game of escape in his choices that analysis had 
disturbed, but which the woman restored here by a ruse, the crudeness of which 
concealed a subtlety that perfectly illustrates the science included in the 
unconscious. 

For, to my patient, it was of no use to have this phallus, since his desire was 
to be it. And the woman's desire yields to his desire here, by showing him what 
she does not have. 
633 Undiscriminating case studies always make much of any sign of a castrat- 

ing mother, however small the role the anamnesis gives her. She looms large 
here, as expected. 

People think that their job is then done. But it's of no value in interpreta- 
tion, where to invoke it would not have taken us very far, except to bring the 
patient back to the very point where he wound his way between a desire and 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5z<) 

contempt for that desire: certainly, his ill-tempered mother's contempt for the 
overly ardent desire whose image his father bequeathed him. 

But this would have taught him less about it than what his mistress said to 
him: that having this phallus in her dream didn't stop her from desiring it. 
Which is why his own want- to-be was touched. 

That lack results from an exodus: his being is always elsewhere. He has 
"tucked it away," one might say. Am I saying this to explain the difficulty of 
his desire? No, rather to say that his desire is for difficulty. 

Let us not, therefore, be misled by the guarantee the subject received from 
the fact that the dreamer had a phallus and would not have to take it from 
him — even if to point out, learnedly, that such a guarantee is too strong not 
to be fragile. 

For that would be precisely to fail to recognize that this guarantee would 
not require so much weight if it did not have to be (im)printed in a sign, and 
that it is by displaying this sign as such, by making it appear where it cannot 
be, that this guarantee has its effect. 

The condition of desire that especially grabs the obsessive is the very mark 
by which he finds desire spoiled, the mark of origin of its object — contraband. 

A singular mode of grace which is figured only on the basis of a disavowal 
of nature. A favor is hidden here that is always kept waiting in our subject. 
And it is by dismissing this favor that one day he will let it enter. 

14. The importance of preserving the place of desire in the direction of the 
treatment requires one to position this place in relation to the effects of 
demand, the only effects that are currently considered to be at the crux of the 
power of the treatment. 

Indeed, the fact that the genital act must find its place in desire 's uncon- 
scious articulation is the discovery of analysis, and it is precisely why no one 
has ever thought of giving in to the patient 's illusion that to facilitate his demand 634 

for the satisfaction of need would be of any help to him. (Still less to author- 
ize it with the classic coitus normalis dosim repetatur.) 

Why do people think differently in believing it to be more essential for the 
progress of the treatment to work in any way whatsoever on other demands, 
under the pretext that they are regressive? 

Let us begin once again with the notion that the subject's own speech is a 
message to him, first of all, because it is produced in the Other's locus. It orig- 
inates in that locus and is worded as such not only because his demand is sub- 
mitted to the Other's code, but because his demand is dated by this Other's 
locus (and even time). 

This can be clearly read in the subject 's most freely given speech. He invokes 



5jo Ecrits 

his wife or his master, so that they have his word with a tu es . . ., "you are ..." 
(the one or the other), without declaring what he himself is otherwise than by 
murmuring an order of murder against himself that the equivocation of the 
French brings to one 's ear. 

Although it always shows through in demand, as we see here, desire is 
nevertheless beyond demand. It is also shy of another demand in which the 
subject, echoing in the other's locus, would like not so much to efface his 
dependence by a payback agreement as to fix the very being he proposes 
there. 

This means that it is only from a kind of speech [une parole] that would 
remove the mark the subject receives from what he says that he might obtain 
the absolution that would return him to his desire. 

But desire is nothing but the impossibility of such speech, which, in reply- 
ing to the first speech can merely redouble its mark by consummating the split 
(Spaltung) the subject undergoes by virtue of being a subject only insofar as 
he speaks. 

(This is symbolized by the slanted bar of noble bastardy, which I assign to 
the S of the subject in order to indicate that it is this specific subject: $.) 17 
635 The regression people foreground in analysis (temporal regression, no 

doubt, providing one specifies that it has to do with the time of remembering) 
concerns only the (oral, anal, etc.) signifiers of demand, and involves the cor- 
responding drive only through them. 

Reducing this demand to its place may produce the appearance of a reduc- 
tion of desire owing to the mitigation of need. 

But this is really only the effect of the analyst's heavy-handedness. For if 
demand's signifiers have sustained the frustrations on which desire is fixated 
(Freud's Fixierung), it is only in their place that desire is exacting [assujetissant]. 

Whether it intends to frustrate or to gratify, any response to demand in 
analysis reduces transference to suggestion. 

There is a relation between transference and suggestion, as Freud discov- 
ered: transference is also a suggestion, but a suggestion that operates only on 
the basis of the demand for love, which is not a demand based on any need. 
The fact that this demand is constituted as such only insofar as the subject is 
the subject of the signifier is what allows it to be misused by reducing it to the 
needs from which these signifiers have been borrowed — which is what psy- 
choanalysts, as we see, do not fail to do. 

But identification with demand's omnipotent signifier, of which I have 
already spoken, must not be confused with identification with the object of 
the demand for love. The demand for love is also a regression, as Freud insists, 
when he makes it into the second form of identification, which he distinguished 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5j i 

in his second topography when he wrote Group Psychology and the Analysis 
of the Ego. But it is another kind of regression. 

Here is the exit* that allows us to leave suggestion behind. Identification 
with the object as a regression, because it begins with the demand for love, 
opens up the sequence of transference (opens it up, not closes it) — that is, the 
pathway by which the identifications that punctuate this regression by stop- 
ping it can be exposed. 

But this regression is no more dependent on the need in demand than sadis- 
tic desire is explained by anal demand, for to believe that a turd is in itself a 
noxious object is but an ordinary lure of understanding. ("Understanding" in 
the harmful sense the word takes on in Jaspers' work. "You understand . . ." 636 

is an introductory phrase by which someone who has nothing to convey thinks 
he can impress someone who understands nothing.) But the demand to be a 
shit — now there 's something that it is preferable to view from a different angle 
when the subject reveals himself there. It's the "misfortune of being" I 
referred to above. 

Whoever cannot carry his training analyses to this turning point — at 
which it is revealed, with trembling, that all the demands that have been artic- 
ulated in the analysis (and more than any other the one that was at its core, 
the demand to become an analyst, which now comes to maturity) were merely 
transferences designed to keep in place a desire that was unstable or dubious 
in its problematic — such a person knows nothing of what must be obtained 
from the subject if he is to be able to ensure the direction of an analysis, or 
merely offer a well-advised interpretation in it. 

These considerations confirm that it is natural to analyze transference. For 
transference is already, in itself, an analysis of suggestion, insofar as transfer- 
ence places the subject, with regard to his demand, in a position he occupies 
only because of his desire. 

It is only in order to maintain this transference framework that frustration 
must prevail over gratification. 

The subject's resistance, when it opposes suggestion, is but a desire to main- 
tain his desire. As such, his resistance should be considered positive transfer- 
ence, since it is desire that maintains the direction of the analysis, quite apart 
from the effects of demand. 

As you can see, these propositions are rather different from the received 
opinions on the matter. If they lead people to think that something has gone 
awry somewhere, I will have succeeded in my aim. 

15. This is the place for a few remarks on symptom formation. 

Freud — starting with his demonstrative study of such subjective phenom- 



532 Ecrits 

ena as dreams, slips, and jokes, which, he says quite categorically, are struc- 
turally identical to symptoms (but, of course, to our scientists, all this is clearly 
inadequate for the experience they have acquired — and by what pathways! — 
for them to even dream of returning to it) — Freud, as I was saying, stressed 
again and again that symptoms are overdetermined. To the foolish acolyte 
engaged in the daily drumbeating that promises the imminent reduction of 
637 analysis to its biological bases, this is obvious enough; it is so easy to say that 

he does not even hear it. "Is that all you've got?" he asks. 

Let us leave aside my remarks on the fact that overdetermination is only 
conceivable, strictly speaking, within the structure of language. What does 
this mean, as far as neurotic symptoms are concerned? 

It means that interference will occur in the effects that correspond in a sub- 
ject to a particular demand from the effects of a position that he maintains as 
a subject in relation to the other (here, his semblable). 

"That he maintains as a subject" means that language allows him to regard 
himself as the stagehand, or even the director, of the entire imaginary capture 
of which he would otherwise be nothing more than the living marionette. 

Fantasy is the very illustration of this original possibility. This is why any 
temptation to reduce fantasy to imagination, that doesn't admit to its failure, 
is a permanent misconception, a misconception from which the Kleinian 
school, which has certainly carried things very far here, is not free, having 
failed to even glimpse the category of the signifier. 

However, the notion of unconscious fantasy no longer presents any diffi- 
culty once it is defined as an image set to work in the signifying structure. 

Let us say that, in its fundamental use, fantasy is the means by which the 
subject maintains himself at the level of his vanishing desire, vanishing inas- 
much as the very satisfaction of demand deprives him of his object. 

"Oh, these neurotics are so fussy! What is to be done with them? These 
people are incomprehensible, upon my word," as one family man put it. 

But this is precisely what has been said for a long time — indeed, what 
has always been said — and analysts haven't gotten any further. The simple- 
minded call it the irrational, since they haven't even realized that Freud's 
discovery is ratified by the fact that it first takes it as certain that the real 
is rational — which, in itself, is enough to cut the ground out from under 
our exegetes — and then by noting that the rational is real. As a result, Freud 
can articulate that what presents itself as not very reasonable in desire is 
an effect of the passage of the rational qua real — that is, of language — 
into the real, insofar as the rational has already traced its circumvallation 
there. 

For the paradox of desire is not the neurotic's privilege; it is rather that he 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 533 

takes the existence of this paradox into account in his way of dealing with 
desire. This does not give him such a bad ranking in the order of human dig- 638 

nity, and it does no honor to mediocre analysts (this is not an assessment, but 
an ideal formulated in a definite wish made by the interested parties) who, on 
this point, fail to achieve the same dignity: a surprising distance that analysts 
have always noted in veiled terms by talking about "other analysts," without 
our knowing how the latter can be distinguished, since they would never have 
thought of doing so themselves, if they hadn't first had to oppose the devia- 
tion of the former. 

1 6. It is, then, the neurotic's position with respect to desire — let us say, to abbre- 
viate, fantasy — that marks with its presence the subject's response to demand, 
in other words, the signification of his need. 

But this fantasy has nothing to do with the signification in which it inter- 
feres. Indeed, this signification comes from the Other, insofar as it depends 
on the Other whether or not demand is met. But fantasy comes in here only 
to find itself on the return path of a broader circuit, a circuit that, in carrying 
demand to the limits of being, makes the subject wonder about the lack in which 
he appears to himself as desire. 

It is incredible that certain features of man's action as such, which have 
always been obvious enough, have not been highlighted here by analysis. I 
am talking about what makes man's action the deed that finds support in his 
epic poem. The analyst reduces this dimension of exploit, performance, and 
solution strangled by the symbol, what thus makes it symbolic (but not in the 
alienating sense this term commonly denotes) — the very reason why people 
speak of passage a Facte [acting out], that Rubicon whose characteristic desire 
is always camouflaged in history in favor of its success, everything to which 
the experience of what the analyst calls "acting out"* gives him a quasi- 
experimental access, since he holds its entire artifice in his hands — the ana- 
lyst reduces it at best to a relapse on the subject's part, at worst to a mistake 
on the therapist's part. 

One is stupefied by the analyst's false shame in the face of action — a shame 
that no doubt conceals true shame, the shame he has regarding an action, his 
own action, one of the highest of actions, when it stoops to abjection. 

For what else, in fact, is it, when by intervening the analyst degrades the 639 

transference message he is there to interpret into a fallacious signification of 
reality [reel] that is nothing but mystification? 

For the point at which the contemporary analyst claims to grasp transfer- 
ence is the distance he defines between fantasy and the so-called "well- 
adapted response." Well-adapted to what if not to the Other's demand? And 



5s4 Ecrits 

why would this demand have any more or less consistency than the response 
obtained, if the analyst didn't believe he was authorized to deny [denier] all 
value to fantasy in using the yardstick he takes from his own reality? 

Here the very pathway by which he proceeds betrays him, when it is nec- 
essary for him to insert himself into fantasy by this pathway and offer himself 
up as an imaginary Host [hostie] to fictions in which an idiotic desire prolif- 
erates — an unexpected Ulysses who offers himself up as fodder so that Circe 's 
pigsty may prosper. 

Let it not be said that I am defaming anyone here, for it is the precise 
point at which those who cannot articulate their practice in any other way 
are themselves sufficiently concerned to question what they are doing: 
"Aren't fantasies the area in which we provide the subject with the gratifica- 
tion in which the analysis becomes bogged down?" This is the question they 
keep repeating to themselves with the inescapable insistence of an uncon- 
scious torment. 

17. Thus, at best, the contemporary analyst leaves his patient at the point of 
purely imaginary identification — of which the hysteric remains captive, 
because her fantasy implies ensnarement in it. 

This is the very point from which Freud, throughout the first part of his 
career, wished to extricate the hysteric too quickly by forcing the call for love 
onto the object of identification (for Elisabeth von R., her brother-in-law [5]; 
for Dora, Herr K.; for the young homosexual woman in the case of female 
homosexuality, he sees the problem more clearly, but errs when he regards 
himself as the object aimed at in reality [reel] by the negative transference). 

It was not until the chapter on identification in Group Psychology and the 
Analysis of the Ego that Freud clearly distinguished the third form of identi- 
fication, which is conditioned by its function of sustaining desire and is there- 
fore specified by the indifference of its object. 

But our psychoanalysts insist: this indifferent object is the substance of the 
object — eat of my body, drink of my blood (this profane evocation flows from 
their pens). The mystery of the analy sand's redemption lies in this imaginary 
640 effusion, of which the analyst is the sacrificial object [loblat]. 

How can the ego, whose aid they claim to enlist here, not suffer, in effect, 
from the blows of the further alienation they induce in the subject? Long before 
Freud came on the scene, psychologists knew, even if they did not express it 
in these terms, that while desire is the metonymy of the want-to-be, the ego 
is the metonymy of desire. 

This is how the terminal identification occurs, in which analysts take such 
pride. 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 535 

Whether the identification involves their patient's ego or superego, they 
aren't sure, or rather, they couldn't care less, but what the patient identifies 
with is their strong ego. 

Freud foresaw this result very clearly in the text I just mentioned, when he 
showed that the most insignificant object may play the role of an ideal in the 
genesis of a leader. 

It is not in vain that analytic psychology is increasingly turning toward 
group psychology and even group psychotherapy. 

Let us observe its effects in the analytic group itself. It is not true that 
analysands undergoing training analysis model themselves on the image of 
their analyst, regardless of the level at which one wishes to detect that image. 
It is rather that analysands of the same analyst are linked to each other by a 
feature that maybe quite secondary in the psychical economy of each of them, 
but upon which the analyst's inadequacy in his work is clearly stamped. 

Thus the analyst according to whom the problem of desire can be reduced 
to lifting the veil off of fear, leaves all those he has guided wrapped in this 
shroud. 

18. Thus we have now reached the tricky crux of this power that is ever open 
to a blind direction. It is the power to do good — no power has any other end — 
and that is why power has no end. But something else is at stake here: truth, 
the only truth, the truth about the effects of truth. Once Oedipus set off down 
this path, he had already given up power. 

Where, then, is the direction of the treatment headed? Perhaps we need but 
question its means to define it in its soundness. 

Let us note: 641 

( 1 ) that speech possesses all the powers here, the specific power s of the treat- 
ment; 

(2) that, with the fundamental rule of psychoanalysis, the analyst is far from 
directing the subject toward full speech, or toward a coherent dis- 
course — rather, the analyst leaves the subject free to have a go at it; 

(3) that this freedom is what the subject tolerates least easily; 

(4) that demand is exactly what is bracketed in analysis, it being ruled out that 
the analyst satisfy any of the subject's demands; 

(5) that since no obstacle is put in the way of the subject's owning [aveu] of 
his desire, it is toward this owning that he is directed and even channeled; 

(6) that resistance to this owning can, in the final analysis, be related here to 
nothing but desire's incompatibility with speech. 

There may still be a few people, even in my usual audience, who are sur- 
prised to find such propositions in my discourse. 



5s<S Ecrits 

One senses here the terrible temptation the analyst must face to respond to 
demand, however minimally. 

How, moreover, is the analyst to prevent the subject from attributing this 
response to him, in the form of a demand to get better, and in accordance with 
the horizon of a discourse that the subject has all the more reason to impute 
to him given that our authority has wrongly adopted this discourse? 

Who will now relieve us of this tunic of Nessus we have spun for ourselves 
in maintaining that analysis responds to all the desiderata of demand, and by 
widely circulated norms? Who will sweep this enormous pile of dung out of 
the Augean Stables of analytic literature? 

What silence must the analyst now impose upon himself if he is to make 
out, rising above this bog, the raised finger of Leonardo's "St. John the Bap- 
tist," if interpretation is to find anew the forsaken horizon of being in which 
its allusive virtue must be deployed? 

19. Since the point is to take desire, and since it can only be taken literally [a 
la lettre], since it is the letter's snare that determines, nay overdetermines, its 
place as a heavenly bird, how can we fail to require the bird catcher to first be 
a man of letters? 

Who among us has attempted to articulate the importance of the "literary" 
642 element in Freud's work, apart from a professor of literature in Zurich who 

has begun to spell it out? 

This is merely an indication. Let us go further. Let us question how things 
should stand with the analyst (with the analyst's "being"), as far as his own 
desire is concerned. 

Who would still be so naive as to see Freud as the conventional Viennese 
bourgeois who so astonished Andre Breton by not manifesting any obsession 
with the Bacchanalian? Now that we have nothing but his works, will we not 
recognize in them a river of fire, which owes nothing to Francois Mauriac's 
artificial river? 

Who was more able than him, when avowing his dreams, to spin the thread 
on which the ring that unites us with being slides, and make its brief shine glow 
in closed hands, passing it from the one to the other in the swiftly shifting game 
of human passion? 

Who has inveighed as much as this scholar against the monopolization of 
jouissance by those who load the burdens of need onto others' shoulders? 

Who, as fearlessly as this clinician, so firmly rooted in the everydayness of 
human suffering, has questioned life as to its meaning — not to say that it has 
none, which is a convenient way of washing one 's hands of the matter, but to 
say that it has only one, that in which desire is borne by death? 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 5sy 

A man of desire, a desire he followed against his will down pathways where 
it is reflected in feeling, dominating, and knowing, but whose unparalleled 
signifier he and he alone — like an initiate at the defunct mysteries — succeeded 
in unveiling: the phallus, the receiving and giving of which are equally impos- 
sible for the neurotic, whether he knows that the Other does not have it, or 
that the Other does have it, because in both cases the neurotic's desire is else- 
where — to be it. And whether male or female, man must accept to have and 
not have it, on the basis of the discovery that he isn't it. 

It is here that is inscribed the final Spaltung by which the subject is linked 
to Logos, and about which Freud was beginning to write [12], giving us, at the 
final point of an oeuvre that has the dimensions of being, the solution to "infi- 
nite" analysis, when his death applied to it the word "Nothing." 

Note and References 643 

This paper represents a selection from my ongoing seminar. My talk at the 
colloquium and the responses it received resituated the paper in the context 
of my teaching. 

During the talk I presented a graph that precisely articulates the directions 
proposed here for the field of analysis and its handling. 

Below, the reader will find, in alphabetical order by author, the references 
indicated in my text by numbers in brackets. 

I have used the following abbreviations: 

GJV: Gesammelte Werke, by Freud, published by Imago Publishing, Lon- 
don. The Roman numerals that follow refer to the volume. 

SE: The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works ofSigmund 
Freud, the English translation of Freud's works, published by Hoga- 
rth Press, London. Again, the Roman numerals refer to the volume. 

IJP: International Journal of Psycho-Analysis. 

PQ: The Psychoanalytic Quarterly. 

RFP: Revue Francaise de Psychanalyse. 

PDA: A work entitled La Psychanalyse d'aujourd'hui ["Contemporary 
Psychoanalysis"] (Paris: PUF, 1956), which I refer to only because 
of the naive simplicity with which the tendency to degrade the 
direction of the treatment and the principles of its power in psycho- 
analysis is presented in it. Designed, no doubt, to circulate outside 
the psychoanalytic community, it serves as an obstacle inside it. 
Thus I don't mention its authors, who make no properly scientific 
contribution in it. 



5s8 Ecrits 

[1] Abraham, Karl, "Die psychosexuellen Differenzen der Hysterie und der 
Dementia praecox" (1st International Congress of Psychoanalysis, Salzburg, 
April 26, 1908), Centralblatt fiir Nervenheilkunde und Psychiatrie, number 2, 
July 1908, Neue folge, Bd. 19: 521—33, and in Klinische Beitrdge iur Psycho- 
analyse (Leipzig, Vienna, Zurich: Int. Psych. Verlag, 1921); "The Psycho- 
Sexual Differences between Hysteria and Dementia Praecox," Selected 
Papers (London: Hogarth Press, 1927): 64-79. 

[2] Devereux, Georges, "Some Criteria for the Timing of Confrontations and 
Interpretations," IJP XXXII, 1 (1951): 19-24. 

[3] Ferenczi, Sandor, "Introjektion und Ubertragung," \%9,Jahr luch fiir psy- 
choanalytische Forschungen I: 422—57; "Introjection and Transference," Sex in 
Psycho-Analysis (NewYork: Basic Books, 1952): 35-93. 

[4] Freud, Anna, Das Ich und die Abwehrmechanismen, Chapter IV, "Die 
Abwehrmechanismen." See Versuch einer Chronologie, 60—63 (Vienna: 
Intern, psychoanal. Verlag, 1936); The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defence 
(London: Hogarth Press, 1937); (New York: International Universities 
Press, 1946). 

[5] Freud, Sigmund, Studien iiber Hysterie (1895), GJV\\ for the case of Elis- 
abeth von R., see pages 196—251 and especially 125—27; Studies on Hysteria, 
SEW, 158-60. 

[6] Freud, Sigmund, Die Traumdeutung (1900), GJFII-III. See, in Chap. IV, 
"Die Traumentstellung," pages 152-56, 157, and 163-68; "Kern unseres 
Wesens," 609; The Interpretation of Dreams, SE IV, Chap. IV, "Distortion in 
Dreams," 146-50, 151, 157-62, and Chap. VII, 603. 

644 [7] Freud, Sigmund, "Bruchstiick einer Hysterie-Analyse (Dora)," finished 

on January 24, 1901 (see letter 140 in Aus denAnfangen, the correspondence 
with Fliess originally published in London): GJVY, 194-95 [The Origins of 
Psychoanalysis (New York: Basic Books, 1954), 325-26]; "Fragment of an 
Analysis of a Case of Hysteria," SE VII, 35-36. 

[8] Freud, Sigmund, "Bemerkungen iiber einen Fall von Zwangsneurose" 
(1909), G JFVII. See, in section 1 .d, "Die Einfiihrungins Verstandnis der Kur," 
pages 402—4, and the footnote on pages 404-5; in section l.f, "Die 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power Sjg 

Krankheitsveranlassung," namely, Freud's decisive interpretation concerning 
what I would translate as the subject of the illness; and l.g, "Der Vaterkom- 
plex und die Losung der Rattenidee," 417-38; "Notes upon a Case of Obses- 
sional Neurosis," SEX. See, section l.d, "Initiation into the Nature of the 
Treatment," 178-81 and the footnote on 181; and sections l.f, "The Precipi- 
tating Cause of the Illness," and l.g, "The Father Complex and the Solution 
of the Rat Idea," 195-220. 

[9] Freud, Sigmund, Jenseits des Lustprin{ips ( 1 920), G JFXIII; see, if it is still 
necessary, pages 11-14 of Chapter II; Beyond the Pleasure Principle, SE 
XVIII, 14-16. 

[10] Freud, Sigmund, Massenpsychologie und I ch- Analyse (1921), GJFXIII, 
Chapter VII, "Die Identifizierung," especially pages 1 16-18; Group Psychol- 
ogy and the Analysis of the Ego, SE XVIII, 106-8. 

[1 1] Freud, Sigmund, "Die endliche und die unendliche Analyse" (1937), 
GJFXVI, 59—99, translated into French as "Terminated (!) analysis and 
interminable (!!) analysis" (my exclamation marks concern the standards 
employed in the translation into French of Freud's works. I am mention- 
ing this translation because, according to the sixteenth volume of the GW 
that came out in 1950, it doesn't exist; see page 280), in RFP XI, 1 (1939): 
3-38. 

[12] Freud, Sigmund, "Die Ichspaltung im Abwehrvorgang," GJFXVII, 
"Schriften aus dem Nachlass," 58-62. Manuscript dated January 2, 1938 [280] 
(unfinished); "Splitting of the Ego in the Defensive Process," Collected Papers 
V, 372-75. [SE XXIII, 275-78.] 

[13] Glover, Edward, "The Therapeutic Effect of Inexact Interpretation: A 
Contribution to the Theory of Suggestion," 7/PXII, 4 (1931): 397-41 1. 

[14] Hartmann, Kris, and Loewenstein, various team* contributions in The 
Psychoanalytic Study of the Child since 1946. 

[15] Kris, Ernst, "Ego Psychology and Interpretation in Psychoanalytic 
Therapy," PQ XX, 1 (1951): 21-25. [Reprinted, with modifications, in 
Selected Papers of Ernst Kris (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1975), 
237-51.] 



540 Ecrits 

[16] Lacan, Jacques, my paper for the Rome Congress (September 26- -27, 
1953), "Fonction et champ de la parole et du langage en psychanalyse" ["The 
Function and Field of Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis"], La Psych- 
analyse 1 (1956); Ecrits 1966, 237-322. 

[17] Lacan, Jacques, "L'instance de la lettre dans l'inconscient ou la raison 
depuis Freud" ["The Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious or Reason Since 
Freud"] (May 9, 1957), La Psychanalyse 3 (1957), 47-81; Ecrits 1966, 493-528. 

[18] Lagache, Daniel, "Le probleme du transfert" ["The Problem of Trans- 
ference"] (Paper given at the 14th Conference of French-speaking Psychoan- 
alysts on November 1, 1951), RFPXVl, 1-2 (1952): 5-115. 

[19] Leclaire, Serge, "A la recherche des principes d'une psychotherapie des 
psychoses" ["Search for Principles Guiding Psychotherapy with Psychotics"] 
(Bonneval Congress, April 15, 1957), L Evolution psychiatrique 2 (1958): 
377-419. 

[20] Macalpine, Ida, "The Development of the Transference," PQ XIX, 4 
(1950): 500-39, especially 502-8 and 522-28. 

645 [21] PDA: see pages 51-52 (on "pregenital" and "genital"), passim (on the 

strengthening of the ego and the method for doing so), and 102 (on distance 
from the object as the principle of a method of treatment) [Maurice Bouvet, 
"La clinique psychanalytique. La relation d'objet"]. 

[22] PDA: see pages 133 (on emotional reeducation and the PDA's opposi- 
tion to Freud regarding the primordial importance of the two-person relation), 
132 (on the cure "from the inside"), 135 (what is important ... is not so much 
what the analyst says or does as what he is), 136, etc., passim, and 162 (on dis- 
missing [the patient] at the end of the treatment), and 149 (on dreams) [Sacha 
Nacht, "La therapeutique psychanalytique"]. 

[23] R.L. [Ruth Lebovici], "Perversion sexuelle transitoire au cours d'un 
traitement psychanalytique" ["Transitory Sexual Perversion in the Course of 
a Psychoanalytic Treatment"], Bulletin dactivites de lAssociation des Psych- 
analystes de Belgique 25 (1956): 1—15 (118, rue Froissart, Brussels). 

[24] Sharpe, Ella, "The Technique of Psychoanalysis," Collected Papers on 
Psychoanalysis (London: Hogarth Press, 1950). See pages 81 (on the need to 



The Direction of the Treatment and the Principles of Its Power 541 

justify one's existence) and 12—14 (on the background and techniques 
required of the analyst). 

[25] Schmideberg, Melitta, "Intellektuelle Hemmung und Ess-storung," 
Zeitschrift fiir psa. P'ddagogik VIII (1934). ["Intellectual Inhibition and Dis- 
turbances in Eating," IJPXIX (1938): 17-22.] 

[26] Williams, J. D., The Compleat Strategyst, The Rand Series (New York, 
Toronto, London: McGraw Hill, 1966). [More recently: (New York: Dover, 
1986).] 

[27] Winnicott, D. W., "Transitional Objects and Transitional Phenomena," 
in 7/P XXXIV, 2 (1953): 29-97. 



Notes 



1. This is the first of two papers I gave at 
the International Colloquium at the invitation 
of the Societe Francaise de Psychanalyse; it was 
published in La Psychanalyse 6 (1961): 
149-206. 

2. Numbers in square brackets correspond 
to the references provided at the end of this 
paper. 

3. To turn the term "dislodge" against the 
spirit of a society, a term that allows us to assess 
this spirit, for it translates the sentence in which 
Freud proved himself the equal of the pre- 
Socratics — Wo Es war, soil Ich werden — into 
French quite simply as Le Moi doit deloger le 
fa y "the ego must dislodge the id." 

4. "Comment terminer le traitement analy- 
tique," Revue Francaise de Psychanalyse XVIII, 
4 (1954): 519 and passim. To gauge the influ- 
ence of such training, read: Charles-Henri 
Nodet, "Le psychanalyste," L* Evolution Psy- 
chiatrique 4 (\957):m-9\. 

5. 1 promise not to tire my readers any fur- 
ther with such stupid formulations, which 
really only serve here to show what has become 
of analytic discourse. I apologized to the for- 
eigners in the audience who no doubt had just 
as many stupid formulations available in their 
own language [langue], if not of quite the same 
platitudinous level. 

6. In France the doctrinaire of being, quoted 
above, went straight to the following solution: 



the psychoanalyst's being is innate [22 (page 
136)]. 

7. Rather than being vocalized as the letter 
symbolizing oxygen, evoked by the metaphor 
being played out, the "O" may be read as zero, 
insofar as this number symbolizes the essential 
function of place in the signifier's structure. 

8. For example: in the United States, where 
Kris has achieved success, publication means 
title of ownership, and a seminar like mine 
would have to stake its claim to priority every 
week against the pillage it couldn't fail to occa- 
sion. In France, my ideas penetrate by way of 
infiltration into a group, in which people obey 
orders that prohibit my teachings. In being 
cursed there, ideas can only serve as decora- 
tions for a few dandies. Never mind: the void 
the ideas cause to resound, whether I am cited 
or not, makes another voice heard. 

9. My parentheses. 

10. My parentheses. 

1 1 . My parentheses. 

12. (Added in 1966:) The penultimate sen- 
tence of this paragraph and the first line of the 
next paragraph have been rectified. 

13. See letter 118 (September 11, 1899) to 
Fliess in Sigmund Freud, Aus denAnfangen der 
Psychoanalyse (London: Imago Publishing 
Company, 1950). 

14. Here is the dream as it is presented in the 
patient's account on page 152 of GWll— III: "I 



5 4 2 



Ecrits 



want to throw a dinner party. But I only have 
a little smoked salmon left. I think of going out 
shopping, when I remember that it is Sunday 
afternoon and all the shops are closed. I tell 
myself that I'll call a few caterers on the phone. 
But the phone is out of order. Thus I have to 
give up my desire to throw a dinner party." 

15. This is the reason Freud gives for the 
hysterical identification, specifying that 
smoked salmon plays for the friend the same 
role caviar plays for the patient. 

16. It must not be forgotten that the term is 
used for the first time in the Traumdeutung on 
the subject of dreams, and that this use provides 
its meaning and, simultaneously, that of the 
term "distortion," which translates it when 



British analysts apply it to the ego. This remark 
allows us to evaluate the use made in France of 
the term "ego distortion" [distortion du Moi\ 
which supporters of ego strengthening — insuf- 
ficiently alerted to the "false cognates" Eng- 
lish words constitute (words have so little 
importance, don't they?) — understand simply 
as ... a twisted ego. 

17. See ($()D) and ($()a) on my graph, 
reproduced in "Subversion of the Subject," 
page 817 below. The sign () registers the rela- 
tions envelopment-development-conjunction- 
disjunction. The links it signifies in these two 
parentheses allow us to read the barred S as "S 
fading* in demand's cut," and "S fading* before 
the object of desire" — that is, drive and fantasy. 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation: 6 47 

"Psychoanalysis and Personality Structure" 

This text was written up on the basis of a tape recording of a presentation I 
gave whose introduction was lost due to a malfunction of the recording 
equipment. I used this as an opportunity to reshape the talk in a way that sub- 
stantially modifies the improvised version. I should indicate that my inten- 
tion in doing so was to tighten up my initial articulation of a position that is 
still essential to my thinking. 

This led me to shorten it and, in particular, to cut what, in the heat of the 
moment, anticipated what was only to be developed later. This is why I resis- 
ted my predilection as an author and decided not to include the fable of the 
mustard jar, which is not, for all that, of merely anecdotal interest, as I have 
since developed it quite fully. 1 

Except for the fact that I am providing it with its birth certificate here and 
am indicating that the motive of its birth lay in the feasts which, at least 
apparently, furnished me with it, I am leaving it to my audience to rediscover 
the mustard jar implicit in the figures that my readers will find rather more 
accessible, since they are less subdued by the signifiers of presence. 

A text that has never before been communicated in any documentary 
form whatsoever attests only to the moment of its definitive composition, in 
this case Easter 1960. 

/. Structure and the Subject 

The term "structure," which serves as the key word in Daniel Lagache 's 
paper, 2 is at the crux of many contemporary trends in research on mankind, 648 

if, as I think, this is the broad meaning that Lagache gives the term "anthro- 
pology." A reference to sociology would have seemed to me to better situate 
structuralism currently. 

For it is the topic of a debate that is lively enough that even Claude Levi- 
Strauss has not escaped structuralists' attacks on each other, the notion of 
structure cherished by one of them seeming to be a total aberration to another. 

Since I myself use the term "structure" in a way that I believe I can legiti- 
mate on the basis of Claude Levi-Strauss' usage, it is of personal concern to 
me — and this is certainly the place to say it — not to consider this use to be 
generally confusing. I am thus all the more interested in putting it to the test 
of Lagache 's elaboration of it. 

I accept the category "set" with which he introduces it, insofar as it avoids 
the implications of totality or purifies them. But this does not mean that its 



544 Ecrits 

elements are neither isolated nor summable [as Lagache claims] — at least, if 
we are looking, in the notion of set, for some guarantee of the rigor it has in 
mathematical theory. The fact that its "parts are themselves structured" thus 
means that they themselves are capable of symbolizing all the relations defin- 
able for the set, which go far beyond their separation and union, the latter being 
relations that are nevertheless inaugural. Indeed, elements are defined therein 
by the possibility of being posited as subsets covering any relation defined for 
the set, this possibility having as its essential characteristic that it is not lim- 
ited by any natural hierarchy. 

This is why it seems advisable to me to discard from the outset the term 
"part" and, a fortiori^ every datum in the field that includes such formidable 
unknowns as an organism; for by organizing the entourage (with the notori- 
ous "situation" that he has in store for us), such a field already brings to every 
structural consideration the minimal limitation that Lagache immediately and 
relevantly qualifies as "geometrical." 3 
649 Now, as I have stressed elsewhere, 4 structure is not form, and we need to 

learn to think in terms of a topology that is necessitated by structure alone. 

I maintain that transcendental aesthetics has to be recast in our times, for 
linguistics has introduced into science its indisputable status, structure being 
defined by signifying articulation as such. 

When Lagache thus starts from a choice he proposes to us between a struc- 
ture that is in some sense apparent (which would imply a critique of what is 
natural in descriptive characteristics) and a structure that he says is located at 
some distance from experience (since it is a question of the "theoretical 
model" [page 12] that he recognizes in psychoanalytic metapsychology), this 
antinomy neglects a mode of structure which, although it is tertiary, cannot 
be excluded — namely, the effects that the pure and simple combinatory of the 
signifier determines in the reality in which it is produced. For is it not struc- 
turalism that allows us to posit our experience as the field in which it [fa] speaks? 
If the answer is yes, structure 's "distance from experience" vanishes, since it 
operates there not as a theoretical model, but as the original machine that directs 
[met en scene] the subject there. 

What Lagache attributes to the economic /dynamic point of view — what 
he calls the material and its interpretation — is precisely where we see the impact 
of structure begin in analytic experience, and structuralist research must pur- 
sue its effects starting from there. Their economic/dynamic import can be 
illustrated by a comparison that is equivalent to its own reason: what a tur- 
bine, a machine that operates according to a chain of equations, brings to a 
natural waterfall in order to produce energy. 

How could we be astonished, then, that the genetic criterion has resulted 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 545 

in a failure to put the Freudian topographies to the test, to the very extent that 
their systems are structural? 

And perhaps we have to reject the criterion of adaptation until things change 
considerably — that is, until changes have occurred which psychoanalysis 
itself will have introduced (unless we enter the impasse of the so-called post- 
revolutionary problem). 

Indeed, the systems whose interrelations (I would suggest the term "para- 650 

nomies") Lagache so delicately highlights in each of Freud 's two topographies, 
by distinguishing them on the basis of their functions, are not, for all that, struc- 
ture in the strict sense of the term. This can be seen in the sort of chiasmus he 
does not explain whereby the primary process (unfolding in the unconscious) 
is governed by the identity of thoughts, and the secondary process (insofar as 
it makes the primary process fall in with reality) finds its criterion in the iden- 
tity of perceptions [page 20] — whereas perception is more primary in the struc- 
ture as Lagache understands it, and closer to the pleasure principle, which 
ensures the reign of the primary process, than everything that seems to be 
reflected back by an enlightened consciousness as thought. 

It is thus worth recalling that, from the outset, Freud did not attribute the 
slightest reality as a differentiated apparatus in the organism to any of the sys- 
tems in either of his topographies. For people forget to draw therefrom the 
corollary that, by the same token, he forbade us to force any of these systems 
back into the fantasized reality of any sort of "totality" of the organism. In 
short, the structure of which I am speaking has nothing to do with the idea of 
the "structure of the organism," as supported by the most soundly based facts 
in Gestalt theory. Not that structure, in the strict sense of the term, does not 
take advantage of gaps in the organic Gestalt to submit it to itself. But on the 
basis of their conjunctions, whether they prove to be based on fission or fis- 
sures, a heterogeneity between two orders appears, which we will be less 
tempted to mask if we grasp its principle. If it is less neglected, the topographical 
distribution of consciousness, so striking in its dispersion that one might even 
say it has exploded, will force us to reconsider a fact that Lagache is right to 
underscore, which is that we have hardly made any progress regarding the 
nature of consciousness since Freud, by the revision of it that he made neces- 
sary, returned to it only in order to complain that he had gotten bogged down 
ink. 

In any case, it is clear that the organism does not escape unscathed. In other 
words, it surrenders one of its more or less detachable tentacles as collateral 
to such a structure, due to a social prohibition, for example, in which it, as an 
individual, may be caught up. 

To enter into the heart of the subject with Lagache, we should credit him 



546 Ecrits 

651 for denouncing, in passing [page 9], the simple falsification Heinz Hartmann 
tried to impose on history when he overlooked the fact that, at the time Freud 
wrote "On Narcissism," he was truly interested in the ego as an agency, the 
only agency, the same agency he continued to promote afterward. As to the 
warning Hartmann and his acolytes, Kris and Loewenstein, feel they need to 
give us to be on guard against a so-called anthropomorphic conception of the 
second topography, I agree with Lagache that its object has about as much 
consistency as the foolishness, which is pure sham, that they attribute to us. 
But it is not in order to accept the impertinence of the other foolishness they 
attribute to us, a real foolishness, counting on our vainglory at being among 
those who are not susceptible to being deluded, in order to give us Hobson's 
choice of a so-called causal conception 5 of the ego. Will Lagache still deny the 
nefarious influence that Jaspers' antinomy has had, in this three-card monte 
trick with which they were hoping to dazzle us, by projecting the splendor of 
physiology onto the closet door out of which they bring, to explain Freud's 
ego, this dummy [mannequin], the rejection of which is the pons asinorum of all 
psychological experience, this verbal subject used as a prop for the synthesis 
of the most disparate functions? Lagache challenges this thirty-six-legged calf 
further on, this monster whose fictive seams evoke a collage devoid of artistry, 
but which quite suits this cabinet of curios where charlatans do not stick out 
like a sore thumb. What could this baroque conception possibly have to do 
with psychoanalysis, other than to debase its technique to the point of exploit- 
ing the most obscure biases? 

As Lagache so forcefully remarks, the fact remains that the very existence 
of "animistic enclaves," even of alternations experienced as personal in our 
assent, does not in the least hinder our understanding of the second topogra- 
phy as a theoretical model. For what is important is not "that one can differ- 
entiate the systems by their functions," but to recognize, as he does, that "the 
concept of function is not exclusively physiological" [page 13]. 

652 My contribution to this debate may incline you to believe that I think he 
could not have put it any better. 

However, my objections to Lagache 's attempt will be clear, insofar as what 
he calls the "structuration of the personality" (indeed, that is part of the title 
of section IV of his article) refers, in his view, to its formation in intersubjec- 
tivity. In my view, his method is not radical enough, and I will say why. 

But first let me say that this is not because I disagree with his critique of 
the exorbitant idealism that strives to make the genesis of the personal world 
derive from personal consciousness [page 14] — namely, the modern vogue of 
a form of psychoanalysis that would like to be based exclusively on the obser- 
vation of children. But he seems to me to be optimistic in assuming that we 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 543 

are free from this bias: Has he forgotten that Piaget has accustomed us to study- 
ing the genesis of the shared world in individual consciousness, going so far 
as to include the categories of scientific thought in it? 

I am no less delighted by his remark that "before existing in himself, through 
himself, and for himself, the child exists for and through other people; he is 
already a pole of expectations, projects, and attributes" [page 14]. But this would 
amount to no more than a truism, did he not emphasize the means by which 
so many expectations and projects make themselves felt in the child's uncon- 
scious when he comes into the world. For is it not by means of these "attrib- 
utes" (a rather odd term in this apposition that slips in at the end of his 
sentence)? "Attributes": let me stop Lagache at this little word. Did he hope 
I would not notice it? Otherwise, why did he not himself give it its full import? 
"A pole of attributes" is what the subject is before he is born (and perhaps it 
is under their mass that he will suffocate once born). "Of attributes," that is, 
of signifiers more or less linked in a discourse — we shall have to recall this 
later when we broach the topic of the id's structure. 

But for the time being, isn't Lagache professing the same thing I teach when 
I define the unconscious as the Other's discourse? For in order for Lagache 
to be able to give this existence "for and through other people," if not prece- 653 

dence, then at least logical antecedence, with respect to the existence of the 
child "in himself, though himself, and for himself," his future relationship with 
the entourage of semblables that awaits him and consigns him to the place he 
occupies in their projects is not sufficient. For in the imaginary dimension that 
is deployed there, this existence relationship remains inverse, insofar as what 
is unborn remains utterly hidden from its view. But none of the following — 
the place the child occupies in the line of descent, according to the convention 
of kinship structures, the forename [pre-nom] that already identifies it at times 
with its grandfather, the blanks to be filled in on civil status forms, and even 
what will denote its sex on them — none of those are concerned with what the 
child is in itself. Let it turn out to be a hermaphrodite and see what happens! 

This, as we know, goes much farther, as far as law covers language and 
truth covers speech: His existence is already pleaded innocent or guilty before 
he comes into the world, and the thin thread of his truth cannot help but have 
him already weave a fabric of lies. This is precisely why there will, roughly 
speaking, be a case of mistaken identity — that is, a mistake regarding the mer- 
its of his parents — in his ego-ideal; while, in the old trial of self-justification 
before God's tribunal, the new little tyke will be saddled with a file that pre- 
dates his grandparents, in the form of their superego. Freud noted this, and 
Lagache repeats it; there is nothing to be sought in it except the effect and field 
of speech and language with the optima that could be indicated on a topolog- 



548 Ecrits 

ical schema, assuming we also see that they only enter reality statistically. 

The parents' desire resonates still more deeply here, as we surely know 
from experience. But this is precisely the question I myself have raised, as some 
of you here know, regarding the determination of desire by the signified 
effects on the subject. 

If Lagache himself were not echoing my promotion of the Word, would he 
be so sure his pretty reference to incarnation would strike his audience, when 
he says that "in the course of prenatal existence, being for other people is mod- 
ified and enriched by incarnation" [page 15]? 

Yes, "being for other people" — he does not say "being in itself" — and he 
continues, "toward the middle of gestation." Is it not that by "his first mani- 
festations of activity, the fetus" . . . begins to make people talk about him? Yes, 
the fact that people talk about him is what defines what Lagache calls here "the 

654 rudiments of an existence" (I would say ex-sistence), and all the more strik- 
ingly in that he qualifies it as "autonomous" [page 15]. 

Why not then relate the anteriority of the relation to the Other's discourse 
to all primal differentiation , 6 in which he admits that the subject functions "with- 
out existing as a cognitive structure"? Seven lines earlier, however, he argues 
that "to claim that the newborn has no conscious experiences is to deny the 
obvious, since he alternates between sleeping and waking." Does this observ- 
able wakefulness suffice to assure him of the existence of a subject without any 
"cognitive structure"? 

To my mind, the fact of primal differentiation leaves in abeyance its prop- 
erly signifying use, on which the advent of the subject depends. To define this 
primal differentiation in itself, I would say that it is an object-relation in the 
real^ thinking that I can prove thereby the robust yet simple nature of the tri- 
partition I use to situate analytic experience in the symbolic, imaginary, and 
real. 

Demand must be added to the need that sustains this primal differentiation 
for the subject (prior to any "cognitive structure") to make his entrance into 
the real, while need becomes drive, insofar as its reality is obliterated in becom- 
ing the symbol of a love satisfaction. 

These categorial requirements, if you will allow me to highlight them, have 
the following advantages, among others: they banish certain loathsome 
metaphors such as the child's "symbiotic relationship" [page 16] with the 
mother (do they constitute a lichen?); they leave us rather dissatisfied with a 
casual reference to "the interplay of maturation and learning" to account for 
"an identification in the intersubjective conflict," even if we agree that "the 
predominance of his passivity means that he receives his temporary person- 

655 age from the situation" [page 16]; and they do not allow us to think we have 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 549 

explained the differentiation between the body and objects by defining that 
differentiation as syncretic, because that would gloss over the essential dis- 
symmetry between projection and introjection. 

Here Lagache 's point of view remains classical. But it seems to me that he 
cannot emphasize, as he does here, the symbolic prematuration through which 
the child is inscribed in being for other people (in my terms, in the Other's 
discourse), and at the same time hold that the formal delay which its learning 
of syntax exhibits (the moment when the child speaks of itself as another speaks 
to it) is decisive of anything whatsoever "in the conjunction that occurs 
between being for other people and being for oneself." For, rather than this 
instant being representative of it, I would say that, since it is a question of dis- 
course, this conjunction has always obtained, since discourse was there from 
the beginning, even if only in its impersonal presence. 

The drama of the subject in the Word is that he experiences his want- to-be 
there, and the psychoanalyst would do well to define certain moments of it; 
for the psychologist cannot do anything about it with his questionnaires, and 
even his recordings, where these moments will not show up so fast — not until 
a film has managed to capture the structure of lack [fame] as constitutive of 
the game of chess. 

It is because it wards off this moment of lack [manque] that an image assumes 
the role of bearing the full brunt of desire: projection, an imaginary function. 

Contrary to this, an index is instated at the heart of being to designate the 
hole in it: introjection, a relation to the symbolic. 

The observed progress in objectification during its early stages seems to 
have no other interest, as Lagache hints, than to mask from us the unconscious 
moments of the projections and introjections in the course [suite] of their 
development. 

I will stop at the same point Lagache did, to take stock of where our per- 
spectives differ. They differ regarding the very function he attributes to inter- 
subjectivity. For the latter is defined, in his view, in a relationship with the 
other as a semblable, a relationship which is fundamentally symmetrical, as 
can be seen in the fact that Lagache formulates that the subject learns to treat 
himself as an object from the other. In my view, the subject has to arise from 
the given state of the signifiers that cover him [le recouvrent] in an Other which 656 

is their transcendental locus; he thus constitutes himself in an existence in which 
the manifestly constitutive vector of the Freudian field of experience — that 
is, what is known as desire — is possible. 

Thus it is hardly necessary for the "subject-ego" to push back the "object- 
ego" in order to make it "transcendent" for himself [page 17]; rather, the true, 
if not the good subject, the subject of desire — seen in the light of fantasy and 



55o Ecrits 

in its hiding place beyond his ken — is nothing other than the Thing, 7 which 
in and of itself is what is closest to him while escaping him more than any- 
thing else. 

This is why those who keep abreast of my work know that the noetic equiv- 
ocation by means of which Lagache causes the subject-ego to vanish [page 18] 
from what is thought in it, is not what I call the fading* of the subject. For such 
fading occurs when desire is in abeyance, because the subject is eclipsed in the 
signifier of demand, and when fantasy becomes fixated, because the subject 
himself becomes the cut that makes the part-object shine in its unspeakable 
vacillation. 

//. Where Is Id? 

The reconstruction that Lagache nevertheless achieves should be examined 
without considering the preceding objections; for although he takes his bear- 
ings from his postulate of personal structure, this postulate can, as usual, only 
be clarified by its use. 

At first sight this use seems to be heuristic, as if Lagache were, in some 
sense, asking each of the "systems" (this is his term) — id, ego, and superego — 
to account for what it is missing in order to be a person. One cannot but note 
here that Lagache discards the term "agency," even though it would seem to 
favor what he calls his personalist style since it is part and parcel of Freud's 
formulation of the so-called second topography. 
657 From limited heteronomies into relative autonomies (I would suggest: in 

their paranomy), these systems come together before our eyes by means of 
this method, without anything preconceived forcing them to combine into a 
complete person. For — and why not if that is its aim? — the investigation also 
leads to technique, and Lagache assigns one of these systems, the ego, which 
is actively brought to the fore [degagement] here, the task of bringing out a 
unity of being, of course, but in a practical ideality that patently proves to be 
more selective than structural. The postulate seems to fall here to the level of 
a dialectical deviation concerning which one would like to know to what extent 
it meets with Lagache 's approval. 

The section in which Lagache studies the structure of the id does not disap- 
point me, and I would endorse many of his formulations verbatim. He seems to 
me to excel especially in his attempt to situate the subject in the structure here. 

Dare I indicate what he would have had to do to avoid the impasse he 
encounters so brilliantly in his formulations on structure itself, insofar as he 
considers it to be that of the id? He would have had to face the full force of 
the paradoxes with which Freud here, as is so often the case, shows us the way. 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 55 1 

Three statements, which seem to be rather incompatible, would have to be 
made to hang together, and this would have to be accomplished on the basis 
of the very scandal that each of them causes. 

The first is that the id is unorganized. The surprising nature of this asser- 
tion can but give us pause for thought, given the advent of this agency in the 
German Es, which is supposed to encompass both the indestructibility, 
affirmed early on (and maintained), of the repressed that is refound in it, and 
the automatic nature, studied much later, of the repetition that must result from 
the repressed (the concept of Wiederholungsywang, posited on the threshold 
of Beyond the Pleasure Principle), 

This statement is linked to another one, which Freud reiterated whenever 
the occasion presented itself. It concerns the very elements whose laws in the 
unconscious he first articulated — later constructing their structure, strictly 
speaking, in the drives — and can be put as follows: these elements do not know 
negation. 

This foreclosure of negation was, of course, corrected, already in The Inter- 
pretation of Dreams, by the analysis of the detours that prop up something equiv- 
alent to negation: deferral, inhibition, and representation by means of an 
opposite. But in reading Freud 's texts closely, one notices that this foreclosure 658 

is maintained in the stricter formulation that there is no contradiction that holds 
up — that is, that has the effect of logical exclusion — between the drives inhab- 
iting the id. 

The third statement stems from the aphorisms in the half-light of which 
The Ego and the Id (Das Ich und das Es) comes to a close, emerging in the 
term "silence" — the silence that the death drives are supposed to make reign 
in the id. 

Any attempt to link a structure thus described to any differentiation what- 
soever of primal needs in the organism can only multiply its apparent contra- 
dictions by ever increasing their weight. Lagache is unable to avoid this 
problem in following this pathway. 

It seems to me that the very difficulties everyone runs up against here 
confirm my belief that it is impossible to dispense with the function of the 
signifier. 

Let us consider the signifier quite simply in the irreducible materiality that 
structure entails, insofar as this materiality is its own, and let us conjure the 
signifier up in the form of a lottery. It will be clear then that the signifier is 
the only thing in the world that can underpin the coexistence — constituted 
by disorder (synchronically) — of elements among which the most inde- 
structible order ever to be deployed subsists (diachronically). The associa- 
tive rigor of which the signifier is capable, in the diachronic dimension, is 



552 Ecrits 

based on the very commutativity it exhibits by being interchangeable in the 
synchronic dimension. 

Its subsistence as connotation cannot be suspended by being assigned con- 
tradictory signs, for an exclusion originating in those signs as such can occur 
only as a condition of the consistency of the chain that will be constituted. We 
must add to this the fact that the dimension in which this condition is verified 
is simply the translation that such a chain lends itself to. 

Let us dwell a moment longer on this lottery. We find that it is because the 
numbers are randomly mixed together ordinally [in the lottery wheel], with- 
out any real organization, that we can place bets on which number will come 
out; whereas it is their structural organization that — allowing them, as they 
are selected, to be read as an oracle — allows me, in continuing to extract num- 
bers, to affirm that some are missing cardinally. 
659 Freud 's propositions thus direct us to the medium of the signif ier, and right 

from the first proposition. Need it be stressed that the repercussions in which 
the second becomes entangled, indicate, by the grammatical reference points 
Freud always gives in his reconsiderations of it, that it is truly a question of 
an order of discourse? 

This is why we cannot but be struck by the combinatorial indifference with 
which Freud breaks the drive down into its source, direction, aim, and object. 
Does it mean that all of this is signifiers? Certainly not, but it is structure. 
Thus I shall leave aside here its energetic status. 

This nevertheless is enough to allow me to respond to Lagache 's criterion 
from the geometrical angle by which he intends to approach it. 

The confused image of the id as the "reservoir of the drives," which so 
rightly disgusts him because it meets with the approval of a crude organicism, 
is, in fact, rectified by the meaning it receives in my perspective. 

Let us think of a mailbox and of the inner cavity of some Baal-like idol; let 
us now think of the bocca di leone which, in combining them, acquired its fear- 
some function in Venice. A reservoir, yes, as it were, that is what the id is, and 
even a reserve; but what is produced in it, missives of prayer or denunciation, 
comes from the outside, and if it accumulates inside, it is in order to sleep there. 
The opacity of the text stating that silence reigns in the id is thereby dispelled: 
The silence is not metaphorical, but relates to an antithesis that must be pur- 
sued in the subject's relation to the signif ier, which is expressly designated to 
us as the death drive. 

But let us return to Lagache and the crux of the question concerning the 
person. I grant him that Freud posits that there is "no negation, no doubt, [and] 
no degrees of certainty" in the unconscious system. But Freud does not do so 
in order to have us imagine that it allows of complete certainty, or of a zero 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 55j 

degree of certainty. How could it be otherwise when I have long said that only 
action gives rise to certainty in the subject? 

I think, however, that Lagache 's error here is to confuse assertion with cer- 
tainty. Having thus eliminated the latter, he believes he can square accounts 
with the former by means of the same procedure, even though it is of unsure 660 

repute — the image of the baby being thrown out with the bath water seems 
appropriate here. 

How could this be, though, when from assertion to certainty a link, if not 
of precedence, at least of logical precession, is established, a link in which the 
uncertainties that action engenders in its wake of verification assume their 
place? 

Does this not imply disparaging the care, as usual extraordinary in the pres- 
ence of mind to which it attests, with which Freud dotted the i's and crossed 
the t's here in expressly articulating Bejahung as the first moment of uncon- 
scious enunciation, the one presupposed by the fact that it is maintained in 
Verneinung as the second moment? You are familiar with the luster I tried to 
give to the discussion of Verneinung in the early years of my seminar. 

I will reach once more into my lottery wheel, and this time I draw out the 
number 58 . . . This number contains in itself its assertive import, which I would 
even go so far as to call provocative. Do not object that the vigilance of a sub- 
ject is necessary here, for the subject is found here simply by virtue of the fact 
of having slipped into this number by the decimal presence that sums up in 
two columns what merely constitutes its cipher, the number remaining indif- 
ferent, being, among other things, the double of a prime number. 

Moreover, to appreciate what this figure can effectively convey about the 
subject, one need but consult, on the subject of the exploratory function in 
psychoanalysis of numbers chosen at random, an all too forgotten chapter in 
Freud's Psychopathology of Everyday Life. 

Such is the example, taken as the least favorable because of its abstract nature, 
with which I intend to show that it is in the signifier's foundational duplicity 
that the subject first finds the hidden stream in which he flows before seeping 
out — we shall see through which crack. 

But if you will allow me, by contrast, to resort to the warm vitality of JVit^ 
I will illustrate it in its greatest opacity with the genius that guided Jarry in his 
find: the condensation of a simple supplementary phoneme in the illustrious 
interjection "merdre" This is the kind of refined triviality we see in slips of 
the tongue, flights of fancy, and poetry — a single letter was enough to give 
the most vulgar French exclamation [merde: shit] the ejaculatory value, verg- 
ing on the sublime, of the place it occupies in the epic of Ubu: that of the Word 
from before the beginning. 



554 Ecrits 

66 1 Imagine what we could do with two letters! For the spelling, Meirdre, gema- 
trially offers us everything promising man will ever hear in his history, and 
Mairdre is an anagram of the verb on which "admirable" is based. 

Please do not read into this departure from the seriousness of my discus- 
sion anything other than my concern to recall that down through the centuries, 
both in life and in letters, fate reserved for the fool*, oh Shakespeare, the task 
of keeping accessible the place of truth that Freud brought to light. 

Let us now recall the problems the status of interrogative sentences pose 
for the linguist, in order to gauge all the problems that Lagache raises with a 
single formulation, striking in the felicity of expression that never fails him in 
the whole of this text: this "interrogation that calls the ego into question, or 
even puts it 'to the question'" [page 22]. I clearly perceive the subtlety 
involved in designating "the agitation that represents the drive in the ego" as 
its instrument of torture. I approve his prudence all the more in that it is only 
too obvious that the question cannot come from the id, but rather responds to 
the id. We have known, however, since Hemmung, Symptom und Angst [Inhi- 
bitions, Symptoms and Anxiety] that the most characteristic agitation in the ego 
is but a warning sign that brings into play the defenses . . . against the id's 
assertiveness, not its question. 

In truth, Lagache takes such pains here because he wants the function of 
judgment to be the ego's privilege [page 22]. 

May I tell him that I believe the whole thrust of Freudian experience con- 
tradicts that? When will I be able to show him, text in hand, that the famous 
Entwurf ["Project for a Scientific Psychology"], dedicated to Fliess, has the 
far from secondary aim of establishing that a fundamental form of judgment, 
which Freud rightly calls "primal judgment," is already constituted 8 at the level 
of the system of the first breaches [frayages] of pleasure. 

I myself cannot fathom otherwise Freud 's formulation that drives Lagache 
to his wits' end: that the drives exist [page 22]. 

Indeed, it is not a total waste to never hold one 's tongue [donne ...sa langue 

662 au chat] when it is a spoken tongue. For the whole point is perhaps that the 
drives ex-sist in the sense that they are not in their place, that they present 
themselves in this Entstellung, in this de-position, so to speak, or, as it were, 
in this crowd of displaced persons. Does this not also give the subject his chance 
to exist some day? For the true being, however, this chance seems at the very 
least compromised. For the way things are going — as we know only too well — 
when language gets in on the act, the drives must multiply instead, and the 
question (were there anyone to pose it) would rather be how the subject will 
find any place there at all. 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 555 

The answer fortunately comes first, in the hole the subject makes for him- 
self there. 

We can only hope to make headway in a new critique of judgment, which 
I take to be initiated in Freud 's text, "Negation," if we take up anew what Freud 
broached in this article and connect it with linguistics. Up until now, apart 
from the publication of the dialogue [between Hyppolite and myself] that I 
mentioned earlier, this initiative, as sometimes happens, has no more bene- 
fited from any sort of commentary than if it concerned the drunkenness of 
Noah. 

We are willing to let father Freud fool around with a judgment of attribu- 
tion and a judgment of existence, and even grant the former the privilege [pas] 
of logical antecedence over the negation on which the latter is based. But we 
analysts are not keen to expose ourselves to the derision of logicians, much 
less take our chances studying Brentano, even though we know he flourished 
in Vienna and that Freud even attended his classes. 

He conceived of the judgment of attribution, then, as instated on the basis 
of Bejahung alone. Its chain develops a first condensation or syncretism in 
which a combinatory structure is already found that I myself have illustrated. 9 
Given this sort of affirmation by juxtaposition, what can ever be refuted if not 
by an effect of obstruction? 

It is here that the problem of the origin of negation should be taken up anew, 
assuming we do not mean by that any sort of puerile psychological genesis, 663 

but rather a problem of structure that has to be broached in the material of 
structure. 

The particles that express shades of negation are, as we know, highly dif- 
ferentiated in each language; they provide formal logic with opportunities for 
oddities which prove quite clearly that they involve an essential distortion — 
that is, another translation of Entstellung — that is valid if one relates it to the 
topology of the subject in the signifying structure. 

The proof thereof appears when formal logic, in having to break its bonds 
with the grammatical forms that carry this distortion, simultaneously tears itself 
away from linguistics, as if it were a threat to the partiality in which it is ten- 
able, but which can nevertheless refer only to a field of language that must be 
distinguished as the field of the enunciated. 

Hence we can understand one of the reasons why the study of these parti- 
cles cannot be genetic, when psychology proves to always bring the same logic 
to it — either the logic of classes or of relations — which we must go beyond. 
We can see an example of what has to be removed in order for truly structural 
research to be sustained at its level, when we see the obstacle created for it by 



556 Ecrits 

even such a small stumbling block as the ne whose usage in French in a sen- 
tence like "je cretins qu 'il ne vienne" [I'm afraid he may come] is qualified by 
grammarians as the "expressive ne" without anybody ever — no matter how 
good his glasses — having been able to make out what it could be expressive 
of. Thanks to which grammarians as well-informed and on their guard against 
any authority other than usage as Brunot and Bruneau, in their Precis degram- 
maire historique (Paris: Masson, 1933), conclude that the headache this ne has 
given everyone is of but "precious little interest," on the pretext "that the rules 
that have been established for it are variable and contradictory" (page 587). 

I would like to see a graph of the zones in which these particles subsist, in 
some sense, in suspension. I am concocting one of my own making this year, 10 
and with it I believe Pcan designate the bed in which these particles oscillate 
between a chain of enunciation, insofar as the latter marks the place in which 
664 the subject is implicit in pure discourse (imperative, echoing voice, epithala- 

mion, or yelling "fire"), and a chain of statements, insofar as the subject is 
designated in them by shifters* (namely, "I," all the particles and inflections 
fixing his presence as the subject of discourse, and with that presence the pres- 
ent of chronology). 

In the turn of phrase, Je crains qu 'ilne vienne^ the most elementary analytic 
art can sense the desire that constitutes the ambivalence characteristic of the 
unconscious (which a certain kind of abjection rampant in the analytic com- 
munity confuses with the ambivalence of feelings, an ambivalence in which 
that community tends to bog down). Is the subject of this desire designated 
by the "I" of discourse? Certainly not, since the latter is simply the subject of 
the statement, which merely articulates the fear and its object, "I" here obvi- 
ously being an index of the presence that enunciates it here and now — that is, 
being a shifter*. The subject of enunciation, insofar as his desire breaks 
through, lies nowhere else than in this ne whose value can be found in a form 
of haste in logic — "haste" being the name I give the function to which its use 
is tied in the phrase, avant quil ne vienne [before he comes]. So-called struc- 
ture is not without a correlate in energetics, insofar as what I can define as the 
subject's fatigue manifests itself in neurosis as distinct from muscle fatigue. 

A pest might object here that the unconscious cannot be involved, since, as 
everyone knows, it does not know time. He should go back to grammar class 
to learn to distinguish the time of chronology — the "aspect forms" that envi- 
sion what the subject becomes there on the basis of the enunciation — from the 
forms that situate the statement on a timeline of events. Then he will stop con- 
fusing the subject of the perfective with the presence of the past, and will per- 
haps wake up to the idea that tension involves time and that identification occurs 
at a scansion's pace [pas]. 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 55 j 

In its uncertain obsolescence, however, this ne suggests the idea of a trace 
that is effaced along the path of a migration or, more precisely, of a puddle that 
brings out its outline. Couldn't the earliest signifier of negation have been the 
elision of a signifier? And isn't its vestige found in a form of phonemic cen- 
sorship, of which we find, as usual, a memorable example in Freud 's work — 
in the Wolf Man's Espe QJF]espe)? But there are many other linguistic forms 
that can be grouped together in analytic experience, beginning with the elision 
of the first syllable of the family name, by which the noble bastardy in which 665 

a line originates is perpetuated in Russian — namely, in the socio-linguistic 
structures in force at the Wolf Man's birth. 

Here is a suggestion for further research: Do the prefixes of negation merely 
indicate the place of this signifying ablation by occupying it anew? 

The tu [silenced or shut up] of the unsaid would then be seen, in French's 
homophony, to give its form to the tu [you] one calls, by which the subject will 
send himself his own summonses. 

I am risking a great deal here in a field in which I am not intimidated by any 
specialist allegiance. I am fully aware of what I am doing, and my goal here is 
to convey a structure in which I risk nothing, because it concerns the serious- 
ness of analytic experience — namely, the link between defense and drive. 

Lagache clearly indicates the tiresome cacophony of the whirling merry- 
go-round on which authors butt heads, or even asses, as they scramble in search 
of its mainsprings. Only psychoanalysts can appreciate the experience that sus- 
tains this literature, and seek out the feature that truly stands out in a certain 
impasse of this discourse. What Lagache points out, regarding the contradic- 
tion involved in attributing its success to a defense, leaves in abeyance the ques- 
tion of what it can succeed in. 

To outline the relations between the subject and structure — structure 
being understood here as the structure of the signifier — is to restore the very 
possibility of the effects of defense. I am accused of claiming that language 
has magical power. But I profess, on the contrary, that to relate the power of 
language to some supposedly primitive aberration of the psyche is to render 
it obscure, and that to thus give it the consistency of an unthinkable fact ren- 
ders us complicit in it. There is no greater betrayal of our own praxis than the 
one analysts stoop to thereby. 

What I say, therefore, is that no suppression of the signifier — whatever 
effect of displacement it causes, and even if it were to go so far as to produce 
the form of sublimation that the term "Aufhebung" describes in German — can 
do any more than free from the drive a reality which, however slight the impor- 
tance of need may be in it, will merely be all the more resistant because it is a 
remainder. 



558 Ecrits 

Defense creates its effect by another pathway, modifying not the tendency 

666 but the subject. The earliest mode of signifying elision, which I am trying to 
conceptualize here as the matrix of Verneinung [negation], asserts the subject 
negatively, by preparing the void in which he finds his place. Strictly speak- 
ing, it is merely an enlargement of the cut in the signifying chain where he 
could be said to reside, insofar as it is the most radical element in the discon- 
tinuous sequence of the chain and, as such, the locus from which the subject 
assures its subsistence as chain. 

It does not suffice for Lagache to tell us the subject "is not distinguished 
from the drive, from its aim and object." He has to choose, in what he distin- 
guishes, in not wanting to distinguish it from the subject, and the proof thereof 
is that he immediately tells us that this subject is "dispersed among these dif- 
ferent object- relations or their groupings" [page 21]. I have italicized this to 
again distinguish it from the further possibility of a multiplicity without 
grouping: a pure shimmering of Whole-Ones [Tout-Uns] which, while each 
of them counts an alternation, are not yet fixed in any range. 

Be that as it may, we can recognize this union between the subject and the 
object: It is the ideal that has served since time immemorial as the basis of a 
classical theory of knowledge that is based on the connaturality with which 
the knower [connaissant], in the course of his knowing, comes to be born along 
with the known [co-naitre au connu]. How can we fail to see that the whole of 
analytic experience runs counter to this? This is evinced in the fragmentation 
that analysis reveals to be there from the outset in the combinatory of the 
unconscious, and to be structuring in the breakdown of the drive into its com- 
ponent parts. 

In short, when Lagache comes closest by saying that "this absence of a coher- 
ent subject best characterizes the organization of the id" [page 21], I would say 
that the absence of the subject, which is produced somewhere in the unor- 
ganized id, is the defense that one might call "natural" — however artificial 
the circle may be that is cleared by burning the brush of the drives — because 
it offers the other agencies a place to camp in order to organize their defenses. 

This is the very place to which each and every thing is called to be washed 
of sin \faute\ sin that this place makes possible since it is the place of an absence: 
for everything might not exist in the first place. It is not enough to note, with 
this very simple matrix of the first contradiction — to be or not to be — that 
the judgment of existence founds reality; we must articulate that the judgment 

667 of existence can only found reality by raising reality up [re lever] from the pre- 
carious status it has when this judgment receives it from a previously made 
judgment of attribution. 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 55$ 

It is the structure of this place which demands that the nothing \le rien] be 
at the core of creation and which — elevating the subject's ignorance of the 
real that assigns him his condition to the role of something essential to our 
experience — forces psychoanalytic thought to be creationist, by which I 
mean, not content with some evolutionist reference. For the experience of 
desire in which that thought has to be deployed is the very experience of the 
want-to-be by which every being [etant] could not be at all, or could be other — 
in other words, by which every being is created as existent. It could be demon- 
strated that this faith lies at the core of Galileo's development of science. 

Let us simply say that this place does not require any supreme being, 
because, since it is the place of Plus-Personne (No One Anymore), it can only 
be from elsewhere that the "it" of the impersonal is heard, an impersonal about 
which I myself formulated the question regarding the id at the appropriate 
time. 1 1 This question, with which the subject punctuates the signifier, does not 
encounter any other echo than the silence of the death drive, a drive that had 
to be involved at some point to provoke the backdrop of depression Melanie 
Klein reconstituted with the genius that guides her in following the thread of 
fantasies. 

Otherwise the question intensifies in the horror of the answer given by an 
Odysseus who is more cunning than the legendary one: a divine Odysseus 
who plays tricks on another Polyphemus (a fine name for the unconscious) 
with superior derision, by getting him to demand to be nothing at the same 
time as he proclaims he is a person [personnel before blinding him by giving 
him an eye. 

///. On the Ideals of the Person 

The ego is this eye, I would say, to stop beating around the bush, unlike 

Lagache who admirably brings out perplexities in his article on the autonomy 

of the ego, which he takes to be intrasystemic, and which is never so manifest 668 

as when it is serving another's law, being subjected to that law in the very act 

of defending against it, by first misrecognizing it. 

This is the labyrinth through which I have always tried to guide my stu- 
dents by providing them with a bird 's-eye view. 

Let us say that, thanks to Lagache 's suggestions, I will have added some- 
thing to it here. 

For my distinction between the space cleared out for the subject without 
him occupying it and the ego that finds lodging in that space, resolves the major- 
ity of the aporias outlined by Lagache, and even explains certain equivoca- 



56o Ecrits 

tions — as, for example, the strangeness Lagache attributes to the unconscious, 
that he knows only occurs when the subject encounters his narcissistic image. 
In light of what I have just said, I will add: when the subject encounters this 
image under conditions that make it appear to him to be usurping his place. 

At the crux of the true resistances we have to deal with in psychoanalysts' 
convoluted theoretical discussions of the ego lies the simple refusal to admit 
that the ego's rightful status in analytic theory is the same as its stains in prac- 
tice: a function of misrecognition. 

This resistance is based on the fact that we clearly have to know something 
about reality in order to survive in it, and that it is obvious in practice that the 
experience that accumulates in the ego, especially in the preconscious, provides 
us landmarks that prove to be the surest for survival. But we forget — and 
shouldn't we be surprised that it is analysts who forget it? — that this argument 
founders when what is at stake is . . . the effects of the unconscious. Now these 
effects extend their influence to the ego itself; indeed, Freud introduced his the- 
ory of the relations between the ego and the id expressly to assert this — thus, 
to extend the field of our ignorance, not of our knowledge. The power of the 
ego that he later revalidated has to do with an entirely different question. 

It is because and insofar as the ego comes to serve in the place left empty 
for the subject, that it cannot help causing there the distortion [distorsion] which 
(translating into English the foundational Entstellung in every drive) has now 
become the basis in our vocabulary for another error: that of believing that 
669 the task of psychoanalysis is to straighten out some sort of curvature of the 

ego. But the distortions [deformations] that impede our progress are not due to 
the greater or lesser thickness of the lens. There always has to be a lens, in 
effect, since the naked eye contains one. It is because the lens comes to occupy 
the place from which the subject can look, and alights on the object-holder 
that is in fact focused on there when the subject looks from elsewhere, that he 
superimposes himself, to the great detriment of the whole, on what can come 
to be ogled there. 

Since it is the exemplary fate of diagrams — insofar as they are geometri- 
cal, that is — to lend themselves to intuitions based on ego-like errors, let us 
begin with what is ineradicably sustained by Freud's rash figuration of the 
relations between the ego and the id, 12 the figuration that I will call the egg 
with an eye. It is famous for cramming skulls, to which it appeals by condensing, 
in a signifier suggestive of some sort of lecithin doping for nutritional pur- 
poses, the metaphor of the embryonic spot in the very bump that is supposed 
to represent differentiation in it ("superficial differentiation," people rejoice 
to think), brought there from the outside world. A geneticism — in which 
Antiquity's lures concerning the knowledge of love are extended for the use 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 56i 

of primates — is thus flattered by the pathways of surprise (in all senses of the 
word) characteristic of the unconscious. 

We need not utterly disdain these lures, however untenable they may be in 
a rigorous science. For they retain their value at the artisanal and folkloric lev- 
els, so to speak. They may even be of considerable use in a bed. They need 
some focusing, however, analytic technique leaving little to be hoped for from 
some sort of natural access to them — Longus' pastoral, Daphnis and Chloe, 
gives some hints in this direction, as do more generally the apprenticeships by 
which the notorious habituses of scholastic psychology are formed. 

Let us finish off this Cyclopean egg. It is but a shell — and the double bar 
that branches off from its curve suffices to indicate its vacuity, along with the 
image of the slit that makes it resemble a piggy-bank, with which I identified 
it earlier. As for the magnifying glass \loupe\ evocative of the lavaterian tumes- 
cence, let us say that it most often strolls around on the inside like a little bell, 670 
allowing for a musical use, generally illustrated by the historical development 
of both literary and scientific psychology. All that is missing is a handle and 
a few frills for us to have the rattle of confirmed madmen, the antidote to 
humanism, recognized since Erasmus' time as giving humanism its savor. 

It is common in our teaching to distinguish what the function of the ego 
imposes on the world in its imaginary projections, from the defense effects 
those projections have by filling the place where judgment is made. 

And after all, hasn't all that been known and repeated since time imme- 
morial? Why would Freud need to add to this indication that a judgment must 
assume the position of repression, if not because repression already occupies 
the position of judgment? When people contest the function I define, follow- 
ing Freud, as Verwerfung (foreclosure), do they think they have refuted me by 
noting that the verb, of which this is the nominal form, is applied to judgment 
in more than one of Freud's texts? It is only the structural locus in which the 
exclusion of a signifier occurs that varies between these proceedings of a fac- 
ulty of judgment that is unified by analytic experience. Here it is in the very 
symphysis of the code with the locus of the Other that lies the chink in exis- 
tence that all the judgments about reality in which psychosis develops are unable 
to fix. 

Let me take the opportunity offered by Lagache 's review of the relations 
between the unconscious and the preconscious, to recall — only to those who 
try to take issue with me on the basis of the link Freud establishes between the 
preconscious system and verbal memories — that we must not confuse the 
recollecting of statements with the structures of enunciation, or Gestalt- 
based links, however invigorated, with the connections [trames] of remem- 
bering. Recall too that if the conditions of representability inflect the 



562 Ecrits 

unconscious according to their imaginary forms, there must be a common 
structure in order for a symbolism, however primitive we assume it to be in 
the unconscious, to be able to be translated — this is its essential feature — into 
a preconscious discourse (see Freud's letter 52 to Fliess, to which I have 
repeatedly referred). 

671 I must now, finally, turn to the masterly distinction Lagache makes between 
the functions of the ideal ego and the ego-ideal. 13 Is it not here that we must 
gauge the well-foundedness of the thesis that guides his study in a personal- 
ist direction? 

If, indeed, psychoanalysis did not in some way transform the problem of 
the "person," why would people try to accommodate its data within a per- 
spective that, after all, has hardly proved its mettle in the real world? 

To point out that the persona is a mask is not to indulge in a simple etymo- 
logical game; it is to evoke the ambiguity of the process by which this notion 
has managed to assume the value of incarnating a unity that is supposedly 
affirmed in being. 

Now, the first datum of our experience shows us that the figure of the mask, 
being split, is not symmetrical. To express this in an image, the figure joins 
together two profiles whose unity is tenable only if the mask remains closed, 
its discordance nevertheless instructing us to open it. But what about being, if 
there is nothing behind it? And if there is only a face, what about the persona? 

Let me note here that in order to differentiate the ideal ego from the ego- 
ideal functionally, if not structurally, Lagache adopts a path he at first rejected, 
that of providing a description of what is "directly observable" in a clinical 
analysis [page 6]. I believe I am staying faithful to the letter of his text, for- 
mulated with an engaging finesse, in paraphrasing him as follows: In a sub- 
ject's relation to the other as an authority, the ego-ideal, obeying the law to 
please, leads the subject to displease himself as the price of obeying the com- 
mandment; the ideal ego, at the risk of displeasing, triumphs only by pleasing 
in spite of the commandment. 

At this point we might expect Lagache to return to what he says about a 
structure "at some distance from experience." For, if we remain at the level of 
the phenomenon, nowhere is the risk of trusting in mirages greater, since one 
can say that, in at least one respect, these agencies present themselves as mirages 

672 in lived experience: the ego-ideal as a model, and the ideal ego as an aspira- 
tion (and to such a significant extent), not to say as a dream. This is certainly 
an occasion to turn for help to what analytic experimentation allows us to con- 
struct by way of a metapsychology. 

If, although Freud distinguishes the terms ego-ideal and ideal ego in an 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation S63 

unmistakable fashion, since the inversion [of adjective and noun] occurs in 
one and the same text, we still cannot distinguish their use in that text, this 
should worry us, for, to the best of our knowledge, Freud was never even 
slightly sloppy in his use of signifiers. Or must we conclude that his topogra- 
phy is not personalist? 

I will skip here what is more or less structural or personalist in the insights 
of Nunberg and Fromm, as well as Fenichel's arbitration — finding what they 
have to say, as is usual in such debates, rather glib, too much so for my taste, 
as you know. 

Instead, I will risk exposing my own insufficiency by informing Lagache 
of something that the excessive demands of our work has prevented from com- 
ing to his attention — namely, the "model" (strictly speaking) with which I 
myself tried, the first year of my seminar at Saint Anne Hospital, to illustrate 
the functioning in the structure of the relations between the ideal ego and the 
ego-ideal. 

It is an optical model that is, of course, sanctioned by Freud 's example, and 
my interest in it can be explained by its affinity with the refractive effects con- 
ditioned by the split between the symbolic and the imaginary. 

Let me begin by introducing a somewhat complicated device, the use value 
of which as a model will depend on analogy, as is the rule in such cases. 

As we know, when an object is placed at the center of curvature of a spher- 
ical mirror, an image is produced that is symmetrical to the object; but what 
is crucial here is that it is a real image. Under certain conditions — like those 
of experiments whose only value lay in a still innocent interest in mastering 
the phenomenon, and which are now relegated to the status of recreational 
physics — this image can be captured by the eye in its reality, without the 
commonly used medium of a screen. This is the case in the so-called inverted 
bouquet illusion, a description of which (to give a serious reference) can be 
found in Optique et photometrie dites geometriques (geometry resurfacing 673 

here) by Bouasse, who is a rather curious figure in the history of the field. 
See page 86 of his book for our object; I will leave for others the gadgets 
described in the same work that are equally thought provoking since they are 
less trivial (4th edition, Delagrave, 1947). You will find below a reproduction 
of the figure provided on page 87 (Figure 1). I will limit my commentary to 
saying that the real bouquet concealed in the box, S, "to add" as Bouasse puts 
it "to one's surprise," seems, to an eye focused on the vase, V, that stands on 
top of the box, to emerge from the neck, A', of the said vase where the image, 
B', appears quite clearly, despite some distortion that the irregular shape of 
the original object should make quite tolerable. 



564 



Ecrits 



FIGURE I 




It should be kept in mind, however, that the illusion only occurs if the eye 
is situated inside the cone, |3B'y, formed by a generatrix joining each point of 
the image, B ', to the circumference of the spherical mirror; and that, since the 
cone of converging rays captured by the eye for each point of the image is 
very small, the image will be more clearly situated in its position the greater its 
distance from the eye. For this distance gives the eye more room for the linear 
displacement that is more useful to it than focusing for locating that position, 
provided the image does not waver too much with the displacement. 

The care I am taking in presenting this device is intended to give consis- 
674 tency to the elements with which I am going to complete it so that it can 

function as a theoretical model. 

With this model and even its optical nature, I am merely following Freud's 
example, except that my model includes nothing to prevent it from being con- 
fused with a schema of anatomical conduction pathways. 

For, as we shall see, the links that will analogically appear here clearly relate 
to (intra)subjective structures as such, representing the relation to the other 
here, and making it possible to distinguish here the twofold impact of the imag- 
inary and the symbolic. I have stressed the importance of this distinction for 
the construction of the subject, once we are forced to conceptualize the sub- 
ject as the subject in which it [fa] can speak, without him knowing anything 
about it (and even about whom we must say that he knows nothing about it 
insofar as he speaks). 

To do so we have to imagine, in accordance with Figure 2, firstly, that the 
vase is inside the box and that its real image comes to enclose with its neck the 
bouquet of flowers that is already mounted on top of the box; the bouquet will 
play the role of a prop for a possible eye to focus on, a prop that is, as I just 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache's Presentation 



565 



indicated, necessary to produce the illusion, which should now be called the 
inverted vase illusion. We have to imagine, secondly, that an observer — placed 
somewhere in the device, say, among the flowers themselves or, for the sake 
of clarity, on the edge of the spherical mirror, but in any case outside of the 
cone in which the real image can be seen (this is why the real image is not rep- 
resented in Figure 2) — tries to bring about the illusion by placing a plane mir- 
ror in position A; for this plane mirror can provide a virtual image of the real 
image, without bending the laws of optics. 



675 



FIGURE 2 



<^ \^ Mirror /'" 





Now in order for the subject, $ , to see this image in mirror A, it suffices to 
have his own image (in the virtual space engendered by the mirror, and with- 
out it being necessary that he see his image, for he might be outside the field 
orthogonal to the mirror's surface; see Figure 2 and the dotted line, #S) come, 
in real space (to which the virtual space engendered by a plane mirror corre- 
sponds point for point), to be situated inside the cone that delimits the possi- 
bility of the illusion (the field x'y' in Figure 2). 

The play of this model partly overlaps the function of misrecognition that 
my conception of the mirror stage locates at the crux of ego formation. It allows 
us to state it in what might be termed a generalized form by better linking to 
the structure the effects of the child's assumption of his specular image — as I 
considered it justified to interpret those effects in the jubilatory moment in 
which that assumption electively occurs, between the ages of 6 and 18 months, 
basing them on a perceptual prematuration inscribed in a discordance in neu- 
rological development. 

The relations between the images, i'(a) and i(a)^ in my model are not to 
be taken literally in their optical subordination, but as propping up an analo- 
gous imaginary subordination. 



566 Ecrits 

For in i'(a), there is not simply what the subject of the model expects to 
find there, but already a form of the other whose power, no less than the play 
of bearing relations that begin there, inserts it as a principle of false mastery 
and fundamental alienation into a synthesis that requires a very different ade- 
quation. 

It is in order to represent the conditions of this latter, in their theoretical 
anteriority, that I have placed the illusion of the image, i(a), at the beginning 
of my model. 
676 If this image in fact involves a subjectification, it is, in the first place, through 

the pathways of autoconduction figured in the model by the reflection in the 
spherical mirror (which can be taken roughly as depicting some global corti- 
cal function). And what the model also indicates with the vase hidden in the 
box is the scant access the subject has to the reality of this body, which he loses 
inside himself, at the limit where — a fold of layers that coalesce with his enve- 
lope, stitching themselves around the orifice rings — he imagines it to be like 
a glove that can be turned inside out. There are body techniques where the 
subject tries to awaken in his consciousness a configuration of this obscure 
intimacy. The analytic process, being far removed from such techniques, scands 
the libidinal progress with accents that bear on the body as a container and on 
its orifices. 

Contemporary analysis, more particularly, links the maturation of this 
progress to something that it designates as object-relations; I emphasize their 
guiding function when I represent them by the flowers, a, in my model — that 
is, by the very objects the subject focuses on in order to perceive the image, 
i(a). 

But such a model can also help us avoid the biases toward which the most 
common conceptions of these relations tend. For, acting as a parable, it allows 
us to indicate the dearth of naturalness involved in a vase-neck's grasp (imag- 
inary, moreover) on elements — flower stems — the bundle of which is com- 
pletely indeterminate in both its link and its diversity. 

The notion of part-object seems to me to be the most accurate discovery 
analysis has made here, but it made it at the cost of postulating an ideal total- 
ization of this object, thereby losing the benefit of the discovery. 

It does not thus seem self-evident to me that the fragmentation of rela- 
tional functions, which I have articulated as primordial in the mirror stage, 
is a guarantee that synthesis will continue to grow as the tendencies evolve. 
Menenius Agrippa's fable has always seemed to me to show — whatever the 
success of his sweet-talk — that a harmony that is presumed to be organic, in 
ordering desires, has sold well in all eras. I do not believe Freud emancipated 
our views on sexuality and its aims so that analysis could add its own mumbo 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 56y 

jumbo to moralists' secular efforts to bring man's desires back to the norms 677 

of his needs. 

At any rate, the antinomy of the images, i(a) and i'(a)^ being situated for 
the subject in the imaginary, resolves into a constant transitivism. A sort of ego- 
ideal-ego is thus produced, whose boundaries (in Federn's sense) are to be taken 
as propping up uncertainty and allowing for rectification, as perpetuating the 
equivocation of different circumscriptions that vary according to their status, 
and even as accepting free zones and isolated fiefs into their complex. 

What is striking to me is that psychoanalysis, which operates in the sym- 
bolic — and this is indisputable if it proceeds by conquering the unconscious, 
bringing history into being, and reconstructing the signifier, assuming one 
does not simply deny that its medium is speech — is able to reshape an ego that 
is thus constituted in its imaginary status. 

Although the phenomenon of vanishing (I call it "fading"*) that Lagache 
attributes to the subject-ego [page 17] seems noteworthy to me here, I do not 
confine my attention, as he does, to refinding therein the direction of an abstract 
noesis; rather, I connote the phenomenon by the structural effect with which 
I try to constitute the subject's place in the elision of a signifier. 

The ego-ideal is a formation that comes to this symbolic place. This is why 
it is based on the ego's unconscious coordinates. Freud developed his second 
topography to explain this, as is perfectly clear from reading it, as is the fact 
that he did not develop it to pave the way for a return of the autonomous ego. 

For the question he raises in Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego 
is how an object, reduced to its stupidest reality, but functioning for a cer- 
tain number of subjects as a common denominator (confirming what I will 
say momentarily about its function as an insignia), can bring about an iden- 
tification of the ideal ego with the very moronic power of misadventure that 
the ideal ego turns out to be at its core. Need I mention, to convey the scope 
of the question, the figure of the Fuhrer and the collective phenomena that 
have given Freud 's text its value of clairvoyance into the very heart of civ- 
ilization? Indeed I need do so, since, in a comedic reversal of what Freud 
wanted to contribute by way of a remedy to civilization's discontents, the 678 

very community to which he bequeathed this remedial task has proclaimed 
the synthesis of a strong ego as a watchword, at the heart of a technique in 
which the practitioner believes that he obtains results by incarnating this ideal 
himself. 

Be that as it may, these two examples are not designed to banish the func- 
tion of speech from the determinants we are seeking for the higher jurisdic- 
tion [7*^07?] of subjectification. 

As you know, I designate this jurisdiction of speech in my topology as the 



568 Ecrits 

Other (connoted by a capital^). Corresponding to this locus in my model is 
the real space on which are superimposed the virtual images "behind the mir- 
ror" — that is, mirror A (whether we adopt the convention of having the sub- 
ject accede to this space by free displacement, or, if the mirror is unsilvered 
and thus transparent to his gaze, by adjusting his position there to some I). 

It would be a mistake to think that the Other (with a capital 0) of discourse 
can be absent from any distance that the subject achieves in his relationship 
with the other, the other (with a lowercase o) of the imaginary dyad. 
Lagache's attempt to provide a personalist translation of Freud's second 
topography, while it certainly cannot be exhaustive in my view, is still less equal 
to the task because it is content to take the distance between two reciprocal 
terms as the medium of intersubjectivity on which its principle is based. 

For the Other where discourse is situated, which is always latent in the tri- 
angulation that consecrates this distance, is not latent as long as it extends all 
the way to the purest moment of the specular relation: to the gesture by which 
the child at the mirror turns toward the person who is carrying him and appeals 
with a look to this witness; the latter decants the child's recognition of the 
image, by verifying it, from the jubilant assumption in which it [elle] certainly 
already was. 

But this "already" should not mislead us as to the structure of the presence 
evoked as a third party here: it owes nothing to the anecdotal personage who 
incarnates it. 

All that subsists here is the being whose advent can only be grasped by no 
longer being. This is how the most ambiguous tense in the morphology of 
French verbs, the imperfect, encounters that being. // etait la [He was to be 
there] contains the same duplicity we find in Un moment plus tard> la bombe 
eclatait [The bomb was to explode a moment later], where, without any con- 
text, we cannot know whether the event occurred or not. 
679 This being is nevertheless posited with the grounding anteriority that it is 

assured by discourse, in that reserve of attributes in which I say that the sub- 
ject must make room for himself. 

If our contemporary analysts misrecognize, along with this dimension, the 
experience they inherited from Freud — finding nothing in it but a pretext for 
renewing a form of geneticism that is always and inescapably the same, since 
it is erroneous — their sin is revealed by the sole resurgence in their theories 
of old stigmata, such as the notorious cenesthesia, in which we see the lack of 
the third point in what is never anything but lame recourse to noesis. But it 
seems that they can never learn anything when they even fail to acknowledge 
the blow dealt to their idea of development by what is known as "hospital- 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache's Presentation 56$ 

ism," in which mothering attentions are clearly seen to have no other defi- 
ciency than the anonymity with which they are meted out. 

But how can the earliest subject refind this place in the elision that consti- 
tutes it as absence? How can he recognize this void as the Thing that is clos- 
est to him, even if he were to deepen it again in the Other's bosom by making 
his cry resound there? He will prefer, rather, to refind there the marks of 
response that had the power to turn his cry into a call. These marks, in which 
the all-powerfulness of the response are inscribed, are thus circled in reality 
with the signifier's line [trait]. It is not without reason that these realities are 
called "insignias." The term is nominative here. It is the constellation of these 
insignias that constitutes the subject's ego-ideal. 

My model shows that it is by situating himself at I that he can tilt mirror A 
to obtain, among other effects, a certain mirage of the ideal ego. 

This is precisely how the neurotic handles the Other in order to constantly 
renew his sketchy identifications in the wild transference that legitimates our 
use of the term "transference neuroses." 

This is not the whole of the neurotic's subjective mainspring, and I will say 
why. But we can use my model to question him regarding what becomes of 
this handling of the Other in psychoanalysis itself. 

Without harboring any illusions as to the import of an exercise that carries 
weight only by virtue of a crude analogy to the phenomena it allows us to 680 

evoke, I propose in Figure 3 an idea of what happens when the Other is an 
analyst, the subject making him into the locus of his speech. 

Since analysis is based on what the subject gains from assuming [assumer] 
his unconscious discourse as his own, its trajectory corresponds in the model 
to a translation of $ to the signifiers of the space "behind the mirror." The 
function of the model is then to depict how mirror relations — that is, the 
imaginary relation to the other and the [visual] capture involved in the ideal 
ego — drag the subject into the field where he hypostasizes himself in the 
ego-ideal. 

Without entering into a degree of detail that might seem exaggerated, one 
could say that by progressively effacing itself until it is at a 90-degree angle 
from where it started, the Other, as mirror A, can, through an almost double 
rotation, lead the subject from $ to occupy position $ at I, a position which 
gave him only virtual access to the inverted vase illusion in Figure 2. In this 
movement, however, the illusion fades along with the quest that it guides, con- 
firming that the effects of depersonalization observed in analysis, in more or 
less discrete forms, should be considered less as signs of a limit than of a break- 
through [franchissement]. 



5yo 



Ecrits 



figure 3 




68 1 For the model again shows that, once the eye, $, has reached position I, 

from which it directly perceives the inverted vase illusion, it also sees, in the 
now horizontal mirror A, a virtual image of the same vase, i '(a), inverting the 
real image anew, as it were, and opposing it, like its reflection in water 
(whether still or moving) gives dream roots to a tree. 

We have here the interplay of bank and waters that, let us note, delighted 
pre-classical mannerism, from Tristan l'Hermite to Cyrano, not without 
unconscious motives, for poetry was merely anticipating the revolution of the 
subject, which was signaled in philosophy by the raising of existence to the 
function of first attribute, not without producing its effects on the basis of a 
new science, politics, and society. 

Can't the artistic indulgences that accompanied it be explained by the value 
given in the same era to the artifices of anamorphosis? — that is, of the exis- 
tential divorce in which the body vanishes in spatiality, those artifices that 
instate in the very prop of perspective a hidden image, reevoking the substance 
that was lost there. Were my model realizable, it would be amusing to note 
that the real jar in its box (where the reflection from mirror A alights) con- 
tains the imaginary flowers, a ', whereas it is the inverted jar illusion (made of 
a realer image) that contains the true flowers, a. 

What the model thus depicts is a state Michael Balint describes as the nar- 
cissistic effusion that, in his opinion, signals the end of an analysis. His descrip- 
tion of it would have been better had he noted an analogous crisscrossing in 
it: one in which the individual's very specular presence to the other, although 
it covers his reality, uncovers his ego-related illusion regarding a conscious- 
ness of the body as frozen, while the power of object a — which, at the end of 
all these machinations, centers this consciousness — reduces his reflection in 
the objects a ' of omnivalent competition to the status of vanities. 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 5yi 

According to Michael Balint, in the state of elation that results, the patient 
believes he has exchanged his ego for his analyst's ego. Let us hope, for his 
sake, that nothing of the kind has happened. 

For even if it is the terminus of the analysis, it is not analysis' end, and even 
if we see here the end of the means the analysis has employed, they are not the 
means by which to reach its end. 

Which is to say that my model dates back to a preliminary stage of my teach- 682 

ing at which I needed to clear away the imaginary which was overvalued in 
analytic technique. We are no longer at that stage. 

I draw people 's attention back to desire, which, far more authentically than 
any ideal-based quest, regulates the neurotic's signifying repetition as well as 
his metonymy, as people tend to forget. This is not the place for me to say how 
he has to maintain this desire as unsatisfied (the hysteric) or as impossible (the 
obsessive). 

For my model fails to shed light on object a. In depicting a play of images, 
it cannot describe the function this object receives from the symbolic. 

This function gives it the role of an arm at the phobic outpost, an arm against 
the threat of desire's disappearance, and the role of a fetish in perverse struc- 
ture, as the absolute condition of desire. 

At the point of departure where my model situates it, a, the object of desire, 
is from the moment it begins to function there . . . the object of desire. This 
means that, while it is a partial object, it is not merely a part, or a spare part 
[piece detackee] of the device that depicts the body here, but an element of the 
structure from the outset, and, so to speak, in the initial deal of the cards for 
the game that is then played out. Being selected as the index of desire from 
among the body's appendages, object a is already the exponent of a function, 
a function that sublimates it even before it exercises the function; this function 
is that of the index raised toward an absence about which the "it" [e-yr-ce] has 
nothing to say, if not that this absence comes from where it speaks [fa park]. 

This is why, when reflected in the mirror, it not only gives us a ', the stan- 
dard of exchange, the currency with which the other's desire enters the circuit 
of the ideal ego's transitivisms. It is also restored to the field of the Other, 
serving the function of desire 's exponent in the Other. 

This is what allows it to take on its elective value at the true terminus of 
analysis, by figuring, in the fundamental fantasy, that before which the sub- 
ject sees himself being abolished when he realizes himself as desire. 

In order for the subject to accede to this point beyond the reduction of the 
ideals of the person, it is as desire's object a, as what he was to the Other in 
his erection as a living being, as wanted* or unwanted* when he came into the 
world, that he is called to be reborn in order to know if he wants what he 



5y2 Ecrits 

desires . . . This is the kind of truth Freud brought to light with the invention 
of analysis. 

683 It is a field in which the subject has, above all, to do a lot personally to pay 
the steep ransom for his desire. This is why psychoanalysis calls for an over- 
hauling of ethics. 

It is clear, on the contrary, that to flee this task, analysts are prepared to 
abandon virtually everything, and even to treat problems the subject has assum- 
ing his sex in terms of sex roles, as we now see being done in Freudian circles. 

The O function of the lost signifier, to which the subject sacrifices his phal- 
lus, the form O(cz) of male desire and $.cp of woman's desire, lead us to the end 
of analysis, the aporia of which Freud bequeathed us with [the concept of] cas- 
tration. The fact that Lagache does not include the latter's effect in his field 
suffices to demonstrate the limits of what we can comprehend of the subject 
of the unconscious in personalist terms. 14 

IV. Toward an Ethics 

I saved the structure of the superego for my conclusion. This is because we can 
only discuss it by examining the Freudian discovery more broadly, namely, from 
the vantage point of existence. We must realize the extent to which the advent 
of the subject who speaks banishes the subject of knowledge — whose status as 
a person was called into question long ago, as the notion of the agent intellect 
suffices to remind us. I am not, I might remark, the one who is responsible for 
bringing people back to the crossroads of practical reason. 

If Kant's proposition — that there are but two instances in which the sub- 
ject can see the heteronomy of his being figured, provided he contemplates 
them "with wonder and respect," which are "the starry sky above him and the 
moral law within him" — is confirmed here, the conditions under which this 
contemplation is possible have nevertheless changed. 

The infinite spaces have paled behind little letters that more surely prop up 
the equation of the universe; and the only beings we are willing to grant any 
say in the matter, apart from our scientists, are other inhabitants who might 

684 send us signs of intelligence — which is why the silence of these spaces no longer 
frightens us in any way. 

It is also why we have begun dumping our garbage in them, intending to 
make these spaces into the landfills that have been the very hallmark of our 
"hominization" of the planet since prehistoric times — oh, Teilhard the pale- 
ontologist, had you forgotten this? 

The same goes for the moral law, and for the same reason that makes us shift 
from language to speech. It also makes us discover that the superego, in its inti- 



Remarks on Daniel Lagache 's Presentation 5ys 

mate imperative, is indeed "the voice of conscience," that is, a voice first and 
foremost, a vocal one at that, and without any authority other than that of being 
a loud voice: the voice that at least one text in the Bible tells us was heard by 
the people parked around Mount Sinai. This artifice even suggests that its enun- 
ciation echoed back to them their own murmur, the Tables of the Law being 
nonetheless necessary in order for them to know what it enunciated. 

Now, for those who know how to read, what is written on those tables is 
nothing but the laws of Speech itself. In other words, the person truly begins 
with the persona, but where does personality begin? An ethics arises, which 
is converted to silence, not by way of fear, but of desire; and the question is 
how analysis' pathway of chatter leads to it. 

I will remain silent here regarding its practical direction. 

But, theoretically speaking, can its goal be to bring the ego to the fore 
[engagement du Moi]? And what can be expected of it, if its possibilities, to 
use Lagache 's term, only offer the subject the overly indeterminate exit that 
diverts him from an overly difficult pathway, the one from which we might 
think it has always been the political secret of moralists to incite the subject to 
remove [degager] something — his stakes from the game of desire? In this game, 
humanism is no longer anything but a dilettante 's profession. 

Does noscit, he knows, come from an elision of ignoscit, which etymology 
shows us to have but a false prefix, and which, moreover, does not mean a 
non-knowledge, but rather the forgetting that consummates forgiveness? 

Would nescit, to alter but a single letter in it, lead us to suspect that the only 
negation it contains is retroactively (nachtraglich) feigned? What does it mat- 
ter, since, like the negations whose constancy we found laughable in meta- 
physical objects, this one is but a mask — a mask of first persons. 

Notes 

1. Especially in my seminar this academic 3. [Added in 1966:] " The psychological field 
year, 1 959- 1 960, on the ethics of psychoanaly- is the set of relations between the organism and 
sis [Seminar VII, 145-46/120-21]. its entourage. [. . .] There is no organism that 

2. [Added in 1966:] "Today, anthropology is not in a situation, nor is there a situation 
is structuralist. One of its major characteristics except for an organism. This necessity is, in the 
is the promotion of the category of 'set,' oiuni- final analysis, geometrical." In Lagache, "La 
tas multiplex [...]. We begin with the idea that psychanalyse et la structure de la personnal- 
we are not dealing with isolated elements or ite," 5. 

with sums of elements, but rather with sets 4. At a symposium on structure, held under 

whose parts are themselves structured." Daniel the auspices of Mr. Bastide. 

Lagache, "La psychanalyse et la structure de la 5. [Added in 1966:] If we are to believe these 

personnalite" (paper given at the Royaumont authors, Freud, in his second model of the psy- 

Colloquium, July 10-13, 1958), published in La che, "took as his criterion the function of sys- 

Psychanalyse 6 ( 1 96 1 ) : 5. terns or substructures in conflict, and the model 



574 



Ecrits 



which inspired him was physiology; the role of 
structural concepts was to favor causal expla- 
nations, and if they are among our most valu- 
able tools, it is because they are situated within 
a genetic context." 

6. [Added in 1966:] "The notion of primal 
differentiation is preferable to that of non- 
differentiation. [It] is demonstrated by the exis- 
tence of systems that assure the subject a 
minimum of autonomy: perceptual, motor, and 
memory systems, and discharge thresholds for 
needs and affects. [W]ithout existing as a cog- 
nitive structure, the subject functions and actu- 
alizes himself successively in the needs that 
awaken and motivate him. [. . .] These func- 
tional object relations are not structured, in the 
sense that the subject and the object are not dif- 
ferentiated." Lagache, "La psychanalyse et la 
structure de la personnalite," 15-16. 

7. The Thing {das Ding) here is antedated, 
having been introduced only in my seminar 
this past year, 1959-1960. But this is why the 
mustard jar offered all the guarantees of 



incomprehension I needed in order to have it 
out with it. 

8. It is with this question that I initiated my 
examination of the ethics of psychoanalysis this 
year, 1959-1960. 

9. See Ecrits 1966, 708. 

10. See Ecrits 1966, 793-827. 

1 1 . In a talk in memory of the centennial of 
Freud's birth, published as "The Freudian 
Thing"; see Ecrits 1966, 401-36 [especially 
417]. 

12. The illustration is found in GJ^XIII, 
252 [SE XIX, 24]. Examined carefully, it con- 
firms my view of Freud's aims in attending to 
the ego in the second topography. 

13. "[T]he antinomy between the ideal ego 
and the superego /ego-ideal, between narcis- 
sistic identification with omnipotence and sub- 
mission to omnipotence," in Lagache, "La 
psychanalyse et la structure de la personnal- 
ite," 46. 

14. [Added in 1966:] See "Position of the 
Unconscious" in Ecrits 1966, 830-50. 



The Signification of the Phallus 685 

Die Bedeutung des Phallus 

The following is the unaltered text of a lecture I gave in German on May 9, 
1958, at the Max Planck Society in Munich, having been invited to speak there 
by Professor Paul Matussek. 

If one has any notion of the mentality then prevalent in not otherwise 
uninformed circles, one can imagine how my use of terms that I was the first 
to extract from Freud's work, such as "the other scene" (to cite one men- 
tioned here), must have resounded. 

If deferred action {Nachtrag), to take back another of these terms from 
the domain of the highbrow literati where they now circulate, makes this 
effort impracticable, it should be realized that they were unheard of at that 
time. 



We know that the unconscious castration complex functions as a knot: 

( 1 ) in the dynamic structuring of symptoms, in the analytic sense of the term, 
in other words, in the dynamic structuring of what is analyzable in the 
neuroses, perversions, and psychoses; 

(2) in regulating the development that gives its ratio to this first role: namely, 
the instating in the subject of an unconscious position without which he 
could not identify with the ideal type of his sex or even answer the needs 
of his partner in sexual relations without grave risk, much less appropri- 
ately meet the needs of the child who may be produced thereby. 

There is an antinomy here that is internal to the assumption [assomption] 
by man (Mensch) of his sex: why must he assume the attributes of that sex only 
through a threat or even in the guise of a deprivation? In Civilisation and Its 
Discontents, Freud, as we know, went so far as to suggest not a contingent but 
an essential disturbance of human sexuality, and one of his last articles con- 
cerns the irreducibility — in any finite (endliche) analysis — of the aftermath 
of the castration complex in the masculine unconscious and oiPenisneid [penis 
envy] in woman's unconscious. 

This is not the only aporia, but it is the first that Freudian experience and 686 

the metapsychology that resulted from it introduced into our experience of 
man. It cannot be solved by reducing things to biological data; the very neces- 



5j6 Ecrits 

sity of the myth underlying the structuring brought on by the Oedipus com- 
plex demonstrates this sufficiently. 

It would be mere artifice to invoke in this case some inherited forgotten 
experience, not only because such an experience is in itself debatable, but 
because it leaves the problem unsolved: what is the link between killing the 
father and the pact of the primordial law, if we include here the fact that cas- 
tration is the punishment for incest? 

It is only on the basis of clinical facts that the discussion can be fruitful. 
These facts reveal a relation between the subject and the phallus that forms 
without regard to the anatomical distinction between the sexes and that is thus 
especially difficult to interpret in the case of women and with respect to women, 
particularly as concerns the following four points: 

(1) why a little girl considers herself, even for a moment, to be castrated, in 
the sense of deprived of a phallus, by someone whom she at first identi- 
fies as her mother — an important point — and then as her father, but in 
such a way that one must recognize therein a transference in the analytic 
sense of the term; 

(2) why, more primordially, both sexes consider the mother to be endowed 
with a phallus, that is, to be a phallic mother; 

(3) why, correlatively, the signification of castration in fact takes on its (clin- 
ically manifest) full weight in the formation of symptoms only on the basis 
of its discovery as the mother's castration; 

(4) these three problems lead, finally, to the why and wherefore of the "phal- 
lic phase" in development. Freud, as we know, uses this term to refer to 
the first genital maturation insofar as, on the one hand, it would seem to 
be characterized by the imaginary dominance of the phallic attribute and 
by masturbatory jouissance and, on the other, he localizes this jouissance 
in the case of women in the clitoris, which is thus raised to the function 
of the phallus. He thus seems to exclude in both sexes any instinctual map- 

687 ping of the vagina as the site of genital penetration until the end of this 

phase, that is, until the dissolution of the Oedipus complex. 

This ignorance smacks of misrecognition in the technical sense of the 
term — all the more so in that it is sometimes fabricated. Could it correspond 
to anything other than the fable in which Longus depicts Daphnis and Chloe 's 
initiation as dependent upon the explanations of an old woman? 

This is what has led certain authors to regard the phallic phase as the effect 
of a repression, and the function assumed in it by the phallic object as a symp- 
tom. The problem begins when one asks, which symptom? Phobia, says one, 



The Signification of the Phallus 5yy 

perversion, says another, and sometimes the same person says both. In the lat- 
ter case, the quandary is evident: not that interesting transmutations of the 
object of a phobia into a fetish do not occur, but if they are interesting it is pre- 
cisely owing to their different places in the structure. It would be pointless to 
ask these authors to formulate this difference from the perspectives currently 
in favor that go by the name of "object relations." For on this subject they 
have no other reference than the approximate notion of part-object, which has 
never been subjected to criticism since Karl Abraham introduced it. This is 
unfortunate given the comfort it offers analysts today. 

The fact remains that the now abandoned discussion of the phallic phase, 
if one rereads the surviving texts from 1928—32, is refreshing for the example 
it sets of doctrinal passion — making one nostalgic, given psychoanalysis' 
decline following its American transplantation. 

Were one to merely summarize the debate, one could but distort the 
authentic diversity of positions taken up by Helene Deutsch, Karen Horney, 
and Ernest Jones, to mention only the most eminent. 

The series of three articles Jones devoted to the subject is especially sug- 
gestive — if only for the first sighting on which he built, which is signaled by 
the term he introduced: "aphanisis." For in raising, quite rightly, the problem 
of the relation between castration and desire, he demonstrates his inability to 
recognize what he nevertheless closes in on so nearly that the term, which will 
soon provide us with the key, seems to emerge in his work due to its very absence. 

Particularly amusing is the way he manages to extract from the very letter 
of Freud's text a position that is strictly contrary to it: a true model in a diffi- 688 

cult genre. 

Yet the question refuses to let itself be dodged, seeming to scoff at Jones' 
plea to reestablish the equality of natural rights (doesn't it push him to the point 
where he closes with the Biblical "Male and female created He them"?). What 
does he, in fact, gain by normalizing the function of the phallus as a part-object 
if he has to invoke its presence in the mother's body as an "internal object," a 
term based on fantasies revealed by Melanie Klein, and if he becomes still more 
unable to separate himself from her views, relating these fantasies to the recur- 
rence, as far back as earliest infancy, of the Oedipal formation? 

We will not be led astray if we reexamine the question by asking what could 
have led Freud to his obviously paradoxical position. For one has to admit that 
he was better guided than anyone in his recognition of the order of uncon- 
scious phenomena, of which he was the inventor, and that, in the absence of 
an adequate articulation of the nature of these phenomena, his followers were 
destined to lose their way to a greater or lesser degree. 

It is on the basis of this wager — which I place at the crux of the commen- 



5j8 Ecrits 

tary on Freud's work I have been pursuing for seven years — that I have been 
led to certain results: first and foremost, to promote the notion of the signifier 
as necessary to any articulation of the analytic phenomenon, insofar as it is 
opposed to that of the signified in modern linguistic analysis. Freud could not 
have taken into account modern linguistics, which postdates him, but I would 
maintain that Freud 's discovery stands out precisely because, in setting out from 
a domain in which one could not have expected to encounter linguistics' reign, 
it had to anticipate its formulations. Conversely, it is Freud's discovery that 
gives the signifier /signified opposition its full scope: for the signifier plays an 
active role in determining the effects by which the signifiable appears to suc- 
cumb to its mark, becoming, through that passion, the signified. 

This passion of the signifier thus becomes a new dimension of the human 
condition in that it is not only man who speaks, but in man and through man 
689 that it \$a\ speaks; in that his nature becomes woven by effects in which the 

structure of the language of which he becomes the material can be refound; 
and in that the relation of speech thus resonates in him, beyond anything that 
could have been conceived of by the psychology of ideas. 

In this sense one can say that the consequences of the discovery of the uncon- 
scious have not yet been so much as glimpsed in analytic theory, although its 
impact has been felt in analytic praxis more than we realize, even if only in the 
form of people beating a retreat from it. 

Let me make it clear that my emphasis on man's relation to the signifier as 
such has nothing to do with a "culturalist" position, in the ordinary sense of 
the term — the position Karen Horney, for example, anticipated in the debate 
over the phallus, a position Freud described as feminist. It is not man's rela- 
tionship to language as a social phenomenon that is at issue, nor even anything 
resembling the ideological psychogenesis we are familiar with which is not 
superseded by peremptory recourse to the thoroughly metaphysical notion — 
with its question-begging appeal to the concrete — that derisively goes by the 
name of affect. 

What is at issue is to refind — in the laws that govern this other scene (ein 
anderer Schauplati), which Freud, on the subject of dreams, designates as the 
scene of the unconscious — the effects that are discovered at the level of the 
chain of materially unstable elements that constitutes language: effects that are 
determined by the double play of combination and substitution in the signi- 
fier, according to the two axes for generating the signified, metonymy and 
metaphor; effects that are determinant in instituting the subject. In the 
process, a topology, in the mathematical sense of the term, appears, without 
which one soon realizes that it is impossible to even note the structure of a 
symptom in the analytic sense of the term. 



The Signification of the Phallus 5j9 

It speaks in the Other, I say, designating by "Other" the very locus evoked 
by recourse to speech in any relation in which such recourse plays a part. If it 
speaks in the Other, whether or not the subject hears it with his ear, it is because 
it is there that the subject finds his signifying place in a way that is logically 
prior to any awakening of the signified. The discovery of what it articulates 
in that place, that is, in the unconscious, enables us to grasp at the price of what 
splitting (Spaltung) he has thus been constituted. 

The phallus can be better understood on the basis of its function here. In 690 

Freudian doctrine, the phallus is not a fantasy, if we are to view fantasy as an 
imaginary effect. Nor is it as such an object (part-, internal, good, bad, etc.) 
inasmuch as "object" tends to gauge the reality involved in a relationship. Still 
less is it the organ — penis or clitoris — that it symbolizes. And it is no accident 
that Freud adopted as a reference the simulacrum it represented to the Ancients. 

For the phallus is a signifier, a signifier whose function, in the intrasubjec- 
tive economy of analysis, may lift the veil from the function it served in the 
mysteries. For it is the signifier that is destined to designate meaning effects 
as a whole, insofar as the signifier conditions them by its presence as signifier. 

Let us thus examine the effects of this presence. They include, first, a devi- 
ation of man's needs due to the fact that he speaks: to the extent that his needs 
are subjected to demand, they come back to him in an alienated form. This is 
not the effect of his real dependence (one should not expect to find here the 
parasitic conception represented by the notion of dependency in the theory of 
neurosis), but rather of their being put into signifying form as such and of the 
fact that it is from the Other's locus that his message is emitted. 

What is thus alienated in needs constitutes an Urverdrdngung [primal 
repression], as it cannot, hypothetically, be articulated in demand; it never- 
theless appears in an offshoot that presents itself in man as desire {das 
Begehren). The phenomenology that emerges from analytic experience is cer- 
tainly of a kind to demonstrate the paradoxical, deviant, erratic, eccentric, and 
even scandalous nature of desire that distinguishes it from need. This fact is 
all too clear not to have been obvious to moralists worthy of the name since 
time immemorial, and the Freudianism of earlier days seemed obliged to give 
it its full status. Paradoxically, however, psychoanalysis now finds itself at the 
head of an age-old obscurantism that is even more boring as it denies this fact 
due to its ideal of theoretically and practically reducing desire to need. 

That is why I must articulate this status here, beginning with demand, the 
specific characteristics of which are eluded in the notion of frustration (a notion 
Freud never used). 

Demand in itself bears on something other than the satisfactions it calls for. 
It is demand for a presence or an absence. This is what the primordial rela- 691 



58o Ecrits 

tionship with the mother manifests, replete as it is with that Other who must 
be situated shy o/the needs that Other can fulfill. Demand already constitutes 
the Other as having the "privilege" of satisfying needs, that is, the power to 
deprive them of what alone can satisfy them. The Other's privilege here thus 
outlines the radical form of the gift of what the Other does not have — namely, 
what is known as its love. 

In this way, demand annuls (aufhebt) the particularity of everything that 
can be granted, by transmuting it into a proof of love, and the very satisfac- 
tions demand obtains for need are debased (sich erniedrigt) to the point of being 
no more than the crushing brought on by the demand for love (all of which is 
perfectly apparent in the psychology of early child-care, which our ana- 
lyst/nannies have latched on to). 

It is necessary, then, that the particularity thus abolished reappear beyond 
demand. And in fact it does reappear there, but it preserves the structure con- 
cealed in the unconditionality of the demand for love. By a reversal that is not 
simply a negation of the negation, the power of pure loss emerges from the 
residue of an obliteration. For the unconditionality of demand, desire substi- 
tutes the "absolute" condition: this condition in fact dissolves the element in 
the proof of love that rebels against the satisfaction of need. This is why desire 
is neither the appetite for satisfaction nor the demand for love, but the differ- 
ence that results from the subtraction of the first from the second, the very 
phenomenon of their splitting (Spaltung). 

One can see how a sexual relationship occupies this closed field of desire 
and plays out its fate there. This is because it is the field designed for the pro- 
duction of the enigma that this relationship gives rise to in the subject by dou- 
bly "signifying" it to him: the return of the demand it gives rise to, in the form 
of a demand concerning the subject of need; and the ambiguity presented con- 
cerning the Other in question in the proof of love that is demanded. The gap 
constituted by this enigma avers what determines it, namely, to put it as sim- 
ply and clearly as possible, that for each of the partners in the relationship, 
both the subject and the Other, it is not enough to be subjects of need or objects 
of love — they must hold the place of the cause of desire. 

This truth lies at the heart of all the defects found in the psychoanalytic 
field regarding sexual life. It also constitutes the condition of the subject's hap- 
692 piness there; and to disguise its gap by assuming that the virtue of the "geni- 

tal" will resolve it through the maturation of tenderness (that is to say, solely 
by recourse to the Other as reality), however pious the intent may be, is 
nonetheless fraudulent. It should be pointed out here that French analysts, with 
their hypocritical notion of genital oblativity, set a moralizing tone which, to 
the strains of Salvation Army bands, is pervading the entire landscape. 



The Signification of the Phallus 58 1 

In any case, man cannot aim at being whole (at the "total personality," 
another premise with which modern psychotherapy veers off course), once 
the play of displacement and condensation to which he is destined in the exer- 
cise of his functions marks his relation, as a subject, to the signifier. 

The phallus is the privileged signifier of this mark in which the role [part] 
of Logos is wedded to the advent of desire. 

One could say that this signifier is chosen as the most salient of what can 
be grasped in sexual intercourse [copulation] as real, as well as the most sym- 
bolic, in the literal (typographical) sense of the term, since it is equivalent in 
intercourse to the (logical) copula. One could also say that, by virtue of its 
turgidity, it is the image of the vital flow as it is transmitted in generation. 

All of these remarks still merely veil the fact that it can play its role only 
when veiled, that is, as itself a sign of the latency with which any signifiable 
is struck, once it is raised (aufgehoberi) to the function of signifier. 

The phallus is the signifier of this very Aufhebung, which it inaugurates 
(initiates) by its disappearance. That is why the demon of AiSooc; (Scham) 1 
springs forth at the very moment the phallus is unveiled in the ancient mys- 
teries (see the famous painting in the Villa of the Mysteries in Pompeii). 

It then becomes the bar with which the demon's hand strikes the signified, 
marking it as the bastard offspring of its signifying concatenation. 

A condition of complementarity is thus produced in the instating of the 
subject by the signifier, which explains his Spaltung and the interventionist 
movement in which it is completed. 

Namely: 693 

(1) that the subject designates his being only by barring everything it signi- 
fies, as is seen in the fact that he wants to be loved for himself, a mirage 
that is not dispelled by simply pointing out that it is grammatical (since it 
abolishes discourse); 

(2) that the part of this being that is alive in the urverdrangt [primally 
repressed] finds its signifier by receiving the mark of the phallus's Ver- 
drangung [repression] (owing to which the unconscious is language). 

The phallus as a signifier provides the ratio [raison] of desire (in the sense 
in which the term is used in "mean and extreme ratio" of harmonic division). 

I shall thus be using the phallus as an algorithm and I cannot, without end- 
lessly inflating my talk, do otherwise than rely on the echoes of the experi- 
ence that unites us to get you to grasp this usage. 

The fact that the phallus is a signifier requires that it be in the place of the 
Other that the subject have access to it. But since this signifier is there only as 



582 Ecrits 

veiled and as ratio [raison] of the Other's desire, it is the Other's desire as such 
that the subject is required to recognize — in other words, the other insofar as 
he himself is a subject divided by the signifying Spaltung. 

The developments that appear in psychological genesis confirm the phal- 
lus' signifying function. 

This allows us, first of all, to more correctly formulate Klein's finding that 
the child apprehends from the outset that the mother "contains" the phallus. 

But development is ordained by the dialectic of the demand for love and 
the test constituted by desire. 

The demand for love can only suffer from a desire whose signifier is for- 
eign to it. If the mother's desire is for the phallus, the child wants to be the 
phallus in order to satisfy her desire. Thus the division immanent in desire 
already makes itself felt by virtue of being experienced in the Other's desire, 
in that this division already stands in the way of the subject being satisfied 
with presenting to the Other the real [organ] he may have that corresponds to 
the phallus; for what he has is no better than what he does not have, from the 
point of view of his demand for love, which would like him to be the phallus. 

Clinical work shows us that the test constituted by the Other's desire is deci- 
sive, not in the sense that the subject learns by it whether or not he has a real 
phallus, but in the sense that he learns that his mother does not have one. This 
694 is the moment in experience without which no symptomatic consequence (pho- 

bia) or structural consequence (Penisneid) related to the castration complex 
can take effect. This seals the conjunction of desire, insofar as the phallic sig- 
nifier is its mark, with the threat of or nostalgia based on not-having [manque 
a avoir]. 

Of course, its future depends on the law introduced by the father in this 
sequence. 

But one can indicate the structures that govern the relations between the 
sexes by referring simply to the phallus' function. 

These relations revolve around a being and a having which, since they refer 
to a signifier, the phallus, have contradictory effects: they give the subject real- 
ity in this signifier, on the one hand, but render unreal the relations to be sig- 
nified, on the other. 

This is brought about by the intervention of a seeming [paraitre] that 
replaces the having in order to protect it, in one case, and to mask the lack 
thereof, in the other, and whose effect is to completely project the ideal or 
typical manifestations of each of the sexes' behavior, including the act of cop- 
ulation itself, into the realm of comedy. 

These ideals are strengthened by the demand they are capable of satisfy- 



The Signification of the Phallus 58s 

ing, which is always a demand for love, with the reduction of desire to demand 
as its complement. 

Paradoxical as this formulation may seem, I am saying that it is in order to 
be the phallus — that is, the signifier of the Other's desire — that a woman rejects 
an essential part of femininity, namely, all its attributes, in the masquerade. It 
is for what she is not that she expects to be desired as well as loved. But she 
finds the signifier of her own desire in the body of the person to whom her 
demand for love is addressed. It should not be forgotten, of course, that the 
organ that is endowed with this signifying function takes on the value of a 
fetish thereby. But the result for a woman remains that two things converge 
on the same object: an experience of love that, as such (see above), ideally 
deprives her of what the object gives, and a desire that finds its signifier in this 
object. This is why one may find that a lack of satisfaction of sexual needs, in 
other words, frigidity, is relatively well tolerated by women, whereas the Ver- 
drdngung inherent in desire is less in them than in men. 

In the case of men, on the other hand, the dialectic of demand and desire 
engenders effects regarding which one must once again admire Freud's sure- 
ness in situating them, in the precise articulations on which they depend, under 69 5 

the heading of a specific debasement (Erniedrigung) in the sphere of love. 

If, indeed, man is able to satisfy his demand for love in his relationship with 
a woman, inasmuch as the phallic signifier clearly constitutes her as giving in 
love what she does not have, conversely, his own desire for the phallus will 
make its signifier emerge in its residual divergence toward "another woman" 
who may signify this phallus in various ways, either as a virgin or as a prosti- 
tute. There results from this a centrifugal tendency of the genital drive in the 
sphere of love, which makes impotence much harder for him to bear, while 
the Verdrdngung inherent in his desire is greater. 

Still it should not be thought that the sort of infidelity that might appear to 
be constitutive of the masculine function is characteristic of him alone. For if 
one looks closely, the same split can be found in women, with the proviso that 
the Loving Other [I 'Autre de I 'Amour] as such — that is, the Other insofar as 
he is deprived of what he gives — is difficult to see in the backcourt where he 
replaces the being of the very man whose attributes she cherishes. 

One might add here that male homosexuality, in accordance with the phal- 
lic mark that constitutes desire, is constituted along the axis of desire, while female 
homosexuality, on the contrary, as observation shows, is oriented by a disap- 
pointment that strengthens the axis of the demand for love. These remarks should 
be refined through a reexamination of the function of the mask, insofar as it 
dominates the identifications in which refusals of demand are resolved. 



584 Ecrits 

The fact that femininity finds refuge in this mask, by virtue of the Ver- 
drangung inherent in desire *s phallic mark, has the curious consequence of mak- 
ing virile display in human beings seem feminine. 

Correlatively, one can glimpse the reason for a characteristic that has never 
been elucidated and that shows once again the depth of Freud's intuition: 
namely, why Freud claims there is only one libido, his text showing that he 
conceives of it as masculine in nature. The function of the phallic signifier 
touches here on its most profound relation: that by which the Ancients embod- 
ied therein the Nous and the Logos. 

Note 
1 . The demon of Shame. 



In Memory of Ernest Jones: 697 

On His Theory of Symbolism 



And bring him out that is but woman's son 

Can trace me in the tedious ways of art, 

And hold me pace in deep experiments. 

— Shakespeare, Henry IV y Part I, Act 3, Scene 1 , 45-47 



Far from the funeral pomp with which our departed colleague was honored 
in accordance with his rank, here I will devote to him a memorial of our sol- 
idarity in psychoanalytic work. 

While it is homage that suits the position of our group, I will not leave out 
the emotion that wells up in me from the memory of more personal relations. 

I will punctuate three moments of the latter. Their contingency reflects a 
man who was very diverse in his vivacity: his unmitigated imperiousness 
toward the newcomer I was in Marienbad, that is, at the last of our council assem- 
blies before a vacuum struck the Viennese sphere, a superficial interaction whose 
sting can still be seen after the war in one of my writings; the familiarity between 
us during a visit to the Plat in Elsted, where, among the letters by Freud spread 
out on an immense table for the first volume of the biography he was writing, 
I saw him anxious to share with me the seductions of his labor, until the hour 
of an appointment with a female patient, kept even in his retreat, put an end to 
it, the haste of which, in its compulsive tone, led me to see the mark of an indeli- 
ble yoke; and lastly, the grandeur of his July 1957 letter to me in which his apol- 
ogy for not coming to see me at my house in the country invoked the pretext 
of stoically explored suffering only to accept it as the signal of a lofty compe- 
tition, death hot at the heels of the work to be completed. 

The organ that is the International Journal of Psychoanalysis, and which owes 
everything to Ernest Jones, from its duration to its quality, allowed to show 698 

between some of its lines in the September— October 1 958 issue the shadow with 



586 Ecrits 

which a long-exercised power always seems to darken when nightfall catches 
up with it: ink quick to accuse his edifice for the light it obliterated. 

This edifice solicits us. For, however metaphorical it may be, it is designed 
to remind us of what distinguishes the architecture from the building: namely, 
a logical power that governs [ordonne] the architecture beyond what the build- 
ing allows for by way of possible utilization. Thus no building, unless reduced 
to the merest of barracks, can do without this order that makes it akin to dis- 
course. This logic harmonizes with efficiency only by dominating it, and their 
discord is not a simply possible fact in the art of construction. 

We can thus gauge how much more essential this discord is in the art of 
psychoanalysis, where an experience of truth determines the field — that of 
memory and signification — whereas the phenomena that are found to be most 
signifying in it remain scandalous compared to the ends of utility with which 
all power is legitimated. 

This is why no consideration of power, even the most legitimate since it 
involves the professional building, 1 can intervene in the analyst's discourse 
without affecting the very purpose of his practice at the same time as its 
medium. 

While Jones is the one who did the most to ensure analytic values a certain 
official standing, and even a status recognized by the public authorities, can 
we not propose to question the immense apology his theoretical work consti- 
tutes in order to assess its dignity? 

This can only be done using a sample of his work, and I will select the arti- 
cle published in the British Journal of Psychology (IX, 2 [October 1916]: 
181-229) on the theory of symbolism, reproduced since then in each of the 
699 editions — which are known to be quite different from one another — that fol- 

lowed of his Papers on Psycho-Analysis, 

This article is uncompromising. Its grasp of the problem sustains it at its 
proper level, and while it does not resolve the difficulty, it highlights it. 

The malice falls flat of those who would like us to see this youngest of the 
faithful, who was linked not only by the talisman of the seven rings but by the 
implications of an executive secret, 2 as sorely tried by the Master. 

The fact that he, the only goy in a circle imbued with its Jewish specificity, 3 
was awarded the prize of erecting this monument [his biography] to the Mas- 
ter will no doubt be attributed to the fact that this monument toes the line that 
the man who opened up a new field of avowal for the world did not want to 
see crossed into his private life. 

One should not fail to reflect upon the resistance of biographical discourse 
to the analysis of the principal case constituted not so much by the inventor 
but by the invention of psychoanalysis itself. 



In Memory of Ernest Jones: On His Theory of Symbolism 58 j 

Be that as it may, Jones' references to Rank and Sachs in the article I will exam- 
ine, due to the criteria they put forward of analytic symbolism, are edifying. 

The criteria that they place at the top of the list, especially the criterion [that 
something must have] a constant meaning and be independent from individ- 
ual interventions 4 [to be considered a symbol], lead to contradictions that Jones 
points out in the facts; and the reverence he maintains for these autodidacts of 
the depths does not stop us from sensing the advantage he derives from a ration- 
alism that is rather sure of its method, since it is also exclusive in its principles. 

Jones begins, 

The progress of the human mind, when considered genetically, is seen 
to consist, not — as is commonly thought — merely of a number of 
accretions added from without, but of the following two processes: on 
the one hand the extension or transference of interest and understand- 700 

ing from earlier, simpler, and more primitive ideas, etc., to more diffi- 
cult and complex ones, which in a certain sense are continuations of and 
symbolise the former; and on the other hand the constant unmasking of 
previous symbolisms, the recognition that these, though previously 
thought to be literally true, were really only aspects or representations 
of the truth, the only ones of which our minds were — for either affec- 
tive or intellectual reasons — at the time capable. 5 

Such is the tone with which things begin and they advance by ever more 
closely closing in on the ambiguity this departure opens up. 

Many, in our time, will no doubt consider what follows of but historical, 
nay prehistoric, interest. We should fear that this disdain hides an impasse in 
which we are presently stuck. 

Jones' concern is to point out Jung's fundamental divergence regarding sym- 
bolism, which Freud realized already in 1 9 1 1 , breaking with Jung in 1 9 1 2, 6 and 
publishing his update on the situation in his "History of the Psychoanalytic 
Movement" in 1914. 

The two different manners of utilizing symbolism in interpretation are deci- 
sive as to the direction they give analysis; and they will be illustrated here by 
an example that may well be considered the earliest one, but that is not out of 
date, insofar as the snake is not simply a figure that art and fables preserve 
from an abandoned mythology or folklore. The ancient enemy is not so far 
from our mirages, for it is still associated with the traits of temptation and the 
deceit of promises, but also with the prestige of the circle that must be crossed 
toward wisdom in the turning inward, the closing of the head on the tail, with 
which it attempts to encircle the world. 



588 Ecrits 

Captive head under the Virgin's foot, what will we see of the head that 
repeats you at the other end of the body of the amphisbaena? A mountain gno- 
sis, whose local hereditary characteristics we would be wrong to neglect, 
grabbed it anew from the lacustrine retreat where it is still curled up, as Jung 
put it when he spoke to me of his canton's secrets. 

701 A figuration of the libido — that is how a disciple of Jung's will interpret 
the appearance of a snake in a dream, vision, or drawing, manifesting, unbe- 
known to himself, that while its seductive power is eternal, it is also always 
the same. For here we see the subject about to be captured by an autistic eros 
which, however revamped its [theoretical] apparatus may be, seems like an 
Old Acquaintance. 

In other words, the soul, which is a lucid blind man, reads its own nature 
in the archetypes that the world echoes back to him: How could he not end up 
believing he is the world soul? 

What is strange is that in their haste to take this soul into account, Calvin- 
ist pastors were fooled. 7 

It must be said that having thrown the beautiful soul a line from his Hel- 
vetian refuge, it is a rather ironic success for a disciple of Briicke, the offspring 
of Helmholtz and Du Bois-Reymond. 

But it is also the proof that there is no compromise possible with psychol- 
ogy, and that if we admit that the soul knows [connaisse] its own structure, with 
the kind of knowledge [connaissance] the soul has, that is, immediate knowl- 
edge — even if it were in the moment of falling asleep where Silberer asks us 
to recognize the "functional symbolism" of the layers of the psyche in a cake 
knife cutting through a puff pastry — nothing can any longer separate thought 
from the reverie of a "chymical wedding." 

Still it is not easy to grasp the cut so boldly traced by Freud in the theory 
of the revision [elaboration] of dreams, unless we purely and simply refuse the 
psychological ingenuity of the phenomena brought out by Silberer's obser- 
vational talent; this is the sorry solution Freud adopts in his discussion of it in 
the 1914 edition of the Traumdeutung [The Interpretation of Dreams] when he 
proffers that the said phenomena apply only to "philosophical minds, [prone] 
to endopsychic perception [and even] to delusions of observation," 8 to meta- 
physicians in the soul, no doubt, that would be the word for it — Jones one- 
upping Freud here, in effect, by indicating with a somewhat more strident tone 
the aversion he allows himself to show to this. 

702 Let us be glad that spiritual hierarchies — along with the materials, pneu- 
matics, psychics, and all the rest — did not return through this door, but we 
see here the source of the infatuation of those who consider themselves to be 
"natural born psychoanalysts." 



In Memory of Ernest Jones: On His Theory of Symbolism 5<%> 

Nevertheless, this is not a usable argument in this context and Jones does 
not dream of using it. 

Regarding the snake, Jones rectifies [Jung's position by asserting] that it is 
the symbol not of libido — an energetic notion which, as an idea, can only be 
brought out at a high degree of abstraction — but of the phallus, insofar as 
the latter seems to him to be characteristic of a "more concrete idea," even 
concrete through and through. 

For this is the pathway Jones chooses with which to ward off the danger- 
ous return to a kind of mysticism that symbolism seems to allow for, mysti- 
cism which seems to him, once unmasked, to exclude itself by itself from any 
and all scientific consideration. 

The symbol is displaced from a more concrete idea (at least that is how he 
expresses himself on the subject), to which it primarily applies, to a more 
abstract idea, to which it relates secondarily, which means that this displace- 
ment can only take place in a single direction. 

Let us stop here for an instant: 

To agree that if a waking hallucination makes analysis' first hysteric 9 — her 
arm having fallen asleep under the weight of her head on her shoulder, pressed 
onto the back of the chair from which it extended, when she slumped down, 
toward her father who she was watching over in his death throes — extend this 
arm with a snake, and even with as many snakes as she had fingers, this snake 
is the symbol of the phallus and of nothing else. But to whom this phallus 
belongs "concretely" is what is less easy to determine in the register of con- 
temporary psychoanalysis that is so nicely labeled by Raymond Queneau as 
the liquette ninque. The fact that this phallus is, in effect, recognized as a belong- 
ing coveted by the subject [quifasse Venvie du sujet], woman though she be, 
does not explain anything if one realizes that it emerges so importunately only 
to be clearly there in the present — namely, in the aforementioned liquette — 
or simply in the bed [lit] where it dies with the dying man. 

This is the very problem about which Jones, eleven years later, provides a 703 

piece worthy of his anthology, owing to the dialectical figure skating he demon- 
strates in it by developing positions that are the opposite of those adopted by 
Freud regarding the phallic phase simply by repeatedly asserting that he com- 
pletely agrees with Freud. But whatever one must think of this unfortunately 
abandoned debate [on the phallic phase], the question may be asked of Jones: 
does the phallus — if it is truly the object of phobia or of perversion, which he 
relates, first the one and then the other, to the phallic phase — remain in the 
state of a "concrete idea"? 

In any case, he is forced to recognize that the phallus takes on a "second- 
ary" application here. This is clearly what he says when he quite dexterously 



5^o Ecrits 

distinguishes between the proto- and deutero-phallic phases. And the phallus, 
as a concrete idea of the symbols that will be substituted for it in the one and 
then in the other of these phases, can only be linked to itself by a similitude 
which is as concrete as this idea is; for otherwise this concrete idea would be 
nothing but the classic abstraction of the general idea or of the generic object, 
which would leave our symbols a field of regression that is the one that Jones 
seeks to refute. In short, I am getting ahead of myself, as you see, regarding 
the only notion that allows us to conceive of the symbolism of the phallus: the 
particularity of its function as a signifier. 10 

In truth, there is some pathos in the sort of skirting of this function that its 
deduction imposes upon Jones. For he immediately realized that analytic sym- 
bolism is only conceivable if it is related to the linguistic fact of metaphor, 
which serves him as a handrail from one end of his discussion to the other. 

He quite apparently fails to find his way in it at two moments at which his 
defective point of departure is related, to my mind, to a very insidious inver- 
sion in his thought by which his need for seriousness in analysis prevails, with- 
out him analyzing this, over the seriousness of need. 
704 This can be seen in a sentence from his debate with Silberer: 11 "[I]f there 

is any truth at all in psycho-analysis, or, indeed, in any genetic psychology, 
then the primordial complexes displayed in symbolism must be n the perma- 
nent sources of mental life and the very reverse of mere figures of speech." 
This remark aims at a certain contingency that Silberer notes quite aptly both 
in the application of symbols and in the repetitions to which they give con- 
sistency, 13 in order to oppose to it the constancy of primordial needs in devel- 
opment (oral needs, for example, whose growing importance Jones supports). 

It is in order to return to these early facts that Jones turns to metaphor, by 
which he intends to understand symbolism. 

It is, in a sense, by backing up and for the needs of his polemic that he took 
up linguistics, but the latter is so tightly linked to his object that it suffices to 
rectify his aim. 

We must credit him with proving himself wrong when he provides his list 
of primary ideas, about which he rightly remarks that they are few in number 
and constant, unlike symbols, which can always be added to, piling up on 
these ideas. These primary ideas are, according to him, "ideas of self and the 
immediate blood relatives, or of the phenomena of birth, love, and death" 
[102]. All of these are "ideas," the most concrete of which is the network of 
the signifier in which the subject must already be caught up in order to be 
able to constitute himself there as self, as part of a lineage, as existing, as the 
representative of a sex, and even as dead, for these ideas can only be passed 
off as primary if all parallelism with the development of needs is abandoned. 



In Memory of Ernest Jones: On His Theory of Symbolism Sgi 

The fact that this is not realized can only be explained by flight in the face 
of the anxiety of origins, and owes nothing to the kind of haste whose con- 705 

elusive virtue I have shown when it is grounded in logic. 14 

Isn't it the least one can demand of an analyst that he maintain his logical 
rigor in [the face of] this anxiety, in other words, that he not spare anxiety to 
those he teaches, even to ensure his power over them? 

This is where Jones seeks his pathway, but where his best recourse fails 
him, for rhetoricians over the ages have balked at metaphor, obviating his 
chance to use it to rectify his own approach to symbols. This appears in the 
fact that he posits that comparison ("simile" in English) lies at the origin of 
metaphor, taking "John is as brave as a lion" as the logical model for "John 
is a lion." 

We are astonished that his so very lively sense of analytic experience did 
not alert him to the far greater signifying density of the second enunciation; 
while recognizing it to be more concrete, he did not render it its primacy. 

Absent this step, he did not manage to formulate what analytic interpreta- 
tion nevertheless makes almost obvious, which is that the relationship between 
reality [reel] and what is thought is not that between the signified and the sig- 
nifies and that the primacy reality [reel] has over thought is reversed from the 
signifier to the signified. This overlaps what happens, in truth, in language 
where meaning effects are created by permutations of signifiers. 

Thus while Jones perceives that it is, in some sense, the memory of a 
metaphor that constitutes analytic symbolism, the so-called decline of 
metaphor hides its reason from him. He does not see that it is the lion as a sig- 
nifier that has been abraded right to the yon, and even to the yon-yon, whose 
meek growl serves as an index of the self-satisfied ideals of Metro-Goldwyn — 
its roar, still horrible to those lost in the jungle, attesting better to the origins 
of its use for purposes of meaning. 

Jones believes, on the contrary, that the signified has become more porous, 
that it has become what grammarians call a figurative meaning. 

He thus misses its function, sometimes so palpable in symbols and analytic 
symptoms, of being a sort of regeneration of the signifier. 

He loses his way, instead, when he repeats a false law of displacement of 706 

the semanteme according to which it is supposed to always go from a partic- 
ular signification to a more general one, from a concrete to an abstract one, 
from a material to a more subtle one called figurative or even moral. As if the 
first example we come across in the daily news did not show its nullity, the 
word "heavy" [lourd\ since that is the one that presents itself to me, known 
to have first signified le lourdaud [clumsy oaf], or even I'e'tourdi 15 [lightheaded 
or scatterbrained] (in the thirteenth century), thus having had a moral mean- 



5c)2 Ecrits 

ing before applying, not much earlier than the eighteenth century, as Bloch 
and von Wartburg teach us, to a property of matter — about which it must be 
noted, so as not to stop while the getting is so good, that it is misleading inso- 
far as, in opposition to light, it leads to the Aristotelian topic of a qualitative 
gravity. To save the theory, will we go so far as to credit the common use of 
words with a presentiment of the scant reality of such a physics? 

But what can we say about the application that gave us this word, lourd — 
namely, the new unit of French monetary reform? What vertiginous or grave 
perspective will we open up, what trance of thickness will we resort to, to sit- 
uate this new flapping of wings from the literal to the figurative? Would it not 
be simpler to accept here the obvious material fact that there is no other main- 
spring of metaphorical effect than the substitution of one signifier for another 
as such? At least we would then not be lourd [dense] (in Franc-Comptois dialect, 
they say lourdeau) in grasping this example, in which the so-called^m/ic lourd 
[new franc], for no stale meaning, can be lourd . . . only due to its consequences: 
for the latter can be inscribed here in accounting terms — namely, purely sig- 
nifying terms. 

Nevertheless, we must not neglect that a meaning effect — which appears, 
here as elsewhere, extrapolated in the substitution of signifiers — should be 
foreseen and, indeed, expected: by which every Frenchman will feel he car- 
ries a heavier [plus lourd] wallet when he has equally weighty bill denomina- 
tions [poids des coupures], although he will feel less lightheaded in the 
manipulation of their cash currency when he spends the same amount. And 
who can say how weighted [ponderation] his spending will become in his tourist 
peregrinations, but also the unforeseeable effects that the metaphorical slid- 
707 ing of his metal coin-related likings toward heavy [lourde] industry and heavy 

machinery will have on the El Dorados of his investments or his luxury uten- 
sils? 16 Question: If a comedy is disparaged when it is called heavy-handed 
[lourd], why can't divine Grace be so characterized? 

This error regarding the function of language is worth emphasizing, for it 
is primordial in the difficulties related to symbolism that Jones does not man- 
age to overcome. 

Indeed, everything in this debate revolves around whether or not a 
knowledge-value [valeur de connaissance] should be granted to symbolism. 
The interference of symbols in actions that are more explicit and better 
adapted to perception has the import of informing us about a more primitive 
activity in being. 

What Silberer calls the negative conditioning of symbolism — namely, the 
dimming of the most advanced discriminating functions for adapting to real- 
ity [reel] — takes on a positive value because it allows access to occur. But we 



In Memory of Ernest Jones: On His Theory of Symbolism Sgj 

would fall into the sin of circular reasoning were we to deduce from it that a 
more profound reality, even if qualified as psychical, is manifested in it. 

All of Jones' efforts are devoted to denying that an archaic symbolism can 
retain any value compared to a scientific apprehension of reality. But since he 
continues to refer symbols to ideas, understanding by ideas the concrete props 
that development is supposed to give symbols, he himself cannot help but main- 
tain the notion of a negative conditioning of symbolism right to the bitter end, 
which stops him from grasping its structural function. 

And yet he provides us with ample proof of the aptness of his orientation 
in the felicitous encounters he makes along the way: for example, when he 
pauses at the fact that a child assigns the "quack" he isolates as the signifier of 
the duck's call not only to ducks, whose natural attribute it is, but to a series 
of objects, including flies, wine, and even a penny, this time using the signi- 
fier as a metaphor [107]. 

Why must he see here but a new attribution based on the apperception of 
a volatile similarity, even if the authority he appeals to in his borrowing — who 708 

is no less than Darwin — considers it sufficient that a penny be stamped with 
an eagle in the corner to include it in it? For however obliging the notion of 
analogy may be in extending the range of the volatile to the dilution of a fluid, 
perhaps the function of metonymy, as propped up by the signifying chain, bet- 
ter accounts for the bird's contiguity with the liquid in which it wades. 

How can we but regret here that the interest directed to the child by devel- 
opmentalistic analysis does not pause at this moment, at the very dawn of the 
use of speech, where the child, who designates with a "bow-wow" what in 
certain cases we strove in front of him to call only by the name of "dog," assigns 
this "bow-wow" to just about anything; or at this later moment when the child 
declares that the cat goes "bow-wow" and the dog goes "meow," showing by 
his sobs, should we try to correct his game, that in any case the game is not 
gratuitous? 

Were Jones to take these moments, which are always manifest, into account, 
he would not fall into the eminent error by which he concludes that "it was not 
the duck as a whole that was named 'quack' [by the child], but only certain 
abstracted attributes, which then continued to be called by the same word." 17 

It would then become clear to him that what he is seeking — namely, the 
effect of signifying substitution — is precisely what the child first finds [trouve], 
the word to be taken literally in the Romance languages in which trouver comes 
from "trope," for it is by the play of signifying substitution that the child rips 
things from their ingenuousness in subjecting them to his metaphors. 

As an aside, the myth of the child's ingenuousness seems clearly reestab- 
lished by this, still to be refuted here. 



5cf4 Ecrits 

We must define metaphor by the implantation in a signifying chain of 
another signifier, by which the one it supplants falls to the rank of the signi- 
fied, and as a latent signifier perpetuates there the interval by which another 
signifying chain can be grafted onto it. We thus refind the very dimensions 
by which Jones strives to establish analytic symbolism. 

709 For these dimensions govern the structure that Freud attributes to symp- 
toms and repression. And without them it is impossible to repair the deviation 
the unconscious, in Freud 's sense of the term, underwent due to the symbol's 
mystification, Jones' goal being to repair it. 

Certain erroneous approaches must be cleared away to do so, such as his 
remark — which is fallacious, fascinating us with its reference to the object — 
that while a church bell tower can symbolize the phallus, the phallus will never 
symbolize a bell tower. 

For it is no less true that in a dream, even in an ironic forgery of a dream 
by Cocteau, one can quite legitimately, if the context allows, interpret the image 
of a Negro who, with sword drawn, comes straight at a female dreamer, as the 
signifier of her forgetting to take her umbrella with her after her last analytic 
session. This is even what the most classical analysts called interpretation 
"toward the exit" [vers la sortie], if you'll allow me to translate thus a term 
introduced in English as "reconstruction upward."* 18 

To put it explicitly, the quality of concreteness in an idea no more deter- 
mines its unconscious effect than the quality of heaviness [lourd] in a heavy 
body determines the speed at which it falls. 

It must be posited that it is the signifier's concrete impact in submitting need 
to demand which, in repressing desire into the position of that which is mis- 
recognized, provides the unconscious with its order. 

Regarding the list of symbols — which is already considerable, as Jones 
stresses — he notes, opposing an approximation which is not the crudest given 
by Rank and Sachs (namely, the third characteristic of the symbol: its inde- 
pendence from individual determinations), that this list remains, on the con- 
trary, open to individual invention, adding simply that once put forward, a 
symbol no longer changes destination. This is a very enlightening remark, 
assuming we return to the catalog of primary ideas in symbolism commend- 
ably prepared by Jones, since it allows us to complete it. 

For these primary ideas designate the points at which the subject disappears 
under the being of the signifier; whether it is a question, indeed, of being one- 
self, being a father, being born, being loved, or being dead, how can we fail 
to see that the subject, assuming he is the subject who speaks, sustains himself 
there only on the basis of discourse? 

710 It is thus clear that analysis reveals that the phallus serves the function of 



In Memory of Ernest Jones: On His Theory of Symbolism 5c>5 

signifying the lack of being [manque a etre] that is wrought in the subject by 
his relation to the signifier. This gives its full import to the fact that all the 
symbols Jones' study highlights are phallic symbols. 

Regarding the magnetic points of signification that his remarks suggest, I 
will thus say that they are points of the subject's umbilication in the cuts made 
by the signifier, the most fundamental of them being the Urverdrangung [pri- 
mal repression] that Freud always emphasized — namely, the subject's redu- 
plication brought on by discourse, though that reduplication remains masked 
by the multiplication of what it evokes as entities [e'tant]. 

Analysis has shown us that it is with images that captivate his eros as a liv- 
ing individual that the subject manages to ensure his implication in the signi- 
fying sequence. 

Of course, the human individual is not without presenting some indulgence 
toward this fragmentation of his images; and the bipolarity of corporal autism 
favored by the privilege of the specular image, 19 a biological fact, lends itself 
singularly to the fact that his desire 's implication in the signifier takes a nar- 
cissistic form. 

But it is not the connections of need, from which these images are detached, 
that sustain their perpetuated impact; rather, it is the articulated sequence in 
which they are inscribed that structures their insistence as signifying. 

This is why sexual demand, assuming it need but present itself orally, 
"ectopizes" images of introjection into the field of "genital" desire. The 
notion of the oral object that the partner would perhaps become in it, although 
it has become ever more established at the heart of analytic theory, is never- 
theless an elision that is a source of error. 

For what happens in the extreme case is that desire finds its fantasmatic 
prop in what is called a defense on the part of the subject when he is confronted 
with a partner who is taken as a signifier of completed devouring. (Weigh my 
terms carefully here.) 

It is in the subject's reduplication by the signifier that we find the main- 711 

spring of the positive conditioning whose quest Jones pursues because of what 
he calls "true symbolism," the symbolism that analysis discovered in its con- 
stancy and rediscovers, articulating itself ever anew, in the unconscious. 

A minimum composition of the battery of signifiers suffices to institute in 
the signifying chain a duplicity that re-covers his reduplication as a subject, 
and it is in this redoubling of the subject of speech that the unconscious as such 
finds a way to become articulated — namely, in a medium that is only apper- 
ceived by being perceived as just as stupid as a cryptography without a cipher. 

Here lies the heterogeneity of the "true symbolism" that Jones seeks in vain 
to grasp, and which escapes him precisely to the extent to which he maintains 



5c)6 Ecrits 

the mirage of negative conditioning, which falsely leaves symbolism con- 
fronted with reality [reel] at all the "levels" of its regression. 

If, as I say, man finds himself open to desiring as many others in himself as 
his members have names outside of himself, and if he must recognize as many 
members that are separate from his unit [unite], lost without ever having been, 
as there are entities that are metaphors of these members, we see too that the 
question of what knowledge-value symbols have is answered, since it is these 
very members that come back to him after having wandered around the world 
in an alienated form. This value, which is considerable when it comes to praxis, 
is nil when it comes to reality [reel]. 

It is very striking to see how much effort it takes Jones to establish this con- 
clusion, which his position requires right from the outset, by the pathways he 
has chosen. He articulates it with a distinction between "true symbolism," 
which he conceives of in short as the producer of symbols, and the "symbolic 
equivalents" that it produces, whose efficacy can only be measured by the 
objective verification of their grip upon reality [reel]. 

One might note that this amounts to asking analytic experience to grant 
science its status, thus getting very far away from it. At the very least it should 
be noted that I am not the one who takes it upon himself to lead our practi- 
tioners astray in this way, but rather Jones who has never been reproached for 
being a metaphysician. 
712 But I believe that he is mistaken. For the history of science alone can set- 

tle this matter and it brilliantly demonstrates, in the birth of the theory of 
gravitation, that it was only on the basis of the extermination of all symbol- 
ism of the heavens that the terrestrial foundations of modern physics could be 
established — namely, that as long as some requirement to ascribe to the 
heavenly orbits a "perfect" shape was maintained (insofar as it implied, for 
example, the circle 's preeminence over the ellipse) from Giordano Bruno to 
Kepler and from Kepler to Newton, it thwarted the development of the 
theory's key equations. 20 

But there is no reason to object to the fact that the Cabalistic notion of a 
God who had consciously withdrawn from matter to leave it to its own move- 
ment may have enhanced our confidence in natural experience as necessarily 
rediscovering the traces of logical creation. For this is the usual detour of all 
sublimation and one can say that, with the exception of physics, this detour 
has not been completed. The question for us is whether the completion of this 
detour can occur in any other way than by being eliminated. 

Here again, despite this error we must admire how in his labor — if I allow 
myself to use this word with the same metaphorical effect as that found in the 
terms "working through" and Durcharbeiten in use in psychoanalysis — our 



In Memory of Ernest Jones: On His Theory of Symbolism 597 

author tills his field with a plowshare that is truly worthy of what analytic 
work in effect owes to the signifier. 

For, to take a final step in his discussion of symbols, he envisions what results 
from the hypothesis, supposedly accepted by certain authors regarding lin- 
guistic and mythological reference points, that agriculture was originally the 
transposition of a fecundatory coitus into the realm of technics. Can one legit- 
imately say of agriculture at that ideal era that it symbolized copulation? 

It is quite clear that the question is not a de facto one, no one here having 
to take sides regarding the real existence in the past of such a stage — which is, 
in any case, worth adding to the file of pastoral fiction from which the psy- 
choanalyst (not to mention the Marxist) has much to learn about his mental 
horizons. * 

The question is merely that of the suitability of applying the notion of sym- 713 

bolism here, and Jones answers, without seeming to worry whether or not any- 
one might agree with him, in the negative, 21 meaning that agriculture thus 
represents an adequate thought (or a concrete idea), nay a satisfying mode, of 
coitus! 

But if we are truly to follow our author's intentions, we realize that the result 
is that it is only inasmuch as a certain operation in the realm of technics turns 
out to be prohibited — because it is incompatible with a certain effect of the 
laws of marriage and kinship, insofar as that effect concerns, for example, the 
use [jouissance] of the earth — that the operation substituted for the former 
operation becomes truly symbolic of a sexual satisfaction (except that, from 
this point on, it is repressed), at the same time as it offers itself up as a prop 
for naturalist conceptions of a kind that obviates scientific recognition of the 
union of the gametes as the crux of sexual reproduction. 

This is strictly correct insofar as symbolism is considered to be intimately 
related to repression. 

We see that, given this degree of rigor in paradoxical precision, we can legit- 
imately wonder if Jones' work did not accomplish the essential part of what 
he could do at that time, although he did not go as far as he could have in the 
direction he found indicated in Freud 's work, quoting it from the Traumdeu- 
tung: "What to-day is symbolically connected was probably in primaeval times 
united in conceptual and linguistic identity. The symbolic relationship seems 
to be the remains and sign of an identity that once existed." 22 

And yet he would have gained much in his quest to grasp the true place of 
symbolism had he remembered that it was granted no room at all in the first 
edition of the Traumdeutung, which means that analysis, in the case of dreams 
but of symptoms too, need highlight symbolism only as subordinate to the 
major mainsprings of the processes [elaboration] that structure the uncon- 



5$8 Ecrits 

scious — namely, condensation and displacement first and foremost. I am 
confining myself to these two mechanisms insofar as they would have suf- 

714 ficed to make up for Jones' inadequate information regarding metaphor and 
metonymy as primary effects of the signifies 

Perhaps he would thus have avoided formulating something that contra- 
dicts his own perspective, whose major lines I believe I have traced out here 
(and that contradicts Freud's own explicit warning): that what is repressed in 
symbolism's metaphorical retreat is affect. 23 This is a formulation that we might 
like to consider to be but a slip, if it hadn't later been developed into an extraor- 
dinarily ambiguous exploration of the whole panoply of affects, insofar as they 
supposedly substitute for each other as such. 24 

For Freud's conception — developed and published in 1915 in the Interna- 
tionale Zeitschrift, in the three articles on drives and their avatars, repression, 
and the unconscious — leaves no room for ambiguity on this point: it is the 
signifier that is repressed, there being no other meaning that can be given in 
these texts to the word Vorstellungsreprasentani. As for affects, Freud expressly 
formulates that they are not repressed; they can only be said to be repressed 
by indulgence. As simple A nsat%e or appendices of the repressed, signals equiv- 
alent to hysterical fits [acc^y] established in the species, Freud articulates that 
affects are simply displaced, as is evidenced by the fundamental fact — and it 
can be seen that someone is an analyst if he realizes this fact — by which the 
subject is bound to "understand" his affects all the more the less they are really 
justified. 

We can conclude with the example Jones took as his point of departure, 
which he deployed with his characteristic erudition: the symbolism of 

715 Punchinello [Polichinelle]. How can one fail to see the dominance of the sig- 
nifier here, manifest in its most materially phonemic form? For beyond the 
falsetto and the morphological anomalies of this personage, who descends 
directly from the Satyr and the Devil, it is clearly homophonies which, con- 
densing in double exposures, like witticisms and slips, most surely give us 
away — it is the phallus that he symbolizes. The Neapolitan polecenella, little 
turkey, pulcinella, little chicken, and pullus, a tender term bequeathed by 
Roman pederasty to the modest outpourings of romantic schoolgirls in my 
youth, are recovered here by the English "punch," in order, having become 
punchinello, to find anew the dagger, stake, or blunt instrument he dissimu- 
lates, which paves the way for him by which to descend, little man, to the dread- 
ful drawer, where the movers, deftly handling the modesty of the Henriettas, 
will pretend, will pretend to see nothing before he comes back up, resuscitated 
in his valiance. 

Winged phallus, Parapilla, 25 unconscious fantasy of the impossibilities of 



In Memory of Ernest Jones: On His Theory of Symbolism 5gg 

male desire, treasure in which woman's infinite impotence is exhausted, this 
member forever lost of all those — Osiris, Adonis, and Orpheus — whose 
fragmented body must be reassembled by the ambiguous tenderness of the 
Mother-Goddess, indicates to us, in being found anew in every illustration of 
this long study on symbolism, not only the eminent function it plays there but 
how it clarifies it. 

For the phallus, as I have shown elsewhere, is the signifier of the very loss 
the subject suffers due to the fragmentation brought on by the signifier, and 
nowhere does the counterpart function — by which an object is led into the 
subordination of desire to the symbolic dialectic — appear in a more decisive 
manner. 

Here we come again upon the sequence indicated above, by which Jones 
essentially contributed to the elaboration of the phallic phase by resorting a 
bit more to development. Isn't this the dawn of the maze in which clinical work 716 

itself has gotten bogged down and of the return to a greater misrecognition 
of the essential import of desire, illustrated by a form of treatment involving 
imaginary immobilization, which is based on the delusional moralism of the 
ideals of the supposed object-relation? The extraordinary elegance of the point 
of departure Freud gave us — that is, the conjugation in girls of complaints 
about their mothers and phallus envy — remains our bedrock in the matter, 
and it should be understandable that I used it as the point of departure for the 
dialectic in which I show how demand and desire become separate. 

But I will not present any further my own contributions in a study that can 
but bow — in confining itself to the sole text it concerns — before the obstinate 
dialectical demands, the loftiness of perspective, the feeling for analytic expe- 
rience, the grasp of the whole of it, the immense information, the inflexibility 
regarding goals, the faultless erudition, and, lastly, the weight [poiJs] that give 
Jones' work its exceptional place. 

Is it a less worthy homage because this discussion of symbolism led us so 
close to this destiny of man to go toward being since he cannot become one? 
Shepherd of being, proffers the philosopher of our time, while he accuses phi- 
losophy of having been its bad shepherd. Answering him with another refrain 
\lai\ Freud makes the good subject of philosophical knowledge definitively 
disappear, the subject who found in the object a sure status, before the bad 
subject of desire and its impostures. 

Isn't it this bad subject that Jones, showing yet another sign of his talent, 
proves to advocate when he concludes, conjugating metaphor with symbol- 
ism: "The circumstance that the same image can be employed for both of these 
functions should not blind us to the important differences between them. Of 
these the principal one is that with metaphor the feeling to be expressed is over- 



600 Ecrits 

sublimated, whereas with symbolism it is under-sublimated (sic); the one relates 
to an effort that has attempted something beyond its strength, the other to an 
effort that is prevented from accomplishing what it would." 

These lines reminded me, with a feeling of returning to the light of day, of 
the immortal division of human functions that Kierkegaard promulgated for 
717 all posterity a division that is, as we know, tripartite, including only officers, 

maids, and chimney-sweeps. If it surprised certain people with their new being, 
it already has the enlightened merit here of mentioning the building in which 
it is obviously inscribed. 

For, more than by recalling Jones' Welsh origins, his small stature, his dark 
cast, and his skill, it is surely because I have followed him, and even conjured 
him up, in this discussion [cheminement] like a chimney in a wall, that in this 
reexiting in a dazzling pursuit, I suddenly felt assured — regardless of what 
may be owed to him by the representatives of the two highest offices in the 
international community of analysts, and particularly in the British Psycho- 
analytic Institute — to see him permanently take his place in the heavens of 
chimney-sweeps, of which he is surely the finest example to my mind. 

Which, asks the Talmud, of two men who exit one after the other from a 
chimney in the living room will have the idea to dust himself off, when they 
look at each other? Wisdom settles the question here regarding all the subtleties 
that could be deduced from the darkness of the faces they present each other 
and the reflections which, in each of them, diverge, when it expressly concludes: 
when two men meet coming out of a chimney, they both have dirty faces. 

Guitrancourt, January-March 1959 

Notes 

1 . Power as an aim is articulated as a factor 2. The extraordinary history of this Com- 

that degrades analytic training* in an article by mittee is revealed to us in Jones' The Life and 

Thomas S. Szasz, "Psychoanalytic Training: A Works of Sigmund Freud, vol. II, chapter 6, 

Socio-Psychological Analysis of Its History 172-88. 

and Present Status," IJP XXXIX (1958): 3. See Ferenczi's letter dated August 6, 1912, 

598-613. in Sigmund Freud, vol. II, 173. 

This is the same aim whose impact on the 4. 1 am forcing the meaning of Bedingungen 

direction of the treatment I denounced in the here. 

paper ["Direction of the Treatment"] I gave at 5. Jones, Papers on Psycho- Analysis, 87-88. 

the Royaumont Congress last July. 6. At stake were the positions adopted by 

Szasz traces its effects in the external organ- Jung in the two parts of Wandlungen und Sym- 

ization of training*, in particular, in the selec- bole der Libido, which came out in 1911 and 

tion of candidates, without getting to the 1912, respectively. [Transformations and Sym- 

bottom of its incompatibility with psychoana- bols of the Libido was first published in English 

lytic treatment itself, that is, with the first stage as Psychology of the Unconscious ( 1 9 1 6); it was 

of the training*. rewritten in 1952 and republished as Symbols 



In Memory of Ernest Jones: On His Theory of Symbolism 601 



of Transformation; it was later translated by Bea- 
trice M. Hinkle as Psychology of the Uncon- 
scious: A Study of the Transformations and 
Symbolisms of the Libido (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1991), as part of 
The Collected Works ofC. G.Jung.] 

7. The author of these lines holds that only 
the Roman Prostitute can, with indemnity, have 
close relations with what she rejects. 

8. See GWll-lll, 510 [in English, see SEN, 
505-6]. 

9. See the case of Anna O., not included in 
G ^because it was Breuer's case. The passage 
evoked here can be found in SE II, 38 {Studies 
on Hysteria) or on page 30 of the original edi- 
tion of Studien iiber Hysterie. 

10. This excursion is not gratuitous. For 
after his 1927 "Precocious Development of 
Feminine Sexuality" and his 1932 "Phallic 
Phase," Jones concludes with a monumental 
declaration in 1935 before the Vienna Psycho- 
analytic Society, indicating his complete 
endorsement of the geneticism of fantasies 
which Melanie Klein makes the linchpin of her 
doctrine, and in which all reflection on sym- 
bolism in psychoanalysis remained closed until 
my paper in 1953 ["Function and Field"]. 

11. Papers on Psycho-Analysis, 125. 

1 2. My emphasis. 

13. Jones goes so far here as to use analysis 
as a weapon when he suggests [on page 1 25] that 
Silberer's use of the term "ephemeral" — which 
is, nevertheless, logically justified in Silberer's 
text — is symptomatic. 

14. See "Logical Time and the Assertion of 
Anticipated Certainty," Ecrits 1966, 197-213. 

1 5. Earlier, no doubt: le sale (that which is 
dirty). 

16. It would be nice to know what fears 
about these metaphorical effects ruled out, in 
the most recent policy decisions, the initially 
announced term "heavy franc" [franc lourd], 
substituting "the new franc" for it. 

17. Jones, Papers on Psycho-Analysis, 107. 

18. See Rudolf M. Loewenstein, "Some 
Thoughts on Interpretation in the Theory and 
Practice of Psychoanalysis," in The Psychoan- 
alytic Study of the Child, vol. XII (New York: 



International Universities Press, 1957), 143, 
and "The Problem of Interpretation," PQW, 
1 (1951): 1-14. 

19. See my conception of the mirror stage 
and the biological foundation I gave it in the 
prematurity of birth [of human beings]. 

20. See Alexandre Koyre, From the Closed 
World to the Infinite Universe (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1957), where he 
summarizes his luminous work on the subject. 

21. Jones, Papers on Psycho- Analysis, 136. 

22. Jones, Papers on Psycho-Analysis, 105. 

23. Jones, were he to apply analytic suspi- 
cion to himself, would have to be tipped off by 
the feeling of strangeness with which he him- 
self is affected ("a curious statement," he says, 
on pages 1 23-24 of his Papers on Psycho-Analy- 
sis) in reading Silberer's nevertheless grounded 
remark "that the universality, or the general 
validity and intelligibility of a symbol, varies 
inversely with respect to the part played in its 
determination by affective factors." 

In short, the points of misrecognition Jones 
cannot let go of instructively prove to be related 
to the metaphor of the weight [poids] he intends 
to give to true symbolism. He thereby winds 
up arguing against his own meaning, as, for 
example, resorting to the subject's conviction 
to distinguish the unconscious effect — that is, 
the properly symbolic effect — that a common 
figure of speech can have on him (page 128). 

24. See Jones, "Fear, Guilt and Hate," a 
paper delivered at the Second International 
Congress of Psychoanalysis in Oxford in July 
1929, published in Papers on Psycho-Analysis, 
304-19. 

25. This is the title of an obscene poem in 
five cantos, supposedly translated from the 
Italian, copiously illustrated and published in 
London in 1782 without any indication of who 
the publisher was. This word makes emerge 
there, in a form that assists all the women who 
pronounce it, the object to whose glory these 
cantos are devoted, an object I could no better 
designate than by calling it the universal phal- 
lus (as one says, clefuniverselle [skeleton or mas- 
ter key that fits all locks]). 



On an Ex Post Facto Syllabary 



The note that one might have expected me to append in passing in the pre- 
ceding text to the name of Silberer is not really missing: it can be found 
in the text in a dissolved form. I have done this in response to the fact that 
Jones devotes a whole chapter, the fourth one interpolated before his con- 
clusion, to the discussion of Silberer's invention. 
71 8 This results in a redoubling of the whole of his argumentation in this 

part of the text, creating a lame equivalence which strikes me as one symp- 
tom (among others) of the problem found in the theory that Jones pres- 
ents us. 

The note that must be made regarding Silberer can take on its value by 
clarifying why, if it may be said of a text, I have been unable to do any- 
thing more than redouble its problem. 

Silberer intends to trace what becomes of the symbol's (historic) impact, 
which he qualifies (quite pertinently) as a "material phenomenon," when 
it accedes to the function of determining a psychical state, or even of estab- 
lishing the so-called constitution of a rhythm or penchant. 

The "functional phenomenon" that he makes of it is a function recov- 
ered from what is material, from which it results that what it "symbolizes" 
henceforth is an elaborate structure, and all the more rightfully so since 
it is, in fact, one of its consequences. 

I am forcing his notorious illustration of it in which he qualifies as a 



On an Ex Post Facto Syllabary 603 

layer cake the cake into which he seems to have had a hard time inserting 
an adequate knife, in the transition to sleep in which his struggle with this 
cake replaced his efforts to bring his thought back to the level of arousal 
necessary for it to be equal to his existence as a subject. 

Psychical strata are evoked here, displacing the phenomenon by sug- 
gesting a possible endoscopy of depths that verge on the sublime. 

The phenomenon is indisputable. This is why Freud made room for 
it in a note he added to the Traumdeutung [The Interpretation of Dreams] 
in 1914, and particularly in the most striking form of it that Silberer 
provided in 1911, as the symbolism of the threshold (Schwellensymbo- 
lik), which is possibly enriched by the addition of a guardian at that 
threshold. 

But the phenomenon seduces us from another angle. One might say 
that it springs off the still green trampoline of Freud's discovery to con- 
quer anew the psychology that one would need but resuscitate from its 
dust. 

Now, it is here that the brakes that Jones intends to slam on by cham- 
pioning Freud take on the value that interests us here, since he confirms 
ab ovo, I mean, at the germination stage of psychoanalysis, the position 
I adopt in my teaching. 

Jones explicitly goes so far here as to enunciate the principle with which 
Jung excluded himself from psychoanalysis. 

It can be summarized in a word, which is relevant in recalling that the 71 9 

thing is still there, regardless of where its label comes from: what Jones 
intends to ward off is the "hermeneuticization" of psychoanalysis. 

The symbol that he calls true, because it designates the one that Freud 
isolated, does not "symbolize" in the sense in which the figures of the Old 
Testament symbolize on the basis of what becomes of them in the New 
Testament, which remains the commonsense meaning of symbolism. 

This is why it is easy for him to point out the slippage that occurs in 
Silberer's work, slippage which aligns him with Jung. The symbol allows 
itself to be surpassed by what it figures once it comes to be no more than 
a figurative meaning. 

Now, what it allows to surpass it are the invisible realities that return 
behind a veil which they have perhaps not always had but which they 
have had for quite a while; and our memory of this veil must be effaced. 

Let us not be mistaken here. The role Freud grants to the "functional 
phenomenon" is granted due to the secondary revision of the dream, 
which says it all, in my view, since Freud explicitly defines secondary 



604 Ecrits 

revision as the scrambling of the code [chiffre] of the dream that occurs 
by means of a camouflaging which he no less explicitly designates as 
imaginary. 

It does not exclude the absurdity (which must be still more absurd than 
it lets on, and devoid of any form when it is intimately inscribed) that leads 
Jones in 1 9 1 6 to relate it to "a personal communication" he had with Freud, 
when it is found, however unrelated it may seem, in the lines that tie the 
"functional phenomenon" to the 1914 edition of the Traumdeutung) 

One can read there, regarding the functional phenomenon that it con- 
cerns, above all, no doubt, about minds "of an especially philosophical 
and introspective type." 

Which is laughable and can be made fun of (as you have seen, I do not 
deprive myself of doing so) because the question is echoed here whether 
philosophy suffices to subtract such minds from the effects of the uncon- 
scious, when the very discussion shows that, at the time when what Freud 
said was still taken seriously, the functional phenomenon makes his analy- 
sis of the dream come up short since it is not an effect of desire (that is, 
of libido, of desire as sexual). 
720 In this case, with the exception being as real as the norm and requir- 

ing that we account for its encroachment, the question means: Are there 
two different laws of sleep? 

Now, it is its ridiculousness that is instructive. This is due to the fol- 
lowing which can be demonstrated: that a certain rejection of the expe- 
rience to which Freud gave himself over here is justified insofar as it is 
the inaugural step of science. 

It is the step that I have introduced in psychoanalysis by distinguish- 
ing the symbolic from the imaginary in their relationship to the real. This 
distinction is forced upon us since it derives from psychoanalytic prac- 
tice through the critique of its intervention and proves to be eristic for 
the theoretical edifice. 

It is a methodological distinction, therefore, which does not consti- 
tute for all that — let me indicate this since the term is offered up to me — 
any sort of threshold in reality [reel]. Indeed, if symbolic structuration 
finds its material in disjoining the imaginary from the real, it becomes all 
the more effective in disjoining the real itself by being reduced to the sig- 
nified relation to the subject — namely, to a schematism whose value is, 
at first glance, determined by the degree to which it forces the imaginary 
to decline. 

Although the rigor of this approach is required for access to the sec- 
ond retreat where object a traces itself out on the basis of another knot, 



On an Ex Post Facto Syllabary 6o5 

I will confine my attention here to the fact that we sense that Jones, fail- 
ing here, simply highlights how badly he needs my categories. 

It is up to me to demonstrate that Freud uses them, given the never 
failing sureness with which he settles matters in his field, giving himself 
the last word when scientificity is at stake. 

But is that so surprising when his attachment to science explains the 
aversion with which he supports his adventure, and that the symbolic, 
the imaginary, and the real are nothing but a vade mecum which we use 
in emergencies, in this field which is ever suspended above those who 
find it comfortable, being forewarned when they wallow in it? 

Thus we can articulate that it is not because the threshold as a sym- 
bol, or better stated, as a signifier marking the place where it begins to 
be called by another name — the house, the naos, and even the outside in 
what is unpronounceable about it — is materially a flat field stone, which 
is laid down or put in place, that one can in any way (based on the 
metaphor of the threshold, employed to note, on a curve coordinating 
objectified variables, the point at which a state manifests itself, even if it 
were itself objectified on the basis of apperception or simply the quali- 
tative difference of a sensation) imagine a graspable ledge anywhere in 
the real, a fortiori any layer whatsoever, which constitutes the psychical 721 

field (and even the field of simple representation) in it as stratified — that 
is, as unitary. 

It would thus be perfectly futile to qualify the thresholds, which nev- 
ertheless are possible to register [inscrire], as "functional phenomena" on 
the basis of the feeling in every field of a heavy and a light, both of which 
are equally heavy with symbolism, as we shall see further on — if we think 
we can thereby give them the slightest value in the theory of gravitation, 
which only took form by borrowing signifiers from an entirely differ- 
ent realm. 

Jones, like me, considers this point to be relevant to the matter, which 
is why he discusses it and settles it as he does. Doesn't he realize to what 
extent it ultimately involves giving up Antiquity's fantasy about knowl- 
edge [connaissance]? We need but note here his recourse to the decency 
of psychoanalytic thought. 

But we should also note that this recourse is weakened by him when 
he articulates it only on the basis of the fact that what is figurative in 
metaphor must yield to what is concrete in symbolism. 

For the entire fiction — which, by attributing the characteristics of 
primitiveness, archaism, lack of differentiation, and even neurological dis- 
integration to symbolism, contributes to our seeing in it only the virtu- 



6o6 Ecrits 

ality of synthetic functions — acquires the force of argument on the basis 
of this concrete. Adding to it their potentiality merely crowns the error 
by wrapping it in mystique. 

Brandishing the sword on this terrain which is thus secondary in 1916, 
Jones no doubt triumphs. We will excuse him for failing to ward off the 
danger that will arise shy of it: precisely from the psychologiiation with 
which psychoanalytic practice will ever more weigh itself down in oppo- 
sition to Freud's discovery. 

For no sense of shame can prevail against an effect at the level of the 
profession, that of enrolling the practitioner in services in which psy- 
chologization is a perfect pathway for all sorts of well specified necessi- 
ties in the social world: How can one refuse to speak the language of those 
for whom one serves as a prop? When the question is framed in this way, 
one cannot even see any harm in it. Psychoanalysis has withered to such 
an extent that it thus forgets that its first responsibility is to language. 

This is why Jones proves to be "too weak"* (as it was repeated to me) 
to politically master Anafreudianism. I have coined this term to desig- 
nate a form of Freudianism that is reduced for use in an ana, and which 
is supported by Freud Anna. 
722 The fact that Jones furthered the cause of the Kleinians against this 

clan suffices to demonstrate that he opposed it. The fact that he indicated 
in Vienna his total agreement with Melanie Klein, however weak her con- 
ceptualizations must have seemed to him with respect to his own require- 
ments, also suffices to demonstrate his faithfulness to a truly psychoanalytic 
approach. 

And since this agreement proclaimed in Vienna concerned the dis- 
cussion that he dominated about the phallic phase in women, let me pro- 
vide a commentary to help those who, as I have seen, show little finesse 
in understanding my meaning here. 

In the preceding text, I highlighted the astonishing fact that Jones 
remains deaf to the import of his own catalog of "primary ideas" that 
group symbols in the unconscious. For if we extend this catalog on the 
basis of his statement that the concrete grounds the true symbol, he merely 
brings out more clearly the counter-truth of this statement. For every 
one of these ideas is lacking in the concrete, since they stand up in the 
real only thanks to the signifier, so much so that one could say that they 
only ground a reality by having it raise itself up on a base of unreality 
[irre'el]: death, desire, and the name of the father. 

It would thus be hopeless to expect Jones to realize that the symbolic 



On an Ex Post Facto Syllabary 607 

function allows the nodal point to appear here at which a symbol comes 
to the place of lack constituted by the "missing from its place" that is nec- 
essary for the dimension of displacement, from which the whole play of 
symbols stems, to arise. 

I immediately suggested the symbol of the snake in the very modu- 
lation of the sentence [in the preceding text] in which I evoked the fan- 
tasy by which Anna O . . . falls asleep in the Studies on Hysteria, the snake 
which is not a symbol of libido, of course, no more than the bronze ser- 
pent is a symbol of redemption — nor is this snake the symbol of the penis, 
as Jones professes, but rather the symbol of the place where the penis is 
missing. 

If I thus did not take the logical structure any further [in that text], it 
was no doubt because I was dealing with an audience that had been ren- 
dered unprepared for the rudiments of its articulation. 

All of my rhetoric aims at bolstering the training effect that I must 
nevertheless provide that audience. 

It must be added here that those who seemed the best prepared to antic- 
ipate its implications preferred to beat their heads against the form of this 
sentence. 

A little game, of Chinese origin if one is to believe the instructions, 
nicely illustrates the function of place in symbolism, for it requires the 723 

player to simply slide pieces of unequal sizes over a surface, where they 
leave empty a modest square, in order to arrive at a predetermined posi- 
tion. The same is no doubt also true of the resistances that it demonstrates 
in the practice of the combinatory. The game is called Red Donkey [FAne 
Rouge]. 

The resistance I am referring to is in the imaginary. And it is because, 
in my very first steps in psychoanalysis, I gave it its status in the mirror 
stage that I was later able to give symbolism its proper place. 

Indeed, confusions in the symbolic stem from the imaginary — this has 
been known forever. But the error, which is no less longstanding, is to 
try to remedy this through a critique of representation, when the imag- 
inary remains prevalent in it. Jones remains dependent upon this con- 
ception, for when he defines the symbol as an "idea" of the concrete, he 
already consents to it being but a figure. 

His bias is Baconian. We are marked by this in school where we are 
taught that the decisive axis of science lies in its recourse to the sensorium, 
which is qualified as experimental. 

The imaginary is not in any sense the illusory, in my view. On the 



6o8 Ecrits 

contrary, I grant it its function as real by basing it on biology — that is, 
as we saw earlier in the IRM, on the innate effect of the imago, which is 
manifest in all forms of display. 

In this respect, we are faithful in psychoanalysis to an affiliation that 
we feel the need to distinguish quite foolishly from the term "biological" 
in order to oppose it to a culturalism to which we claim to contribute in 
no regard. 

We simply do not indulge in those forms of delusion that we have suf- 
ficiently designated. To biologize in our field is to bring back into it every- 
thing that is useful to us in the science known as biology, and not simply 
to call upon something real that is alive. 

To speak of urethral or anal instinct, or even to mix them together, 
has no more biological meaning than to tickle one 's semblable or to be 
an undertaker. To highlight animal ethology or the subjective impact of 
neonatal prematurity in Hominoidea does have biological meaning. 

Symbolic thought must be situated, as I try to do, in relation to scien- 
tific thought, but we will find nothing in it if we seek out this relation- 
ship in the virtual or potential. 
724 This relationship is found in the actual. 

There has never been any other thought than symbolic thought, and 
scientific thought is the kind of thought that reduces symbolism by ground- 
ing the subject in it — this is called mathematics in everyday language. 

It is thus not at all with respect to a depreciation of thought, a retar- 
dation of the subject, an archaism of development, or even a dissolution 
of mental function — or more absurdly still, the metaphor of being freed 
from automatisms that supposedly register its results — that symbolism 
can be situated, even if it perpetuates the impact related to these states in 
the real. 

Conversely, one cannot say that symbolic thought has always been 
ripe with scientific thought, if one intends to include no knowledge in it. 
This merely provides material for historical casuistry. 

Psychoanalysis has the privilege that symbolism is reduced in it to the 
truth effect that, whether it is extracted or not from its pathetic forms, it 
isolates in its knot as the counterpart without which nothing can be con- 
ceived of by way of knowledge. 

"Knot" here means the division that the signifier engenders in the 
subject, and it is a true knot in that it cannot be flattened out. 

The knot of the functional phenomenon is merely a false knot accord- 
ing to this criterion, and this is why Jones pretends that it redoubles the 



On an Ex Post Facto Syllabary 609 

first knot. But flattening out the second one does not make the first one 
easier to deal with. 

The structure of the symbol is that of a knot that one cannot flatten 
out; this structure is such that one cannot found an identification unless 
something serves as the support to cut it. 



1966 



Note 



1. See La Science des reves (Paris: Alcan, 1939), 308-9 and 450-52 [in English, see SE 
V, 214, footnote 4, and 503-6]. 



725 



Guiding Remarks for a Convention 
on Female Sexuality 



/. Historical Introduction) 

If we consider the experience of psychoanalysis in the course of its sixty- 
year development, no one will be surprised to hear that, while it conceived 
of itself at first as grounding the castration complex — the first offspring of 
its origins — in repression brought on by the father, it has progressively 
turned its interest toward frustrations coming from the mother, an interest 
by which this complex has not been better elucidated, although its forms 
have been distorted. 

A notion of affective deficiency, directly linking developmental problems 
to real defects in mothering, is paralleled by a dialectic of fantasies whose 
imaginary field is the maternal body. 

What is at stake here is obviously the conceptual promulgation of 
woman's sexuality and it allows us to note a striking negligence. 

II. Definition of the Subject 

This negligence concerns the very point to which people would like to draw 
attention at this juncture: namely, the female part [partie], if this term has any 
meaning, in what is at stake in genital relations where the act of coitus occu- 
pies at least a local place. 

Or, so as not to lower ourselves from the lofty biological landmarks with 



Guiding Remarks for a Convention on Female Sexuality 61 1 

which we continue to be content: What libidinal pathways are assigned to 726 

women by the anatomically visible signs of sexual differentiation among 
higher organisms? 

777. Review of the Facts 

Such a project requires us to first review: 

(a) the phenomena attested to by women under the conditions of psycho- 
analytic experience regarding the avenues and act of coitus, insofar as 
these phenomena confirm or fail to confirm the nosological bases of our 
medical point of departure; 

(b) the subordination of these phenomena to the mainsprings that our ana- 
lytic activity recognizes as desires, and especially to their unconscious off- 
shoots — with the effects on the psychical economy that result therefrom, 
whether they are afferent or efferent with respect to the act — among which 
those of love can be regarded separately, not to mention the transition of 
their consequences to children; 

(c) the never recanted implications of a psychical bisexuality related first to 
anatomical duplications, but which have been progressively transferred 
to "personological" identifications. 

IV. The Shine /Eclat/ of Absences 

From such a summary, certain absences can be isolated whose interest cannot 
be avoided by withdrawing the case [non-lieu]: 

1 . While we must always be reserved when it comes to the clinical inter- 
pretation of the new findings of physiology (for example, the facts of chro- 
mosomal sex and its genetic correlates, its distinction from hormonal sex, and 
their proportional share in anatomical determination — or simply what has 
been found regarding the libidinal privilege of the male hormone, and even 
the ordering of estrogen metabolism in the menstrual phenomenon), they 
nevertheless give us pause for thought since they have been ignored by a 
practice in which people readily base their case on a messianic access to deci- 
sive chemisms. 

The distance from reality [reel] that is maintained here may, indeed, raise 
the question of the dividing line [coupure] involved — which, if it is not to be 
drawn between the somatic and the psychical that are consubstantial, must be 727 

drawn between organism and subject, on condition that we repudiate for the 
latter the affective valuation with which the theory of error has burdened it, 



6i2 Ecrits 

in order to articulate it instead as the subject of a combinatory, the latter alone 
giving the unconscious its meaning. 

2. Inversely, a paradox that originates in the psychoanalytic approach — 
the key position of the phallus in libidinal development — is of interest due to 
the insistence with which it is repeated in the facts. 

It is here that the question of the phallic phase in women becomes still 
more problematic, in that after having created an uproar from 1927 to 1935, 
it has since been left tacitly intact, interpreted by everyone however he 
likes. 

It is by investigating the reasons for this that we can put an end to this sus- 
pension [of the question]. 

Imaginary, real, or symbolic: as concerns the impact of the phallus in the 
subjective structure to which development adapts, these are not terms from 
an individual's teaching but the very terms by which, in writings by certain 
authors, the conceptual slippage is indicated that has led, since it was not 
checked, to the lifelessness of analytic experience after the stagnation of 
debate. 

V, The Darkness Cast upon the Vaginal Organ 

The apperception of a prohibition, however oblique the preceding may have 
been, may serve us as a prelude. 

Is it confirmed by the fact that our discipline — which, justifying its field 
in terms of sexuality, seemed to promise to bring the whole secret of sexual- 
ity to light — has left what is recognized about feminine jouissance at the 
exact point at which a hardly zealous physiology threw in the towel? 

The rather trivial opposition between clitoral jouissance and vaginal sat- 
isfaction has been so greatly reinforced by the theory that it has worried 
many subjects, and the theory has even taken this worry up as a theme, if not 
as a demand — though we cannot say, for all that, that the opposition between 
them has been elucidated any more correctly. 

This is true because the nature of vaginal orgasm has kept its obscurity 
inviolate. 
728 For the massotherapeutic notion of the sensitivity of the cervix and the 

surgical notion of a noli tangere regarding the posterior wall of the vagina 
prove in fact (in hysterectomies of course, but also in vaginal aplasias!) to be 
contingent. 

Representatives of the fairer sex, however loud their voices among ana- 
lysts, do not seem to have given their all to remove the seal of secrecy. 

Apart from the famous "taken on lease" of rectal dependence on which 



Guiding Remarks for a Convention on Female Sexuality 613 

Lou Andreas-Salome took a personal stand, they have generally confined 
themselves to metaphors whose loftiness in the ideal signifies nothing prefer- 
able to what the hoi polloi give us by a way of a less intentional poetry. 

A convention on female sexuality is not about to cause to weigh upon us 
the threat of Tiresias' fate. 

VI. The Imaginary Complex and Questions of Development 

If this state of affairs betrays a scientific impasse in approaching reality \reel\ 
the least one can nevertheless expect from psychoanalysts, meeting at a con- 
vention, is that they not forget that their method was born of a similar 
impasse. 

If symbols here have only an imaginary hold, this is probably because 
images are already subjected to an unconscious symbolism, in other words, 
to a complex. This is an opportune moment to recall that images and symbols 
in women cannot be isolated from images and symbols o/women. 

The representation ( Vorstellung in the sense in which Freud uses the term 
when he notes that it is what is repressed) of female sexuality, whether it is 
repressed or not, conditions its implementation, and its displaced emergences 
(in which the therapist's doctrine may turn out to be an interested party) seal 
the fate of the tendencies, however naturally refined [degrossies] one assumes 
them to be. 

It should be recalled that Jones — in his address to the Vienna Psychoana- 
lytic Society, which seems to have scorched the earth for all contributions 
since — already found nothing to offer but a pure and simple rallying cry to 
Kleinian concepts in the perfectly brutal form in which Klein presents them: 
I am referring to Melanie Klein's lack of concern for the fact that the earliest 
Oedipal fantasies, which she includes in the maternal body, actually derive 729 

from the reality presupposed by the Name-of-the-Father. 

When we consider that this is all Jones comes up with in his attempt to dis- 
pel Freud's paradox, which instates women in a primal ignorance of their 
sexual organ but which is also tempered by the educated admission of our 
own ignorance — his attempt being motivated to such a degree by his belief in 
the dominance of the natural order that he finds it pleasing to assure it with a 
quote from Genesis — it is difficult to see what has been gained. 

For since it is a question of the wrong that has been done to the female sex 
("is a woman born or made?" Jones cries) by the equivocal function of the 
phallic phase in the two sexes, it does not seem that femininity is any better 
specified when the phallus' function becomes still more equivocal by being 
taken all the way back to oral aggression. 



6i4 Ecrits 

So much noise will not have been in vain, however, if it allows us to modu- 
late the following questions on the lyre of development, since that is its music. 

1. Is the bad object of a fantastic phallophagy, which extracts it from the 
bosom [sein] of the maternal body, a paternal attribute? 

2. In the case of the same object, raised to the ranks of the good object and 
desired as a more manageable (sic) and more satisfying (in what respect?) 
nipple, the question becomes more precise: Is it from the same third party 
that it is borrowed? For it does not suffice to adopt the notion of the "com- 
bined parent" — we still must know whether it is as an image or a symbol that 
this hybrid is constituted. 

3. How does the clitoris, as autistic as its solicitations may be, imposing 
itself nevertheless in reality \reel], come to be compared with the preceding 
fantasies? 

If it is independently that it places the little girl's sexual organ under the 
sign of an organic minus-value, the aspect of proliferating duplication that 
fantasies take on from it renders them suspect by falling under the heading of 
"legendary" fabulation. 

If it (too) combines with both the bad and the good object, then we need a 
theory that explains the equivalence function [fonction d' equivalence] served 
by the phallus in the advent of any object of desire, the simple mention of its 
"partial" character not sufficing. 

4. In any case, the question rearises of the structure Freud's approach 
730 introduced: namely, the fact that the relation of deprivation or not-being 

[manque a etre] symbolized by the phallus is established as a diversion [deri- 
vation] from the not-having [manque a avoir] engendered by any particular or 
global frustration of demand; and that it is on the basis of this substitute — 
which, in the final analysis, the clitoris puts in its place before succumbing in 
the competition — that the field of desire precipitates its new objects (at the 
top of the list, the future child [of her own]) by reclaiming [recuperation] the 
sexual metaphor in which all the other needs were already taken up. 

This remark assigns a limit to questions about development, requiring 
that they be subordinated to a fundamental synchrony. 

VII. Misrecognitions and Biases 

At this same point, it is appropriate to investigate whether phallic mediation 
exhaustively accounts for everything drive-related that can manifest itself in 
women, especially the whole current of maternal instinct. Why not posit here 
that the fact that everything that is analyzable is sexual does not mean that 
everything that is sexual is accessible to analysis? 



Guiding Remarks for a Convention on Female Sexuality 6i5 

1. Regarding the [girl's] supposed ignorance [meconnaissance] of the 
vagina: If, on the one hand, it is difficult not to attribute to repression its fre- 
quent persistence for an implausibly long period of time, the fact remains 
that — apart from several case studies (by Josine Miiller) that I will set aside 
due to the very traumas to which they attest — the proponents of "normal" 
knowledge [connaissance] of the vagina are reduced to basing this knowledge 
on the primacy of a displacement downward of the mouth's experiences, that 
is, to seriously aggravating the discordance they claim to palliate. 

2. Next there is the problem of female masochism which already appears 
in the promotion of a partial drive — that is, a drive that is regressive in its 
condition, whether or not it is characterized as pregenital — to the status of a 
pole of genital maturity. 

Indeed, such a characterization cannot be considered to be simply a hom- 
onym for "passivity," which is already metaphorical; and its idealizing func- 
tion, the inverse of its regressive aspect, shines through clearly in the fact that 
it is not discussed, unlike the accumulation — which is perhaps forced in mod- 73 1 

ern analytic genesis — of castrating and devouring, dislocating and stupefy- 
ing effects in feminine activity. 

Can we rely on what masochistic perversion owes to male invention and 
conclude that female masochism is a fantasy of male desire? 

3. In any case, I will denounce the irresponsible mental retardation that 
claims to deduce fantasies of the breaking of corporal boundaries from an 
organic constant whose prototype would be the rupture of the ovular mem- 
brane — a crude analogy that shows clearly enough how far such people are 
from Freud's way of thinking in this domain when he elucidates the taboo of 
virginity. 

4. For we verge here on the mainspring by which vaginismus is distin- 
guished from neurotic symptoms even when they coexist, which explains 
why the former yields to a suggestive procedure whose success is well known 
in painless childbirth. 

If analysis has, in effect, degenerated to the point of swallowing its own 
vomit by tolerating that people in its circle confuse anxiety and fear, it is perhaps 
time to distinguish between unconscious and bias regarding the signifier's 
effects. 

And to recognize, simultaneously, that the analyst is just as liable as any- 
one else to have a bias regarding sex, above and beyond [/jom/) what the 
unconscious reveals to him. 

Do we recall Freud's oft-repeated advice not to reduce the supplement of 
the feminine with respect to the masculine to the complement of the passive 
with respect to the active? 



6i6 Ecrits 

VIII. Frigidity and Subjective Structure 

1 . Frigidity — however broad its realm may be, and it is almost generic if one 
takes into account its transitory form — presupposes the entire unconscious 
structure that determines neurosis, even if it appears outside of the context of 
symptoms. This accounts, on the one hand, for the fact that it is refractory to 
all somatic treatments and, on the other hand, for the usual failure of the ded- 
icated efforts \bons offices] of the most desired partner. 
732 Analysis alone mobilizes it, at times incidentally, but always in a transfer- 

ence that cannot be contained in the infantilizing dialectic of frustration, or 
even deprivation, but clearly such that it brings symbolic castration into play. 
This amounts here to the recalling to mind of a principle. 

2. This principle is easy to lay out: Castration cannot be deduced from 
development alone, since it presupposes the subjectivity of the Other as the 
locus of its law. The difference between the sexes [Lalterite du sexe] is dena- 
tured by this alienation. A man serves here as a relay so that a woman 
becomes this Other to herself, as she is to him. 

It is in this respect that an unveiling of the Other involved in the transfer- 
ence can modify a symbolically commanded defense. 

I mean that the defense here can be conceptualized, firstly, in the dimen- 
sion of mascarade that the presence of the Other liberates in the sexual role. 

If one begins anew from this veil effect to relate the object's position to it, 
one will divine how the monstrous conceptualization, whose analytic asset 
was investigated above, may deflate. Perhaps this conceptualization simply 
means that everything can be attributed to a woman insofar as she represents 
the absolute Other in the phallocentric dialectic. 

We must thus return to penis envy (Penisneid) in order to observe that at 
two different times, and with a certainty equally lessened at each of them by 
the memory of the other, Jones makes of it a perversion and then a phobia. 

The two assessments are equally false and dangerous. The one marks the 
effacement of the function of structure before that of development, toward 
which analysis has slipped ever further — to be contrasted here with Freud's 
emphasis on phobia as the cornerstone of neurosis. The other inaugurates the 
rise of the maze to which the study of the perversions has found itself con- 
demned in attempting to account for the function of the object in perversion. 

At the last detour of this palace of mirages, people arrive at the splitting* 
of the object, not having known how to discern, in Freud's admirable inter- 
rupted note on the splitting* of the ego*, the fading* of the subject that 
accompanies it. 

"Fading" is perhaps also the term that can dissipate the illusion of the 



Guiding Remarks for a Convention on Female Sexuality 6iy 

splitting* in which analysis has gotten bogged down by making good and bad 733 

into attributes of the object. 

If the sexes have different positions with respect to the object, it is owing 
to the distance that separates the fetishistic form of love from the erotomani- 
acal form of love. We should find its salient features in the most ordinary 
lived experience. 

3. If one begins with a man in order to assess the reciprocal position of the 
sexes, one sees that phallus-girls, this equation having been posited by 
Fenichel in a meritorious yet groping manner, proliferate in a Venusberg to 
be situated beyond the "You are my wife" by which he constitutes his part- 
ner; it is confirmed thereby that what reemerges in the subject's unconscious 
is the Other's desire [le desir de F Autre], that is, [a desire for] the phallus that 
was desired by the Mother. 

After which, the question arises of knowing whether the real penis, 
because it belongs to her sexual partner, destines a woman to an attachment 
devoid of duplicity, although it does not effect the elimination of the incestu- 
ous desire which supposedly occurs naturally here. 

One would be approaching the problem from the wrong angle were one 
to consider it to be resolved. 

4. Why not admit, in fact, that if there is no virility that castration does not 
consecrate, it is a castrated lover or a dead man (or the two in one) who, for 
woman, hides behind the veil in order to call her adoration to it — that is, [he 
calls] from the same locus beyond the maternal semblable from which the 
threat came to her of a castration that does not really concern her. 

Thus it is because of this ideal incubus that an embrace-like receptivity 
must be displaced in a sheath-like sensitivity onto the penis. 

This is thwarted by any imaginary identification a woman may have (in 
her stature as an object offered up to desire) with the phallic standard [e talon] 
that props up fantasy. 

In the either/or position in which the subject finds herself caught between 
a pure absence and a pure sensitivity, we should not be surprised that the nar- 
cissism of desire immediately latches onto the narcissism of the ego* that is its 
prototype. 

The fact that insignificant beings may be inhabited by such a subtle dialec- 
tic is what analysis accustoms us to, and it is explained by the fact that banal- 
ity is the ego's* least significant shortcoming. 

5. The figure of Christ, which is evocative in this respect of other older 
figures, plays a more extensive role [instance] here than the subject's religious 734 
allegiance would imply. And it is worth noting that the unveiling of the most 
hidden signifier, that of the Mysteries, was reserved for women. 



6i8 Ecrits 

At a more down-to-earth level we thus account for: a) the fact that the 
duplicity of the subject is masked in women, all the more so in that the part- 
ner's servitude makes him especially apt to represent the victim of castration; 
b) the true reason why the demand that the Other be faithful takes on its par- 
ticular character in women; c) the fact that she justifies this demand all the 
more readily with the supposed argument of her own faithfulness. 

6. This review of the problem of frigidity is traced out in terms in which 
analysis' classical instances can easily be reaccommodated. Its broad out- 
lines attempt to help avoid the pitfall owing to which analytic writings are 
becoming ever more denatured: namely, their resemblance to the reassem- 
bly of a bicycle by a savage who has never seen one, using spare parts [organes 
detaches] from models that are far enough apart historically that they do not 
bear any relation to each other, their use for two different purposes thus not 
being ruled out. 

At the very least, let some elegance renew the comic side of the trophies 
thus obtained. 

IX. Female Homosexuality and Ideal Love 

1 . Studying the framework of perversion in women introduces another per- 
spective. 

Given that it has been largely demonstrated for most of the male perver- 
sions that their imaginary motive is the desire to preserve a phallus — the one 
that interested the subject in his mother — the absence in women of fetishism, 
which represents the virtually blatant case of this desire, leads us to suspect 
that this desire has a different fate in the perversions women present. 

For to suppose that a woman herself assumes the role of the fetish merely 
introduces the question of her different position with respect to desire and 
the object. 

Jones — in his article, "The Early Development of Female Sexuality," 
which inaugurated a series — begins from his exceptional experience of 
735 homosexuality in women and takes things up in a middle register [medium] 

that he might perhaps have done better to sustain. He has the subject's desire 
bifurcate in the choice she is supposedly forced to make between her incestu- 
ous object, her father here, and her own sex. The resulting light that Jones 
sheds on the matter would be greater if he did not stop short due to his 
reliance upon the overly convenient prop of identification. 

Better armed observation would show, it seems, that what is at stake is, 
instead, a sublation [releve] of the object: one might say a challenge that is 
accepted [defi releve]. Freud's original case study, inexhaustible as usual, 



Guiding Remarks for a Convention on Female Sexuality 619 

allows us to grasp that this challenge finds its point of departure in a demand 
[exigence] for love which is held up to ridicule in reality [reel] and that it leads 
to nothing less than artificially making a virtue of [se donner les gants de] 
courtly love. 

If courtly love, more than any other form of love, prides itself on being the 
love that gives what it does not have, this is certainly what the female homo- 
sexual excels in doing regarding what she is missing. 

It is not really the incestuous object that she chooses at the expense of her 
own sex; what she does not accept is that this object only assumes [assume] his 
sex at the cost of castration. 

This is not to say that she renounces hers for all that: on the contrary, in all 
the forms of female homosexuality, even unconscious, the supreme interest is 
in femininity and Jones clearly detected the link here between the fantasy of 
man, the invisible witness, and the care taken by the subject in giving her 
partner jouissance. 

2. We must still learn something from the natural ease with which such 
women invoke their quality as men, in order to contrast it with the delusional 
style of the male transsexualist. 

Perhaps we see thereby the doorway that leads from female sexuality to 
desire itself. 

The passivity of the act does not at all correspond to this desire; female 
sexuality appears, instead, as the effort of a jouissance enveloped in its own 
contiguity (of which any circumcision perhaps indicates the symbolic break) 
in order to be realised in competition with the desire that castration liberates in 
the male in giving him the phallus as its signifier. 

Is it then this signifying privilege that Freud is aiming at when he suggests 
that there is perhaps but one libido and that it is marked with the male sign? 
If some chemical configuration supported it beyond, could we fail to see the 
exalting conjunction of the dissymmetry of the molecules employed by the 736 

living construction with the lack in the subject orchestrated by language, 
which is such that desire's supporters and the appellants of the fairer sex (the 
partiality of the term sexe always being the same here) act there as rivals? 

X. Female Sexuality and Society 

Several questions remain to be raised regarding the social impact of female 
sexuality. 

1 . Why does the analytic myth come up short concerning the prohibition 
of incest between father and daughter? 

2. How are we to situate the social effects of female homosexuality, in rela- 



620 Ecrits 

tion to those that Freud attributes — regarding presuppositions that diverge 
radically from the allegory to which they have since been reduced — to male 
homosexuality: namely, a sort of entropy moving in the direction of a 
degrading of the community? 

Without going so far as to contrast it with the antisocial effects that earned 
Catharism, as well as the Love it inspired, its disappearance, could we not, if 
we consider the eros of female sexuality in the more accessible movement of 
the Precieuses, grasp what it conveys by way of information as running 
counter to social entropy? 

3. Lastly, why does the social instance of women remain transcendent to 
the contractual order propagated by labor? And, in particular, is the status of 
marriage maintained by its effect, despite the decline of paternalism? 

These are all questions that cannot be reduced to an orderly field of needs. 

Written two years before the Convention. 

Note 

1 . This convention, known as the International Colloquium of Psychoanalysis, took place Sep- 
tember 5-9, 1960, at the city university of Amsterdam. My text was published in the last issue of 
the journal La Psychanalyse to which I directly contributed [VII (1962): 3-14]. 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 

On a book by Jean Delay and another by 
Jean Schlumberger 1 

Ikcuoioi \iev yap kcxivcx Jipoacpepcav aocpa 
66§eic; axpeioc, kotj aocpoc; Jieq/uKevat 
xcav 6 av 6oKOi3vxcav ei&evcxi xt jiolklA&v 
KpEtaacav vonicrttelc; Xvnpbc, ev ji6A.ei cpavEi. 
—Euripides, Medea, 298-301 

And whether it is a metaphor or not, what I am saying here is perfectly true. 
— Andre Gide, La Tentative amourense 



739 



The work that Jean Delay devoted to the youth of Andre Gide, which came 
out in two volumes, one a year after the other, has already met with consid- 
erable success. 2 Literary critics have, without any notable discordance, 
acclaimed it and appreciated the wide variety of its merits. 

I would like to show here the conjunction whereby a work, which is scien- 
tifically grounded in the fact that its author is eminently qualified to 
approach it from a general perspective, manages, in the particularity of its 
object, to lay out a problem in which the usual generalities change: it is to 
these most topical works that history promises a long life. 

The problem, that of man's relationship to the letter •, calls history itself into 
question, and thus it will be understood that contemporary thought grasps it 
only by enveloping it through a convergence effect of a geometrical kind, or, 
since we recognize that a strategy is found in the unconscious, by proceeding 
with an envelopment maneuver that can be discerned in our so-called human 
sciences — which are already no longer overly human. 

Relating Delay's work to this problem does not excuse me from promis- 
ing the reader — and in order to introduce the most inexperienced to the mat- 
ters that will be discussed here — a pleasure that will captivate him in the 
book's very first pages, without him having to resist, and that will carry him, 740 

effortlessly, it will seem to him, right to the last of its 1,300 pages. 

The sureness of the writing is the instrument of the pleasure in which he 
will be, in some sense, absorbed. The word "masterful" can be applied here 



624 Ecrits 

first to the art of a form of composition — whose folds are dissimulated by an 
alternation of perspectives, documents, analysis, commentary, and recon- 
structions — that only comes to one 's attention by appearing each time to offer 
it respite. 

It is upon closing the book that the reader realizes that nothing in it was 
motivated by anything other than a concern with providing an exact, delicate 
assessment. The touch of humor with which the author tempers its execution 
at moderate intervals is merely the room he makes for the comedy that struc- 
tures things: assuming that the tone he adopts in it surprises the reader in 
remaining devoid of affectation while running parallel to the modulation, 
which is one-of-a-kind, that his model brought out in his work. 

This is the threshold of the performance we are about to witness, for it 
denotes the author's disposition, which is that of what in Gidian terms I 
would call the most tender attention. For this is clearly the kind of attention 
that leads him to revive somewhere the archaic genitive of the "Gide child- 
hoods." And it is also the one that Gide was able to distinguish in their friend- 
ship, which developed late in his life. 

Thus we see why Delay, who has already proven his talent as a writer in 
sensitive work that future generations will return to, only employs his art in 
proportion to the artifex to whom he devotes it. This is confirmed by the 
astonishing uniformity, throughout this long work, of the qualities I have just 
mentioned, and justifies my changing as I please the Buffonesque aphorism, 
enunciating it as follows: the style is the object. 

In so doing, Delay claims to isolate a genre: psychobiography. Regardless 
of the law to which he wishes to submit it, the fact that he simultaneously 
provides its chef-d'oeuvre cannot be without importance in grasping its 
limit. This limit seems to me to be singularly revealed in the fate that befalls 
the work, and regarding which the old sacred monster wagered, I would 
swear to it, in giving his partner the material for an exceptional test, certain as 
he was that in taking it up, he could but complete it. 
741 Delay's very success shows what his lot was: the greater the rigor he 

applied to the subject of such an author, the more likely he would be to pro- 
duce the most necessary complement to the author's work. The psychobio- 
graphical "postface" to the writer aimed at here turns out, once completed, to 
have become a preface to his works, not being doomed to simply follow them 
on the bookshelves, like a neighbor bearing witness, like Boswell for John- 
son, and like Eckermann with Goethe, but beating the very drum to which 
their message will continue to march. 

The reader will excuse me for theorizing here about the turning point that 
Sainte-Beuve constitutes, in order to shift it from literary criticism to a liter- 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 6z5 

ary condition. Let us say, so as not to beat around the bush, that Sainte-Beuve 
grants the critic the power to make the writer's private life intrude into the lit- 
erary work to the degree of his own vanity. Allow me to define this private 
life in relation to the work itself, of which it becomes in some sense the neg- 
ative, being everything about himself that the writer did not publish. 

We are well aware of the project Sainte-Beuve used to justify this, which 
is a natural history of minds. But withholding our judgment regarding such 
an aim, and without otherwise taking a stand on the naturalness that it quali- 
fies, we can separate out the obvious effects it has had on the condition it 
places on the work of writing. 

I am thus adopting a stance of objective neutrality regarding Proust's 
position "against Sainte-Beuve," regardless of the relevance it derives from 
the poet's authority to speak about his creation, and more expressly from an 
analysis of the poetic message, which leaves no doubt but that approaching it 
requires a method suited to its nature. 

Proust's own writings indisputably show that the poet finds the material 
of his message in his own life. But the operation carried out by this message 
reduces his life events to their use as material. And this is true even though 
the message claims to articulate the experience that furnished these events, 
for at the very most the message can manage to be seen in this experience. 

We must not hesitate to go so far as to say that the signifierness of the mes- 
sage makes do with all the falsifications brought to what the experience sup- 
plies, the latter including at times the writer's very flesh. Indeed, the only 
thing that is of importance is a truth that is based on the fact that the message 
condenses in its unveiling. There is so little opposition between this Dichtung 742 

and Wahrheit in its nakedness that the fact of the poetic operation must make 
us notice, instead, the following feature which we forget in every truth: truth 
shows itself [s 'avere] in a fictional structure. 3 

As for insights into the published work, what literary critics have pro- 
duced by resorting to the writer's private life has remained rather evasive to 
date, with respect to their naturalness. But this practice — protests against 
which in the name of some kind of decency merely miss the point — has 
instead engendered a revolution in literary values. It has done so by intro- 
ducing into a market, whose effects have been regulated by printing tech- 
niques for the past four centuries, a new sign of value: what we call short(er) 
writings [petits papiers]. The manuscripts that print had relegated to the func- 
tion of the unpublished reappear as an integral part of the work with a func- 
tion that deserves examination. 

This is clearly the material offered up in the present work: personal notes 
taken by Gide for his memoirs, published as Si le grain ne meurt\ unpublished 



626 Ecrits 

passages from his journal; notes he took on his readings between the ages of 
20 and 24, significantly designated by him as his "subjective"; the enormous 
correspondence with his mother up until her death when he was 26; and a pile 
of unpublished letters collected by those around him, which increases the size 
of the edifice by the square of its mass when added to the published letters. 
In this mass we must include the hole left by the correspondence with his 

743 cousin, Madeleine Rondeaux, who became his wife, a hole whose place, 
importance, and cause I will discuss later. 

Things told to Delay in confidence and seen by him in person take up only 
a discreet amount of room here, which is fortunately less exiguous than he 
tells us he would have liked, but which he seems rather to have effaced. 

Neither Gide 's work nor the content of these intimate writings leaves any 
doubt as to the aim of the consummate homo litterarius Delay sees in him. The 
short(er) writings are, right from the outset and still more when they are tied 
together in bundles with string, planned with an eye to the body they must 
constitute, if not in the work itself, at least in relation to it. One might won- 
der what such an aim could offer of interest to Sainte-Beuve if it were truly 
naturalness he had in mind. 

In this aim, indeed, Gide does not simply redouble his message by adding 
his private thoughts to them — he cannot help but have his actions oriented 
by them. Let us note that his actions do not defer, as has always been the case, 
solely to his concern with glory, but also, and we find this term in his own 
writing, to his concern with his biography. 

To suspect on that basis that his entire life was insincere would be absurd, 
even if one were to argue that his biography recounts nothing base, no 
betrayal, no jealousy, no sordid motivation, and still less ordinary stupidity. 
One might note here that a psychoanalysis, while it is going on, constrains the 
subject 's actions more than he thinks, and that this changes nothing in the prob- 
lems raised by his behavior. We sense clearly enough that when Gide explains 
his loaning of capital to an esteemed friend in need 4 by expressly indicating 
that he is "looking after [his] biography," he is staking his confidence on this 
wager, in which pride has other outlets than to broadcast his good deed. 

The soul is always permeable to an element of discourse. What we are 
looking for, in the place in which the soul is constituted by the history of a 
word, are the effects to which many other words have contributed and from 
which the dialogue with God tries to take its bearings. These remarks are not 

744 irrelevant to Gide 's soliloquy as a beautiful soul. 

This soliloquy is conveyed in his literary work; aren't the short(er) writ- 
ings distinguished from that work simply by their deferred communication? 
It is here that Delay's book enlightens us with its appearance: the short(er) 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 627 

writings differ not in their content but in the audience to whom they are 
addressed. 

They are addressed to the biographer, and not to just any biographer. 
Reading Goethe 's memoirs, Gide wrote to his mother that he was "learning 
more by reading how Goethe blew his nose than [he] would by reading about 
how a concierge received Holy Communion." And he added: "Moreover, 
these memoirs are of very little interest regarding what they recount ... If 
they were not written by Goethe, if Goethe had had Eckermann write in his 
stead, there would remain merely their slight interest as documents." 5 

Let us say that, in allowing Delay to write in his stead about his short(er) 
writings, Gide was not unaware that Delay knew how to write nor that he 
was not Eckermann. But he also knew that Delay was an eminent psychia- 
trist, and that, in the final analysis, the eternal destination of these short(er) 
writings was the psychobiographer. 

Let us consider what leads people to say that the psychoanalyst in our times 
has taken the place of God. This reflection of omnipotence (which, moreover, 
the analyst greets with the pedantic-like detour of challenging this omnipo- 
tence at the core of his patient's thinking) must come to him from somewhere. 

It comes from the fact that, in order to live with his soul, man in our times 
needs the catechism's answer that gave him consistency. 

Gide knew how to do what it was appropriate to do with God and thus 
expected something else. Delay does not pointlessly mention Montaigne here 
and his way of addressing another who is yet to come regarding his private 
life, in which he gives up trying to discern what the signifier will be for this 
other. A similar form of address allows us to understand why the ambiguity 
with which Gide develops his message is found again in his short(er) writings. 

The miracle, which is how we should designate the present situation, is 
that in applying his role as consultant to the letter of the short(er) writings, 745 

Delay relays this ambiguity, finding anew in this soul the very effect in which 
the message formed. In Narcissus* water, the grassy depths have the same 
wavelength as the reflection of the foliage. 

Through Delay's work, psychology has a unique confrontation with liter- 
ary criticism. The lesson is gripping, for we see the subject's composition 
become organized in all its rigor therein. 

Allow me to say how this can be instructive. First, I will not consider fol- 
lowing in Delay's footsteps, however much one may forget that one is follow- 
ing him in seeing him so beautifully take up where Gide left off. A bloodhound 
on a hunter's track, he is not the one who will efface it. He stops and points it 
out to us with his shadow. He isolates, as if from himself, the very absence 
that caused it. 



628 Ecrits 

Regarding the family that was Gide 's own and not a social abstraction, 
Delay begins with a chronicle. 

He shows us how the tree of the bourgeoisie that arose under Louis XIV 
grew from a farmer, Nicolas Rondeaux, who acquired wealth by trading sta- 
ples from the colonies, already no doubt Arnolphe imagining himself to be 
Monsieur de la Souche. His son married into the family of a certain Father 
D'Incarville, his grandson was granted the name de Setry, and his great- 
grandson was Charles Rondeaux de Montbray, who was fascinated by the 
Enlightenment and even by illuminism — since F therefore M therefore — 
and suffered several misfortunes due to the French Revolution. This hardy 
tree — which was constantly grafted with high quality branches, and was not 
lacking in the crowning jewel of scholarly distinction granted for research in 
the natural sciences — left, after the storm, a seedling that was still vigorous. 

Edouard Rondeaux [Charles's son] could rival in deal making with the 
Turelures, who in those new times offered up as an ideal their practice — "get 
rich" — thanks to which they supposedly elevated the grandeur of France. If, 
however, their political preeminence never led to a clear title to this eleva- 
tion, it is perhaps because the only virtue that accounted for their existence, 
self-abnegation, was a little too exposed in those times to the suspicion of 
hypocrisy. Fortunately, they delegated the tradition of this virtue, along with 
its privileges, to their wives, which explains the comedy to which their mem- 
ory has been consigned. 

This comedy, which is especially immanent in a surprising dialogue found 
in the correspondence between Gide and his mother, is preserved throughout 
746 the book from the tragedy of the relation to the maternal figure wrought by 

psychologizing pedantry. This is clear right from this section of the book in 
the sketch of the blossoming of men's paunches, which is juxtaposed with the 
striking fact that, in two generations of Protestant affiliation, the women turn 
this family into a stronghold of Protestantism and a playpen of moral mother- 
ing — to which we owe the boon, after reduction of the penultimate males in 
the family to an insignificant status, of an illustrious specimen of humanity. 

His father's bourgeois background suggests another extraction, that of 
lawyers and academics, whom Delay credits with Florentine ancestry. The 
grandfather's close supervision of Paul Gide 's preparations for his aggrega- 
tion examination, Paul being Andre's father, is told movingly in order to 
introduce both the lightning-fast advancement of this original professor of 
law, and the loss felt by Andre for a sensitive father who only extricated him- 
self from an unfulfilling marriage through an untimely death. 

The heartrending image of this father appears in the veiled confession of 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 629 

a maxim tucked away in one of Paul's diaries, and in the tone of his filial 
devotion as retransmitted by Gide — one of Delay's rare references to his 
own memories. 

But further on a letter written by Uncle Charles rouses heightened emo- 
tions in us, regarding which we turn in vain to psychology for answers when 
we set out to reduce them to the supposed norms of comprehension. Respond- 
ing to something told him in confidence by his nephew concerning the loss of 
his virginity to Meriem, the charming Oulad, this cultured man violently 
opposed an act about which the least one can say is that the context of cus- 
tomary, nay ritual, prostitution in which it was situated would require him to 
temper his moralizing about it; nevertheless, Uncle Charles finds nothing bet- 
ter with which to depict its stigma than the stain of the act, impossible to undo 
once committed, of parricide that Lady Macbeth attempts in vain to efface. 6 

So it is that at the first stirrings of his explorations, the very thing dissipates 747 

that Gide believed he had to retain by way of Tainean reverence for the incom- 
patibilities of the inheritance turning sour in his blood. Myths give way to a 
method that recreates every being in his discourse, to repay each for his speech. 

A marriage of psychology and the letter — I would like to echo here a title 
by William Blake that was dear to Gide, in order to designate what happens 
when the letter, being educated by psychology, refinds in it its own instance 
in a position to direct it. 

If Delay notes in passing that Janet's description of psychasthenia is con- 
firmed here, it is to show that the description Gide provides of his own states 
of mind coincides with it, except for the fact that Gide 's description is written 
in stricter language. 7 We see here how we can wonder whether the scientific 
functions used to articulate the theory — reality function and psychological 
tension — are not simple metaphors of the symptom, and whether a symptom 
which is poetically so fruitful is not itself constructed like a metaphor, which 
would not for all that reduce it to a flatus vocis, the subject here paying the 
price of the signifying operation with the elements of his personality. 

This suggests, in my view, the ultimate mainspring of the psychoanalytic 
discovery. None of these avenues is foreign to Delay; he tries them out here, 
one after the other, without being able to do any better than to refer to frag- 
ments of theory into which analytic doctrine is currently disintegrating. Yet 
he is able to turn everything to advantage assuming he brings each stone to 
the right place, so much so that one can say that this book would not be the 
same without psychoanalysis. 

It did not even for a minute run the risk of resembling what the analytic 
world calls a work of "applied psychoanalysis." Delay immediately rejects 



6jo Ecrits 

what this absurd qualification translates by way of confusion on the part of 
analysts. Psychoanalysis is applied, strictly speaking, only as a treatment and 
thus to a subject who speaks and hears. 

In the absence of such circumstances it can only be a question of psycho- 

748 analytic method, the method that proceeds with the deciphering of signifiers 
without concern for any form of presumed existence of the signified. 

What Delay's work shows brilliantly is that a study, to the extent to which 
it observes this principle, and owing solely to its honest espousal of the proper 
method for reading literary material, encounters the very structure of the sub- 
ject that psychoanalysis sketches out in the organization of its own exposition. 

Psychoanalysts will no doubt consider that this once again proves just 
how important their doctrine is. They would do better to be concerned at the 
fact that no work that has come out under the rubric of applied psychoanaly- 
sis is preferable to this one as regards the purity of the method employed and 
the well-foundedness of its results. 

Delay always begins with the material his subject offers him: in this case, 
the road paved by Gide himself, who was, as we know, interested in psycho- 
analysis. 

It was Jacques Riviere's circle that first brought Freud's message to the 
forefront [in France] after World War I, the medical circle in which the aston- 
ishing Hesnard had discussed Freud starting in 1910, although he had to be 
begged to do so. Gide attempted to undergo analysis with Mrs. Sokolnicka 
who had come at that time to France as a missa dominica for the Viennese 
orthodoxy. He was a bit too much not to have escaped the holds — lacking, no 
doubt, in a bit of penetrating strength — of the likable pioneer. It is surprising 
that he was so little concerned with looking at the texts and judged Freud in 
a way whose repercussions cannot spare even someone of his stature. 8 

It is nevertheless in light of the explanations given by Sokolnicka, presented 
in an undisguised manner in his novel The Counterfeiters, that he sheds light 
on a childhood tragedy which befalls the character, little Boris, and which is 
taken up by Delay for what it is — namely, an elaboration of Gide 's own drama. 

Little Boris, consigned to his grandfather's care, is nevertheless not sub- 
mitted to the same conditions as he who, from the time of the death of his 

749 father when he was 11, tells us that he felt "suddenly enveloped completely 
by a love that, from that time forward, closed in" on him, that of his mother. 9 

On the other hand, we have the pleasure of seeing what we already under- 
stand, apt to bring knowing nods from the initiated, which can be easily 
obtained by recalling the overriding importance of the relationship with the 
mother in the affective life of homosexuals. Beyond that, we have the Oedi- 
pus complex, which has become a common term, people speaking about it as 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 631 

they might speak of a dresser — after having been the illness whose destruc- 
tive effects Gide met with sarcasm that was less costly to him than the earlier 
instance. 10 

Delay certainly does not limit himself to such a vague articulation. 

Who was his mother for this child, and this voice by which love was iden- 
tified with the commandments of duty? We are aware that there is more than 
one way to overly cherish a child, and this is true for the mothers of homo- 
sexuals as well. 

Delay does not give us the map of the labyrinth of identifications with 
which psychoanalysts cheat in their writings in order not to lose their way. 
But he has the advantage of finding his way because he does not let go of the 
thread of his case. 

He finds his way by unforgettably unfolding the components of the 
mother's discourse wherein we can glimpse the composition of her personality. 

He dwells on what others might push aside in a vain attempt to look 
behind it. Regarding Gide 's mother as a young girl — who is as unattractive 
to her suitors as to the graces, and who, her wedding being slow to come, 
whiles away the time by developing a passion for her governess [Anna 
Shackleton] — Delay impassively makes her letters speak: jealousy and des- 
potism are not excluded from this passion, even if they are not openly shown, 
nor are the embraces of an innocent joy, as anchored as they may be in the 
habits of vestal virgins. Surely we must find another depth to this attachment, 
behind these unassailable manifestations, for it to have resisted the prejudices 
of those around her, in a rebellion designed to vanquish them, who objected 
to it in the name of their difference in social rank. 

Just as the antics of the chambermaids correspond to the pathos of the sub- 
lime characters in Marivaux's plays, a memory of Gide 's as a child corre- 
sponds to this: straining to hear in nocturnal space the modulated sobs 
coming from the garret, where the servants, Marie and Delphine, the latter to 750 

be married the next day, were breaking up. 

The psychoanalyst can but stop and pause before a screen, which is cer- 
tainly all the more piquant here as Marie was to become one of the "dragons" 
who would watch out for what it was that the child was not supposed to be 
prodigal at. 

The silence he was able to maintain at the time, except deep within him- 
self, shows one small facet of an extensive taciturn reign in which darker 
powers constitute virtue. 

In this hallway filled with white-on-black medallions, Delay does not 
stand still. He knows to what pace he must match his stride, and what shadow, 
never more than glimpsed in a doorway, designates the female walker, who is 



6j2 Ecrits 

formidable in that she always leaves empty the room ahead that she stays in 
their race around the apartment. 

It was this emptiness that the child filled with monsters, the fauna of 
which we know, since an haruspex, with childlike eyes, an inspired tripe 
butcher, catalogued them for us, seeing them in the entrails of the nourish- 
ing mother. 

Because of this, we have attributed these fantasies to the imagination of 
the child, with its black instincts, without having yet progressed so far as to 
realize that the mother too had the same fantasies as a child, and that to 
broach the question by asking what route fantasies take to pass from mother 
to child would perhaps place us on the very path from which they derive their 
true impact. 

A nightmare, which is part of this series, 11 haunts Gide's sleep right up 
until the end, except that, starting at one point, he finds the Crique that eats 
him "funny." But what never ceases to fill him with anguish is the appearance 
on the scene of a shape, that of a woman whose veil has fallen, allowing him 
to see but a black hole, 12 or who slips away like sand between his fingers when 
he touches her. 13 

Another abyss corresponds to this in him, the one that opens up in his pri- 
751 mal jouissance: the destruction of a beloved toy, the noisy breaking of dishes 

when the servant carrying them is suddenly tickled, and the strange meta- 
morphosis of Gribouille drifting with the current of a river, sprouting 
branches and leaves — all these lead him to orgasm. 14 

Jolts, slips, and grimacing shapes — when the actors, the number of whom 
corresponds to that in Antiquity's plays, come in the front door to populate 
the stage with their masks, death has already come in the backdoor. For its 
place to be marked there, that place need no longer even be empty — it is 
enough for it to be numbered. Or, better put, isn't death itself the number 
assigned to the places? That is why it is so quick to change places. 

The child hears the pure voice of death three times. It is not greeted with 
anguish, but with a trembling that rises up from the very depths of his being, 
a sea [mer] that submerges everything, a Schaudern^ the allophonic signifier- 
ness of which Delay trusts in to confirm its signification of allogeneity — 
teaching us its semiology, especially that of the relation to the "second 
reality" and of the feeling of being cut off from relations with his semblables, 
by which this state is distinguished from anxious temptation. 15 

This is an example of clinical finesse, and further increases our chagrin at 
the mindless repetition of stupidities that we hear as psychiatrists, when 
everything remains to be articulated. 

I will not here go into why four corners are necessary in the relation of 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 633 

the ego to the other, and then to the Other, where the subject is constituted 
as signified. 

I will simply refer the reader to the chapters that situate them very simply 
through the sole progression, which is exemplary to my mind, of Delay's study. 

This progression begins with the fact that the earlier constructions, which 
were more necessary for the child, are redoubled in the writer's creations, 
having to occupy the four places which were rendered more uncertain due to 
the lack that dwelled there. 

This is why the constitution of the "Persona," which is the title of the 
chapter with which the fourth book of Delay's biography culminates, refers 
us back to the analysis of the Voyage d'Urien — a work which is interpreted by 
Delay, without leaving itself open to dispute any more than the deciphering 752 

of a rebus does, as the Voyage du Rien [Voyage of the Nothing] — which is the 
highlight of the third book. 

Similarly, "The Creation of a Double," which, in bringing the second 
book to a close, is the pivotal point of the two parts of the work, refers back 
to "A Divided Child" in the first book. 

This Spaltung or splitting of the ego, with which Freud's pen stopped in 
articulo mortis, clearly seems to me to be the specific phenomenon here. It 
affords me the opportunity to express anew my astonishment at the com- 
mon sense of psychoanalysts, which banishes that splitting from all consid- 
ered reflection, isolating itself instead in a notion like the weakness of the 
ego, whose relevance can be gauged once more in the case of Gide by the 
assertion he could make without his behavior belying it: "It rarely happens 
that I give up on something; adversity wrings from me nothing more than a 
postponement." 16 

Must I, in order to awaken their attention, show them how to handle a mask 
that unmasks the face it represents only by splitting in two and that represents 
this face only by remasking it? And then explain to them that it is when the 
mask is closed that it composes this face, and when it is open that it splits it? 17 

When Gide declares to Robert de Bonnieres that "We must all repre- 
sent," 18 and when in his ironic Paludes 19 he speculates about being and 
appearing, those who, because they have a rented mask, persuade themselves 
that they have a face underneath it, think "Literature!" — without suspecting 
that Gide is expressing here a problem which is so personal that it is the very 
problem of the person. 

Freud's ego-ideal is painted on this complex mask, and it forms, along 
with the repression of one of the subject's desires, by the unconscious adop- 
tion of the very image of the Other who has the usufruct [jouissance] of this 
desire and both the right to enjoy it and the means with which to do so. 



634 Ecrits 

Gide as a child, between death and masturbatory eroticism, receives, as far 

753 as l° ve ls concerned, only the kind of speech that protects and the kind that 
prohibits; in taking his father, death took away the speech that humanizes 
desire. This is why desire is limited to the clandestine for him. 

As he tells us, one evening was for him his rendezvous with fate, the illu- 
mination of his night, and his engagement in vows — vows in the name of which 
he was to make his cousin Madeleine Rondeaux his wife and which initiated 
for him what he maintained right up until the end to have been his only love. 

How can we conceptualize what happened in that instant which "deter- 
mined the course of his life" and that he cannot "recall without anguish," as 
he says in La Porte etroite? What is this state of being "drunk with love, with 
pity, with an indistinguishable mixture of enthusiasm, self-abnegation, and 
virtue," where he calls upon God to "offer [himself] up to Him, unable to 
conceive that existence could have any other object than to shelter this child 
from fear, from evil, from life." 20 

Were we to consider this event, as Delay is inclined to, as a mythical mem- 
ory formation, it would simply be all the more significant. For in his position 
as a 13-year-old boy at the mercy of the "reddest torments" of childhood in 
the presence of a 1 5-year-old girl, this vocation to protect her signals the 
intervention of an adult. This adult is all the more certainly identifiable with 
the very person from whom he seeks to protect her — since it is this person's 
presence, at that very moment on the floor that the young Andre passed in a 
bound up the stairs, that drew him into the house with all of the charm of the 
clandestine, if she was not, in fact, the object of his visit — namely, his ami- 
able aunt who was in the process of dissipating the heat of passion, whoever 
it was who brought it out in her (Gide gives two different versions of this 
episode). 

Now this aunt — if we are to believe La Porte etroite, which in any case 
bears the truth of fiction — played the role of seductress with the young boy, 
and we cannot fail to note that her maneuvers bear an astonishing resem- 
blance to the torturous delights, 21 whose confession by Gide in Et nunc manet 
in te, taken to be scandalous, whether they occurred during his honeymoon 

754 or not, clearly corresponds to his most feverish fascinations, fascinations that 
he hardly sought to hide. 

It thus seems here that the subject finds himself transformed into a woman 
as desiring. Potiphar hides behind Pasiphae, whom he tells us he becomes, 
bellowing when opening himself up to be penetrated by nature, just as the 
model of his aunt can be divined where Delay points to it, behind the "mimo- 
drama" of his childhood hysteria. 

By this means in the imaginary, he becomes the desired child — in other 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 6jS 

words, he becomes what he missed out on, in the unfathomable relationship 
that unites the child with the thoughts that surrounded his conception — and 
a little of that grace returns to him whose absolute absence in his childhood 
photo stirred up in Francis Mauriac a kind of theologal horror. 22 

But this transformation comes only as a residue of a symbolic subtraction 
which occurred in the place where the child, faced with his mother, could 
only reproduce the self-abnegation of her jouissance and the envelopment of 
her love. Desire left nothing here but its negative impact, giving form to the 
ideal of an angel that impure contact cannot touch. 

To convince ourselves that this love, "embalmed so as not to suffer the rav- 
ages of time" 23 — about which Gide says, "No one can imagine the love of an 
Uranist" 24 — is truly love, why limit ourselves to his testimony? Because it is 
not consistent with the "Dear Abby"-like understanding of love on which psy- 
choanalysts, with their chimerical belief in oblative/ genital relations, insist? 

As Delay rightly emphasizes, everything here is supported by a very old 
tradition, justifying his mention of the mystical bonds of courtly love. Gide 
himself was not afraid to relate his union, despite its bourgeois trappings, to 
Dante's mystical union with Beatrice. And if psychoanalysts were capable of 
understanding what their master said about the death instinct, they would be 
able to recognize that self-realization can become bound up with the wish to 
end one's life. 

In fact, Gide's feeling for his cousin was truly the height of love, if love 755 

means giving what one does not have and if he gave her immortality. 

This love, which took form in a Manichean meditation, had to be born at 
the point at which death had already overtaken [double] the missing object. 
Let us recognize death's passage in the supposed sister [Lucie] Gide gives him- 
self in his Cahiers d' Andre Walter, in order to make his heroine [Emmanuele] 
the one who subtly substitutes her image for that of the dead sister. 25 He has 
this imaginary sister die in 1885, that is, at the age Madeleine was when his 
love laid hold of her, in order to have her be born with him. And despite what 
Jean Schlumberger says, 26 there is no reason to discredit what Gide writes about 
her to Valery, in his final struggle to convince Madeleine to marry him: "She 's 
Morella." 27 Woman of the beyond, disowned in her daughter, who dies when 
Poe calls her by her name which should never have been pronounced . . . The 
cryptogram of the position of the beloved object in relation to desire is there, 
in the duplication reapplied to itself. The second mother, the desiring mother, 
is lethal and this explains the ease with which the ingrate form of the first, the 
loving mother, manages to replace her, in order to superimpose herself 28 — 
without the spell being broken — on the form of the ideal woman. 

It remains to be seen why desire and its violence — the latter, being the 



6s6 Ecrits 

violence of the intruder, was not devoid of repercussions on the young sub- 
ject (Delay rightly emphasizes this) — did not break this mortal spell after 
having given shape to it. 

Here I think Delay is on the right track when he sees in Madeleine the ulti- 
mate reason why this love had to remain unrealized, except that when he dwells 
on the glass wall that separated the two beings who he animates for us, he per- 
haps deludes himself into thinking that it is fragile because of its thinness. 

The book leaves no doubt that Madeleine wanted an unconsummated 
marriage. But she wanted it for unconscious reasons that happened to be the 
most appropriate for leaving Andre's impasse intact. 

756 This happens to appear, as is often the case with things that are difficult to 
see, in a form which becomes the most obvious form once designated. The 
abolition in the girl of any acknowledgment of her mother, after the latter 
had left the family, is the indicator which guarantees that the salutary 
desire — to which the disgraced child attributed a man's face — could no 
longer come back in from the outside. 

There is, thus, no need to be a genius to find this in Madeleine 's writings: 
She remains for a very long time, after the drama and well beyond the begin- 
ning of her marriage, fixated on her love for her father. In noting her emo- 
tional penchants, on the third line she evokes his figure (let us try to 
understand this in the strict sense of the term) as if it were from the beyond. 29 

What would have happened if Madeleine had turned toward Andre the 
face of Mathilde (her mother, whom she resembled) that a womanly flush [la 
couleur du sexe] had revived? 

In my view, in order to embrace this Ariadne he would have had to kill a 
Minotaur that would have sprung forth between his arms. 

Gide, of course, dreamt of being Theseus. But even if the fate of the 
checkmated Ariadne had been shorter, Theseus' vicissitudes would have 
been no different. 

It is not merely because it veers to the right rather than to the left that 
desire creates difficulties for human beings. 

The privilege of a desire that lays siege to the subject cannot become obso- 
lete unless this particular turn in the labyrinth, where the fire of an encounter 
has etched his coat of arms, has been taken a hundred times. 

Of course the cipher of this encounter is not simply a print, but a hiero- 
glyph, and may be transferred from one text to others. 

But all the metaphors in the world cannot exhaust its meaning, which is 
not to have any, since it is the mark of the iron with which death brands the 
flesh when the Word has disentangled flesh from love. 

757 This mark, which perhaps is no different than what the Apostle calls "a 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 63 7 

thorn in the flesh," has always seemed horrific to wisdom, which has done 
everything to disregard it. 

Let us note that wisdom has been punished for this with the air of slavery 
it has conserved throughout the ages, an air it probably owes to being encum- 
bered by carrying this branding iron under its robes, acting as if nothing were 
the matter. 

And we could, were we to give it some more thought, take up anew the 
question of the Master in a new light, indicating that it is not so much his 
jouissance that concerns him but his desire that he does not disregard. 

It seems remarkable that, as time went by, it was around a calling into 
question of desire by wisdom that a drama was reborn in which the Word is 
involved. 

This is why Gide is of importance. However slight his singularity may be, 
after all, he is interested in it, and the world that he sets in motion for it is con- 
cerned by it, because a chance depends upon it that one might call that of the 
aristocracy. Indeed, it is the last and only chance the aristocracy has not to be 
thrown out with the weeds. 

Let us say that the weeds appeal on the basis of what they have already fur- 
nished to culture, and that psychoanalysis, designed to bring to the bench the 
most amazing deposition in this debate, is expected to appear there when the 
fog, in which the weight of its responsibility has plunged it, will have cleared. 

On this ground Delay was able to perceive in Gide's construction the 
essential piece, the one by which the fabrication of the mask — which is 
exposed to a splitting whose infinite repercussions exhaust the image of 
Andre Walter (in the first of the two volumes) — finds the dimension of the 
persona who becomes Andre Gide, in order that he convey to us that it is 
nowhere but in this mask that the secret of desire is revealed to us and, with 
it, the secret of all nobility. 

This piece is Goethe 's message, and Delay indicates when it intervenes 
(plus or minus a few days) as well as the articulation that it constitutes. 30 

Prior to Delay, only Gide's mother recognized the decisive effect of 758 

Goethe's message at that time. This demonstrates that the passion of a 
woman with no special gifts can reach the truth that psychoanalytic method 
reconstructs, when it is coupled with finesse, whereas commonsense, repre- 
sented here by Charles Gide, remains utterly blind. 31 

Delay nevertheless makes clear the weight of the missing piece, the one 
represented by the loss of virtually all of Gide 's letters to Madeleine, a corre- 
spondence that covered the span of his adult life up until 1918. 

It is to their destruction by Madeleine in 1918 that we owe the projection 
by Gide onto his love of a testimony that was considered scandalous by some 



638 Ecrits 

and remains a problem for all; here Delay's analysis sheds light by gauging 
its gravity, his analysis sealing it, in short, with objective confirmation. 32 

This testimony, which Gide entitled Et nunc manet in re, was written after 
his wife 's death. The title, if one restores the full citation, indicates the mean- 
ing of the text, if it were not already clear: it evokes the punishment that 
weighs on Orpheus beyond the grave due to Eurydice's resentment at the 
fact that Orpheus, by turning around to see her as they climbed out of hell, 
condemned her to return there. 33 

Thus, it is not the beloved object that this title invokes as dwelling inside 
of he who offers up a confession under its sign, but rather an eternal punish- 
ment: "Poenaque respectus et nunc manet, Orpheus, in te." 34 

Shall I take things so far as to highlight the extraordinarily ironic meaning 
this choice takes on by indicating that the poem, "The Gnat," from which it 
is taken (which is attributed to Virgil) revolves around the death this insect 
759 receives at the hands of the very shepherd whose salvation it ensured when it 

woke him up by stinging him, and that the news of hell that the mosquito 
gives the shepherd in a dream merits him the cenotaph that makes his mem- 
ory live on for all posterity? 

In truth, one hardly wonders about the limits of good taste in reading 
these lines by Gide. They are quite simply atrocious due to the conjunction 
in them of a kind of mourning that insists on renewing its vows — I loved her 
and I will love her forever — and the misery of a disabused look at what the 
other's fate was, which no longer has anything to retain itself but the ravages 
of an inhuman deprivation, which arose in his memory with the offended 
specter of his most tender need. 

I am not setting myself the task of applying here what I teach about desire, 
insofar as desire reins in this need in each of us. For there is no truth here 
which serves to dispense justice. 

Nothing about desire, which is lack, can either be weighed or placed in 
scale pans, unless they are those of logic. 

I would like this book by Gide to keep its cutting edge for those men 
whose destiny in life is to pass on the furrow of a lack, in other words, all 
men, and for those who lament it, in other words, many of them. 

This suffices to indicate that I am not one of those to whom the figure of 
Madeleine, however wounded she appears here, comes out of it diminished, 
as some claim. 

Whatever shadow may be cast on her face by the tragic footlights, her face 
is not disfigured. The light that Gide projects here emanates from the same 
point at which Delay's work places its projectors and from which I myself 
direct the psychoanalytic lighting. 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 639 

A different feeling proves that when it is inspired by respectability, that 
lighting can have a less respectful effect. 

Jean Schlumberger reproaches Gide for having obscured his wife 's face 
with the blackness of the shadows in which he moved toward her. Does he 
think he can dissipate these shadows with his fair-skinned memories? 

It is hard not to consider a reparative pretension to be detrimental when it 
futilely works against a voice that is now extinguished to convince it to give 
up its pretensions. 

The challenge that inspires it, in producing for us a defender of patrician 760 

virtues (sic), 35 is not easily taken up when it is pursued to laud bourgeois well- 
being, and the evidence is weakened by an admitted inattention to what was 
happening in reality behind the art of appearances. 36 

In truth, the honor rendered to these virtues would incline me to observe 
instead that the courtly lists gain nothing by being adorned with Courteline, 
and that the remark that Gide had, after all, "happiness that was tailor-made 
for him," 37 while it brings peace to one 's home in this context, may seem out 
of place. 

Schlumberger's testimony would, in short, limit its own import to the sus- 
ceptibilities of a distinguished fervor, did it not try to convince us that 
Madeleine was a bird-brain and that the ideas of her late-nineteenth-century 
world equated homosexuality with cannibalism, with the bestiality found in 
myths, and with human sacrifices, 38 all of which assumes an ignorance of the 
classics that Madeleine, at any rate, cannot be taxed with. 

Yet Schlumberger's efforts were not in vain since they furnished us with 
more pertinent evidence. For it turns out that Madeleine, refined, cultured, 
and gifted, but highly secretive, knew how not to see what she did not want 
to know; that her influence beyond a small circle of friends could be tempered 
enough not to be noticed, especially by a personality who was more adept at 
affecting others; and that the crystal clarity of her judgment, which Gide 
exalted, could allow the opaque angle of its refraction to appear in the form 
of a certain harshness. 39 

Nevertheless, Schlumberger's offer to evaluate someone's class on the 
basis of class traits perhaps deserves the image — which Bernard Frank's true 
acid wit would have been capable of providing — of throwing a thick cement 
tome to someone who is drowning [pave du lion]. 

Why not realize that Madeleine, who was no doubt completely absorbed 
in the mystery of the destiny that united her with Andre Gide, escapes just as 
surely any worldly approach as she withdrew, with icy determination, from a 
messenger who was sure enough that he was bearing divine speech to inter- 761 

fere in her bedroom affairs. 40 



640 Ecrits 

To what extent she managed to become what Gide made her into 41 
remains impenetrable, but the sole act in which she clearly showed that she 
was separate from it was the act of a woman, a true woman, in her uncom- 
promising nature as woman [entierete de femme]. 

The act was that of burning Gide 's letters, which are what she had that 
was "most precious." The fact that she gives no other reason for it than hav- 
ing "had to do something" 42 adds the sign of an unleashing provoked by the 
only intolerable betrayal. 

Love, the first love to which this man accedes beyond her, his face having 
betrayed its fleeting convulsion a hundred times — she recognizes it in what 
she sees in his face: less nobility, she says simply. 43 

Hence Andre Gide's groan — that of a female primate 44 struck in the 
stomach, wailing over the ripping away of these letters that were a doubling 
of himself, which is why he calls them his child — can but seem precisely to 
fill the very gap that the woman's act wished to open up in his being, deep- 
ening it slowly as one after the other of the letters was thrown onto the fire of 
his blazing soul. 

Turning over and over in his heart the redemptive intention he attributes 
to Madeleine 's gaze, which he depicts as ignoring his poignant sighs, to this 
passerby who goes through her demise without meeting him, Andre Gide is 
mistaken. Poor Jason who has gone off to conquer the Golden Fleece of hap- 
piness — he does not recognize Medea! 

Nevertheless, the question I would like to raise here lies elsewhere. And it 

involves the laughter, variously modulated by the laws of decorum, that 

762 greets the news innocently spread by Gide of his tragedy, for this laughter is 

a response to the loss that he proclaims to be that of the most precious legacy 

he was bequeathing to posterity. 

This laughter reduced Gide himself to smiling at having written: "Perhaps 
there never was a more beautiful correspondence." 45 But the fact that he cried 
over it as such and testified to the blow this bereavement dealt to his being, in 
terms equaled only by those he used in speaking of his loss of Madeleine her- 
self, after the years had strangely reestablished her confidence in him and her 
proximity to him, isn't that worth weighing in the balance? And how can we 
weigh it? 

We must recognize that this laughter does not bear the meaning of indif- 
ference with which the author of the book that I have just added to this file 
says he greeted Gide 's plaintive cry in the back of a theater box in the rue du 
Vieux-Colombier. And it would be pointless to attribute it to the obscenity 
befitting fraternal mobs. 

Rather, I intend to bring out in this laughter the human meaning awak- 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 641 

ened by high comedy. And I shall not muffle the echo it receives from the 
inimitable imbroglio Moliere depicts for us, when he has Harpagon sing the 
praises of his treasure box [cassette], confusing it with his own daughter when 
someone who is in love with her speaks to him of her. 

In other words, I am not aiming here at humanity's loss, or the humanities' 
loss, of Gide 's correspondence, but rather at the fateful exchange by which 
the letter comes to take the very place from which desire has withdrawn. 

On the last page of the edition of Et nunc manet in te 46 which includes the 
pages that complete the Journal regarding relations between Gide and 
Madeleine, we find the following phrase at the end of lines that make our 
head spin: "which offers nothing more, in the ardent place of the heart, than 
a hole." It seems to us to pin the lover's plaintive cry to the place in the living 
heart that has been emptied of the beloved being. 

However, we have incorrectly read this: What is at stake is the void left in 
the text of five. Journal for the reader by the suppression of the pages that are 
restored in this new edition. But it is in reading incorrectly that we have nev- 
ertheless read correctly. 

It is thus here that Gide 's irony, which would be almost unique were it not 763 

for Heine, breaks down when he evokes the deadly touch with which love 
was marked for him, this "No, we will not be true lovers, my dear," whose 
tone Delay highlights in Gide's notebook entry from January 3, 1891, fol- 
lowing its path and aftermath in his papers and works. 47 

It is here that his courage failed him, he who incurred derision and even 
risked misfortune in order to have his desire recognized, and here that his 
intuition — which "made more than a tract" 48 of his Corydon, providing an 
astonishing glimpse of the libido theory — abandoned him. 

It is here that gave way the humor of a man whose wealth assured his inde- 
pendence, but who was placed in the position of Master beyond his bourgeois 
background because he raised the question of his particularity. 

The letters in which he placed his soul . . . had no carbon copy [double]. 
When their fetishistic nature appeared it gave rise to the kind of laughter that 
greets subjectivity caught off guard. 

It all ends with comedy, but who will put a stop to the laughter? 

Is it the Gide who contents himself in his final days with writing down on 
paper silly stories, childhood memories, and lucky deeds all mixed together, 
which take on a strange glow in his A insi soit-il? 49 

"Are you almost done, Signora Velcha?" — where did this incantation 
come from which was repeated by his cousins, little girls like any others, this 
incantation that was irrevocable for them if they risked saying it, and that 
they revealed to him once in the attic retreat where it scanded their dance? 



642 



Ecrits 



From the same fateful trio of female magicians who reappeared in his destiny. 

And the hand that transcribed that incantation, was it still his, when he 
764 already at times believed he was dead? Immobile, was it the hand of the ado- 

lescent caught in the polar ice of the Voyage d'Urien, which held out the 
words that one could read: Hie desperatus? 50 Stirring, did this hand imitate the 
piano-playing-like movements made by his moribund mother, which made 
Gide associate his mother's death with the music of a disappointed striving 
toward beauty? Haec desperata? 5] 

The movement of this hand is not in itself, but in its lines, my lines, which 
here continue those Gide traced out, your lines, which will be those of the 
forthcoming book on Nietzsche that you, Delay, have announced. 

This movement will only stop when it reaches the appointed place of 
which you are already aware, since you are on your way to it, when it reaches 
the question on the face offered up by the Word beyond comedy, at the 
moment at which comedy turns, of its own accord, into farce: How can we 
know which of the jugglers holds the real Punchinello? 52 



Notes 



1. This article first came out in Critique 131 
(April 1958): 291-315. 

2. Jean Delay, La jeunesse d'Andre Gide 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1956-1957), 2 volumes. [In 
English, see The Youth of Andre Gide, abridged 
and translated by June Guicharnaud (Chicago 
and London: University of Chicago Press, 
1963).] 

3. The appropriateness of this reminder here 
would be sufficiently proven, were this neces- 
sary, by one of the many unpublished texts that 
Delay brings us, shedding the most suitable light 
on them. I will cite here from the unpublished 
journal referred to as Brevine since Gide resided 
in the village known as La Brevine in October 
of 1894 (see Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 667, foot- 
note [not included in The Youth of Gide]): 

The novel will prove that it can depict 
something other than reality — emotion 
and thought directly It will show just how 
far it can be deduced/?nor to the experience 
of things — that is, just how far it can be 
composed — that is to say, be a work of art. 
It will show that it can be a work of art, 
composed from scratch, based on a real- 
ism not of little facts and contingencies, 
but a superior realism. 



A reference to the mathematical triangle fol- 
lows, and then Gide continues, 

In their very relations, each part of a work 
must prove the truth of each of the other 
parts — there is no other proof necessary. 
Nothing is more irritating than the proof 
de Goncourt gives for everything he says: 
He saw it! He heard it! As if proof by real- 
ity were necessary. 

Obviously, no poet has ever thought other- 
wise . . . but no one follows up on this thought. 

4. See Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 387-88. The 
friend in question is Maurice Quillot and Gide 
mentions the loan in a letter to his mother dated 
October 17, 1894. 

5. Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 491. [In English, 
The Youth of Gide, 410 (abridged).] 

6. 1 am leaving aside here the impact for the 
censor [Uncle Charles] of the fact that the inci- 
dent is presented to him as an experiment by 
his student. The singularity of his judgment is 
no less palpable. See, in Jeunesse de Gide, vol. 
II, 442, the letter by Uncle Charles starting with 
the words "One cannot deny that this incident 
is the mark of an absolute derailing of the moral 
sense" up to page 445, where the rebuke ends 
with the words, the "stain that nothing can 



The Youth of Gide, or the Letter and Desire 



643 



efface." [Not included in The Youth ofGide.] 

7. Seejeunesse de Gide, vol. 1, 240: "feelings 
of incompleteness, or as Gide says, of 'lack'; of 
strangeness, or as Gide says, of 'estrangement'; 
of splitting, or as Gide says, of a 'second real- 
ity' (which is far more appropriate; my com- 
ment); of inconsistency, or as Gide says, of 
'deconsistency ' (which is more exact; my com- 
ment)." [The Youth of Gide , 110, translation 
modified.] 

8. See his Journal, 1889-1 '939 (Paris: Galli- 
mard, 1948), 785-86 [June 19, 1924], cited in 
Jeunesse de Gide, vol. I, 248. Gide's formula- 
tion "Freud, [that] brilliant imbecile," is prof- 
fered perpendicularly, as it were, to objections 
that are, strangely enough, not very strong. [In 
English, see The Journals of Andre Gide, 
1889-1949 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1947-1951), 4 vol., trans. Justin O'Brien, 
reprinted more recently (Urbana & Chicago: 
University of Illinois Press, 2000).] 

9. Jeunesse de Gide, vol. 1, 165 [The Youth of 
Gide, 79, translation modified]. 

10. See Gide's bantering remark to Delay 
regarding the "spreading oedipemic" m Jeunesse 
de Gide, vol. I, 265 [The Youth ofGide, 125]. 

1 \.Ainsisoit-il, 98, cited in Jeunesse de Gide, 
vol. 1, 138 [in English, see So Be It, or the Chips 
Are Down, trans. Justin O'Brien (London: 
Chatto and Windus, 1960), and The Youth of 
Gide, 65]. 

1 2. Jeunesse de Gide, vol. 1, 525, citing Gide 's 
Cahiers d 'Andre Walter in Gide, Oeuvres com- 
pletes (Paris: Gallimard, 1933-1939), vol. I [The 

Youth ofGide, 225, abridged]. 

13. Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 104, citing Et 
nunc manet in te, 35 [not included in The Youth 
ofGide; in English, Et nunc manet in te can be 
found in Madeleine, trans. Justin O'Brien 
(Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1989)]. 

14. Jeunesse de Gide, vol. I, 249-50 [The 
Youth ofGide, 115-16, abridged]. 

15. Seejeunesse de Gide, vol. 1, 171-76, and 
321-29. Silegrainne meurt, vol. 1, 135, 136, and 
195 [The Youth ofGide, 80-83, 153-54]. 

16. Cited in Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 479 
[The Youth ofGide, 404, translation modified], 
from Si le grain ne meurt, vol. II, 357, which can 
be associated with another citation, "Too bad, 
I will act otherwise" (Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 
18 [not included in The Youth ofGide]), which 



was written in his notebook on January 1 , 1 89 1 , 
after the major refusal he received from 
Madeleine. 

17. They can find this mask in the chapter 
entitled "Split Representation in the Art of Asia 
and America," in Structural Anthropology [New 
York: Basic Books, 1963], by my friend Claude 
Levi-Strauss, especially plates IV-VII. 

IS. Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 70 [not included 
in The Life ofGide], citing the scene from Si le 
grain ne meurt, vol. I, 274-75, and reminding 
us that Gide indicates that this formulation is 
the "pure secret" of his life. 

19. And in his Journal, 1889-1939, 25 
[August 7, 1891], cited in Jeunesse de Gide, vol. 
II, 52 [The Youth ofGide, 263]. [Paludes can be 
found in English in Marshlands & Prometheus 
Misbound, trans. George D. Painter (New York 
and Toronto: McGraw-Hill, 1965).] 

20. Seejeunesse de Gide, vol. 1, 299-302 [The 
Youth of Gide, 144—46] and La Porte etroite, 
16-1% [Straight Is the Gate, 13-15]. 

21. See Et nunc manet in te (Neuchatel and 
Paris: Ides et Calendes, 1947), 41 [Souvenirs et 
Voyages, 948]. 

22. Seejeunesse de Gide, vol. 1, 225 note [not 
included in The Youth ofGide]. 

23. Reported by Roger Martin du Gard; see 
Jean Schlumberger's Madeleine et Andre Gide 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1956), 193. [In English, see 
Madeleine and Andre Gide, trans. Richard H. 
Akeroyd (New Orleans: Portals Press, 1980); 
Lacan takes considerable liberties in quoting 
from this text.] 

24. Madeleine et Andre Gide, 186 and 193. 

25. Seejeunesse de Gide, vol. 1, 494 and note 
[not included in The Youth ofGide], and Cahiers 
d'Andre Walter {Oeuvres completes, vol. I, 
40^1). 

26. To him this connection seems "truly 
absurd"; see Madeleine et Andre Gide, 80. 

27. Seejeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 98 and 173, 
and vol. 1, 300 [The Youth ofGide, 144 and 278]. 

28. Delay's book is full of evidence of such 
a banal phenomenon, but the latter takes on its 
importance here because of its devastating con- 
text. See Ainsi soit-il, 128. 

29. See, for example, Jeunesse de Gide, vol. 
II, 1 87 [ The Youth ofGide, 305, translation mod- 
ified]: "Perhaps I really only know two feelings 
in life: anxiety regarding the future and sadness 



644 



Ecrits 



over missing Daddy ..." This is from the let- 
ter written by Madeleine Rondeaux to her aunt 
Juliette Gide in October 1892. See also Jeunesse 
de Gide, vol. II, 25, the quote from Madeleine 's 
diary that footnote 3 situates in February 1891 
[not included in The Youth of Gide]. 

30. See Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 155-59, 177, 
245ff (see the chapter entitled "Premedita- 
tions"), 266 (the myth of Lynceus), and 277 
[The Youth of Gide, 297-98 abridged, 303 
abridged, 322ff, 329, 334]. 

3 1 . See Charles Gide 's unpublished letter to 
Mrs. Paul Gide dated April 16, 1895, m Jeunesse 
de Gide, vol. II, 496-97 [The Youth of Gide, 413]. 

32. See Jeunesse de Gide, vol. I, "De 
l'angelisme," 492-519; vol. II, "Le mariage 
blanc," 557—92, and the masterful pages in "La 
consultation," 516—56 [The Youth of Gide, 
"Angelism and Its Other Side," 215-24, "The 
Unconsummated Marriage," 443-57, and 
"Medical Advice," 423-42, all abridged]. 

33. A remark from Gide's Journal, 
1889-1939, 840, can be related to this. 

34. My edition, published by Aides, places 
a comma after respectus, which contemporary 
annotated editions leave out, as I think they 
should, given the meaning. 

35. Madeleine et Andre Gide, 18. 

36. Madeleine et Andre Gide, 184. 

37. Madeleine et Andre Gide, 169. 

38. Madeleine et Andre Gide, 94. 

39. As attested to by Mrs. Van Rysselberghe, 
in Madeleine et Andre Gide, 143-44. This is in 
contrast to what Gide says in Et nunc manet in 
te, 69. 

40. See the correspondence between Claudel 
and Gide collected by Robert Mallet, entitled 
Correspondance, 1899-1926 (Paris: Gallimard, 
1949), [especially the] letter from Madeleine 
Gide to Paul Claudel, dated August 27, 1925, 
in response to a note from Paul Claudel, which 
is also provided. 

41. "Alissa [. . .] she wasn't, but she became 
her," is Andre Gide 's reply to a question posed 
to him by Delay. See Jeunesse de Gide, vol. I, 
502-3, and vol. II, 32. [The Youth of Gide, 218; 
second reference not included]. 

42. Madeleine et Andre Gide, 197. 

43. Madeleine et Andre Gide, 199. 



44. We must credit Jean Schlumberger for 
having perceived the female character of 
Gide's long cries. He deduces from it what a 
more virile attitude should have inspired in him: 
"To open his wife 's bedroom door." Why? To 
give her a little kiss, of course, to make it all bet- 
ter. See Madeleine et Andre Gide, 213. 

45. See the note on page 83 of the supple- 
ment to the Journal, provided in Et nunc manet 
in te (Neuchatel's edition) [Souvenirs et Voyages, 
962 note]. 

46. The Neuchatel edition. 

47. This almost parodic irony of the works, 
from the Poesies to Paludes, is commented 
upon by Delay in the following terms, in which 
the tone of his own irony can be seen when, 
regarding the precious Tentative amoureuse, he 
concludes, "In short, Luc, enchanted at the 
prospect of realizing his desire, becomes dis- 
enchanted when he realizes it and becomes sor- 
rowful, whereas Gide, by expressing the desire 
of this double instead of living it, also becomes 
disenchanted but in a very different sense: he 
breaks the spell and becomes joyful, such that 
the disenchantment in the sense of a charm is a 
re-enchantment in the sense of chant" [Jeunesse 
de Gide, vol. II, 241; not included in The Youth 
of Gide; La Tentative amoureuse ( 1 893) was 
translated into English as "The Lovers' 
Attempt" in The Return of the Prodigal Son, 
trans. Aldyth Thain (Logan, UT: Utah State 
University Press, I960)]. 

48. This is Francois Porche's view, as 
expressed in the volume of the Nouvelle Revue 
Franfaise. 

49. See Jeunesse de Gide, vol. I, 184 [not 
included in The Youth of Gide], and A insisoit- 
il, 95-96 [Souvenirs et Voyages, 1027-28]. 

50. Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 21 1 [The Youth 
of Gide,1\\]. 

51. Jeunesse de Gide, vol. II, 501 [The Youth 
ofGide,4\6]. 

52. [Noted added in 1966:] Ecco, ecco, ilvero 
Pulcinella: I would appreciate it if whoever 
recalls where Nietzsche evokes this cry from 
the podium in Naples by a monk brandishing 
a crucifix, would be so kind as to provide me 
with the reference here that I cannot seem to 
find. 



Kant with Sade 765 



This essay was to have served as a preface to Philosophy in the Bedroom. It 
was published in the journal Critique (CXCI, April 1963) as a review of the 
edition of Sade 's works for which it was intended: the 15- volume set brought 
out in 1963 by Editions du Cercle du livre precieux. 1 



The notion that Sade's work anticipated Freud's — if nothing else, as a cata- 
logue of the perversions — is a stupidity repeated in works of literary criti- 
cism, the blame for which goes, as usual, to the specialists. 

I, on the contrary, maintain that the Sadean bedroom is of the same stature 
as those places from which the schools of ancient philosophy borrowed their 
names: Academy, Lyceum, and Stoa. Here as there, one paves the way for sci- 
ence by rectifying one's ethical position. In this respect, Sade did indeed 
begin the groundwork that was to progress for a hundred years in the depths 
of taste in order for Freud's path to be passable. Add to that another sixty 
years before one could say why. 

If Freud was able to enunciate his pleasure principle without even having 
to worry about indicating what distinguishes it from the function of pleasure 
in traditional ethics — without risking that it be understood, by echoing a bias 
uncontested for two thousand years, as reminiscent of the attractive notion 
that a creature is preordained for its good and of the psychology inscribed in 
different myths of benevolence — we can only credit this to the insinuating 
rise in the nineteenth century of the theme of "delight in evil" \bonheur dans 
le mal\ 

Sade represents here the first step of a subversion of which Kant, as 
piquant as this may seem in light of the coldness of the man himself, repre- 
sents the turning point — something that has never been pointed out as such, 
to the best of my knowledge. 



646 Ecrits 

Philosophy in the Bedroom came eight years after the Critique of Practical 
Reason. If, after showing that the former is consistent with the latter, I can 
766 demonstrate that the former completes the latter, I shall be able to claim that 

it yields the truth of the Critique. 

As a result, the postulates with which the Critique concludes — the alibi of 
immortality in the name of which it suppresses progress, holiness, and even 
love (everything satisfying that could come from the law), and its need for a 
will to which the object that the law concerns is intelligible — losing even the 
lifeless support of the function of utility to which Kant confined them, reduce 
the work to its subversive core. This explains the incredible exaltation that 
anyone not prepared by academic piety feels upon reading it — a reaction that 
will not be spoiled by my having explained it. 

One might say that the shift involved in the notion that it feels good to do evil 
[qu on soit bien dans le mal] — or, if you will, that the eternal feminine does 
not elevate us — was made on the basis of a philological remark: namely, that 
the idea that had been accepted up until then, which is that it feels good to do 
good [quon est bien dans le bien], is based on a homonymy not found in Ger- 
man: Manfiihlt sich wohlim Guten. This is how Kant introduces us to his Cri- 
tique of Practical Reason. 

The pleasure principle is the law of feeling good [bien], which is wohl in 
German and might be rendered as "well-being" [bien-etre]. In practice, this 
principle would submit the subject to the same phenomenal sequence that 
determines his objects. The objection that Kant raises against this is, in accor- 
dance with his rigorous style, intrinsic. No phenomenon can lay claim to a 
constant relationship to pleasure. No law of feeling good can thus be enunci- 
ated that would define the subject who puts it into practice as "will." 

The quest to feel good would thus be a dead end were it not reborn in the 
form of das Gute, the good that is the object of the moral law. Experience tells 
us that we make ourselves hear commandments inside of ourselves, the 
imperative nature of which is presented as categorical, in other words, 
unconditional. 

Note that this good [bien] is assumed to be the Good [Bien] only if it pres- 
ents itself, as I just said, in spite of all objects that would place conditions 
upon it — that is, only if it opposes any and every uncertain good that these 
objects might bring one according to some theoretical equivalence, such that 
it impresses us as superior owing to its universal value. Thus the weight of 
the Good appears only by excluding everything the subject may suffer from 
due to his interest in an object, whether drive or feeling — what Kant desig- 
nates, for that reason, as "pathological." 



Kant with Sade 643 

We would thus find anew here the Sovereign Good of the Greeks by 767 

induction from this effect, if Kant, as is his wont, did not specify once more 
that this Good does not act as a counterweight but rather, so to speak, as an 
anti-weight — that is, as subtracting weight from the pride [amour-propre] 
(Selbstsucht) the subject experiences as contentment (arrogantia) in his pleas- 
ures, insofar as a look at this Good renders these pleasures less respectable. 2 
This is both precisely what the text says and quite suggestive. 

Let us consider the paradox that it is at the very moment at which the sub- 
ject no longer has any object before him that he encounters a law that has no 
other phenomenon than something that is already signifying; the latter is 
obtained from a voice in conscience, which, articulating in the form of a 
maxim in conscience, proposes the order of a purely practical reason or will 
there. 

For this maxim to constitute a law, it is necessary and sufficient that, being 
put to the test of such reason, the maxim may be considered universal as far as 
logic is concerned. This does not mean — let us recall what "logic" entails — 
that it forces itself on everyone, but rather that it is valid in every case or, bet- 
ter stated, that it is not valid in any case if it is not valid in every case. 

But this test, which must be based on pure, though practical, reason, can 
only be passed by maxims of the type that allows for analytic deduction. 

This type is illustrated by the faithfulness required in returning a deposit: 3 
we can get some shut-eye after making a deposit knowing that the depositary 
must remain blind to any condition that would oppose this faithfulness. In 
other words, there is no deposit without a depositary worthy of his task. 

One can sense the need for a more synthetic foundation, even in such an 
obvious case. At the risk of some irreverence, let me, in turn, illustrate the 
flaw in it with a maxim by Father Ubu that I have modified slightly: "Long 
live Poland, for if there were no Poland, there would be no Poles." 

Let no one, out of some slowness of wit or emotivity, doubt my attach- 768 

ment to a freedom without which the people mourn. But while the analytic 
explanation of it here is irrefutable, its indefectibility is tempered by the 
observation that the Poles have always been known for their remarkable 
resistance to the eclipses of Poland, and even to the lamentation that ensued. 

We encounter anew here what led Kant to express his regret that no intu- 
ition offers up a phenomenal object in the experience of the moral law. 

I agree that this object slips away throughout the Critique. But it can be 
surmised in the trace left by the implacable suite Kant provides to demon- 
strate its slipping away, from which the work derives an eroticism that is no 
doubt innocent, but perceptible, the well-foundedness of which I shall show 
through the nature of the said object. 



648 Ecrits 

This is why I will ask those of my readers who are still virgins with respect 
to the Critique, never having read it, to stop reading my text here and to 
return to it after perusing Kant's. Let them see if it does, indeed, have the 
effect I say it does. In any case, I promise them the pleasure that is brought by 
the feat itself. 

The other readers will follow me now into Philosophy in the Bedroom, at 
least into the reading thereof. 

It proves to be a pamphlet, but a dramatic one, in which the stage lighting 
allows the dialogue and the action to be taken to the very limits of what is 
imaginable. The lights go dark for a moment to make room for a diatribe — a 
sort of pamphlet within the pamphlet — entitled "Yet Another Effort, 
Frenchmen, If You Would Become Republicans." 

What is enunciated in it is ordinarily understood, if not appreciated, as a 
mystification. One need not be alerted to the fact that a dream within a dream 
points to a closer relationship to the real to see an indication of the same kind 
in the text's deriding of the historical situation. It is blatant and one would do 
well to look twice at the text. 

The crux of the diatribe is, let us say, found in the maxim that proposes a 
rule for jouissance, which is odd in that it defers to Kant's mode in being laid 
down as a universal rule. Let us enunciate the maxim: 

769 "I have the right to enjoy your body," anyone can say to me, "and I will 

exercise this right without any limit to the capriciousness of the exac- 
tions I may wish to satiate with your body." 

Such is the rule to which everyone 's will would be submitted, assuming a 
society were to forcibly implement the rule. 

To any reasonable being, both the maxim and the consent assumed to be 
given it are at best an instance of black humor. 

But aside from the fact that if the deductions in the Critique prepared us for 
anything, it is for distinguishing the rational from the sort of reasonable that 
is no more than resorting in a confused fashion to the pathological, we now 
know that humor betrays the very function of the "superego" in comedy. A 
fact that — to bring this psychoanalytic agency to life by instantiating it and 
to wrest it from the renewed obscurantism of our contemporaries' use of it — 
can also spice up [relever] the Kantian test of the universal rule with the grain 
of salt it is missing. 

Are we not thus incited to take more seriously what is presented to us as 
not entirely serious? As you may well suspect, I will not ask if it is necessary 



Kant with Sade 649 

or sufficient that a society sanction a right to jouissance, by permitting every- 
one to lay claim to it, for its maxim to thus be legitimated by the imperative 
of moral law. 

No de facto legality can decide if this maxim can assume the rank of a uni- 
versal rule, since this rank may also possibly oppose it to all de facto legalities. 

This is not a question that can be settled simply by imagining it, and the 
extension of the right that the maxim invokes to everyone is not what is at 
issue here. 

At best one could demonstrate here the mere possibility of generalizabil- 
ity, which is not universalizability; the latter considers things as they are 
grounded and not as they happen to work out. 

I cannot pass up the opportunity to point out the exorbitant nature of the 
role people grant to the moment of reciprocity in structures, especially sub- 
jective ones, that are intrinsically incompatible with reciprocity. 

Reciprocity — a relation that is reversible since it is established along a 
simple line that unites two subjects who, due to their "reciprocal" position, 
consider this relation to be equivalent — is difficult to situate as the logical 
time of any sort of breakthrough [franchissement] on the subject's part in his 
relation to the signifier, and far less still as a step in any sort of development, 
whether or not it can be considered psychical (in which it is always so con- 770 

venient to blame the child when providing veneers with a pedagogical 
intent). 

Be that as it may, we can already credit our maxim with serving as a para- 
digm for a statement that as such excludes reciprocity (reciprocity and not 
"my turn next time"). 

Any judgment regarding the odious social order that would enthrone our 
maxim is, thus, of no import here, for the question is whether to grant or 
refuse to grant this maxim the characteristic of a rule acceptable as universal 
in moral philosophy — moral philosophy being recognized, since Kant's 
time, as involving the unconditional practice of reason. 

We must obviously acknowledge this characteristic in the maxim for the 
simple reason that its sole proclamation (its kerygma) has the virtue of instating 
both the radical rejection of the pathological (that is, of every preoccupation 
with goods, passion, or even compassion — in other words, the rejection by 
which Kant cleared the field of moral law) and the form of this law, which is 
also its only substance, insofar as the will becomes bound to the law only by 
eliminating from its practice every reason that is not based on the maxim itself. 

Of course, these two imperatives — between which moral life can be 
stretched, even if it snaps our very life — are imposed on us, according to the 
Sadean paradox, as if upon the Other, and not upon ourselves. 



65o Ecrits 

But this only differs from Kant's view at first blush, for the moral imper- 
ative latently does no less, since its commandment requisitions us as Other. 

We perceive quite nakedly here what the aforementioned parody of the 
obvious universality of the depositary's duty was designed to introduce us 
to — namely, that the bipolarity upon which the moral law is founded is noth- 
ing but the split [refente] in the subject brought about by any and every inter- 
vention of the signifier: the split between the enunciating subject [sujet de 
I'enonciation] and the subject of the statement [sujet de I'enonce], 

The moral law has no other principle. Yet it must be blatant, for otherwise 
it lends itself to the mystification we sense in the gag* "Long live Poland!" 

In coming out of the Other's mouth, Sade 's maxim is more honest than 
Kant's appeal to the voice within, since it unmasks the split in the subject that 
is usually covered up. 

The enunciating subject stands out here as clearly as in "Long live 
771 Poland," where the only thing that sticks out is what its manifestation amus- 

ingly evokes. 

To confirm this view, one need but consider the doctrine with which Sade 
himself establishes the reign of his principle: the doctrine of human rights. 
He cannot use the notion that no man can be the property, or in any way the 
prerogative, of another man as a pretext for suspending everyone 's right to 
enjoy him, each in his own way. 4 The constraint he endures here is not so 
much one of violence as of principle, the problem for the person who makes 
it into a sentence not being so much to make another man consent to it as to 
pronounce it in his place. 

Thus the discourse of the right to jouissance clearly posits the Other qua 
free — the Other's freedom — as its enunciating subject, in a way that does 
not differ from the Tu es which is evoked out of the lethal depths [fonds tuant] 
of every imperative. 

But this discourse is no less determinant for the subject of the statement, 
giving rise to him with each addressing of its equivocal content: since jouis- 
sance, shamelessly avowed in its very purpose, becomes one pole in a couple, 
the other pole being in the hole that jouissance already drills in the Other's 
locus in order to erect the cross of Sadean experience in it. 

Leaving off my discussion of its mainspring here, let me recall instead that 
pain, which projects its promise of ignominy here, merely intersects the 
express mention of it made by Kant among the connotations of moral experi- 
ence. What pain is worth in Sadean experience will be seen better by 
approaching it via what might be disconcerting in the artifice the Stoics used 
with regard to it: scorn. 



Kant with Sade 65i 

Imagine a revival of Epictetus in Sadean experience: "You see, you broke 
it," he says, pointing to his leg. To reduce jouissance to the misery of an 
effect in which one's quest stumbles — doesn't this transform it into disgust? 

This shows that jouissance is that by which Sadean experience is modified. 
For it only proposes to monopolize a will after having already traversed it in 
order to instate itself at the inmost core of the subject whom it provokes 
beyond that by offending his sense of modesty [pudeur]. 

For modesty is an amboceptor with respect to the circumstances of being: 772 

between the two, the one's immodesty by itself violating the other's modesty. 
A connection that could justify, were such justification necessary, what I said 
before regarding the subject's assertion in the Other's place. 

Let us question this jouissance, which is precarious because it depends on 
an echo that it sets off in the Other, only to abolish it little by little by attach- 
ing the intolerable to it. In the end, doesn't it seem to us to be thrilled only by 
itself, like another horrible freedom? 

Thus we will see appear the third term that, according to Kant, is lacking 
in moral experience — namely, the object that Kant, in order to guarantee it to 
the will in the implementation of the Law, is constrained to relegate to the 
unthinkability of the thing in itself. But is this not the very object we find in 
Sadean experience, which is no longer inaccessible and is instead revealed as 
the being-in-the-world, the Dasein^ of the tormenting agent? 

Yet it retains the opacity of that which is transcendent. For this object is 
strangely separated from the subject. Let us observe that the herald of the 
maxim need be no more here than a point of broadcast. It could be a voice on 
the radio recalling the right promoted by the supplemental effort the French 
would have consented to make in response to Sade 's appeal, the maxim hav- 
ing become an organic Law of their regenerated Republic. 

Such voice-related phenomena, especially those found in psychosis, truly 
have this object-like appearance. And in its early days, psychoanalysis was 
not very far from relating the voice of conscience to psychosis. 

Here we see why Kant views this object as evading every determination of 
transcendental aesthetics, even though it does not fail to appear in a certain 
bulge in the phenomenal veil, being not without hearth or home, time in intu- 
ition, modality situated in the unreal [irreel\ or effect in reality. It is not sim- 
ply that Kant's phenomenology is lacking here, but that the voice — even if 
insane — forces [upon us] the idea of the subject, and that the object of the law 
must not suggest malignancy on the part of the real God. 

Christianity has assuredly taught men to pay little attention to God's 
jouissance, and this is how Kant makes palatable his voluntarism of Law-for- 
Law's-sake, which is something that exaggerates, one might say, the ataraxia 



652 Ecrits 

of the Stoics. One might be tempted to think that Kant feels pressured here 

773 by what he hears too close by, not from Sade but from some nearby mystic, 
in the sigh that muffles what he glimpses beyond, having seen that his God is 
faceless: Grimmigkeit? Sade says: supremely-evil-being. 

But humph! Schwarmereien, black swarms — I chase you away in order to 
return to the function of presence in the Sadean fantasy. 

This fantasy has a structure that we will see again further on; in it the 
object is but one of the terms in which the quest it figures can die out [s'etein- 
dre]. When jouissance petrifies in the object, it becomes the black fetish, in 
which can be recognized the form that was verily and truly offered up at a 
certain time and place, and still is in our own time, so that one can adore the 
god therein. 

This is what becomes of the executioner in sadism when, in the most 
extreme case, his presence is reduced to being no more than the instrument. 

But the fact that the executioner's jouissance becomes fixated there does 
not spare his jouissance the humility of an act in which he cannot help but 
become a being of flesh and, to the very marrow, a slave to pleasure. 

This duplication neither reflects nor reciprocates (why wouldn't it "mutu- 
alize"?) the duplication that took place in the Other owing to the subject's 
two alterities. 

Desire — which is the henchman of the subject's split — would no doubt be 
willing to call itself "will to jouissance." But this appellation would not make 
desire any more worthy of the will it invokes in the Other, in tempting that 
will [to go right] to the extreme of its division from its pathos; for when it 
does so, desire departs [part] beaten down, doomed to impotence. 

For desire disappears [part] under pleasure 's sway, pleasure 's law being 
such as to make it always fall short of its aim: the homeostasis of the living 
being, always too quickly reestablished at the lowest threshold of tension at 
which he scrapes by, the ever early fall of the wing, with which desire is able 
to sign the reproduction of its form — a wing which here must nevertheless 
rise to the function of representing the link between sex and death. Let us lay 
that wing to rest behind its Eleusinian veil. 

Pleasure, a rival of the will in Kant's system that provides a stimulus, is 
thus in Sade 's work no more than a flagging [defaillant] accomplice. At the 
moment of climax [jouissance], it would simply be out of the picture if fantasy 
did not intervene to sustain it with the very discord to which it succumbs. 

Stated differently, fantasy provides the pleasure that is characteristic of 

774 desire. Let us recall that desire is not the subject, for it cannot be indicated 



Kant with Sade 



65 3 



anywhere in a signifier of any demand whatsoever, for it cannot be articu- 
lated in the signifier even though it is articulated there. 

Taking pleasure in fantasy is easy to grasp here. 

Physiology shows that pain has a longer cycle than pleasure in every 
respect, since a stimulation provokes pain at the point at which pleasure stops. 
However prolonged one assumes it to be, pain, like pleasure, nevertheless 
comes to an end — when the subject passes out. 

Such is the vital datum that fantasy takes advantage of in order to fixate — 
in the sensory aspect of Sadean experience — the desire that appears in its 
agent. 

Fantasy is defined by the most general form it receives in an algebra I have 
constructed for this purpose — namely, the formula ($0^)? m which the 
lozenge (} is to be read as "desire for," being read right to left in the same way, 
introducing an identity that is based on an absolute non-reciprocity. (This 
relation is coextensive with the subject's formations.) 

Be that as it may, this form turns out to be particularly easy to animate in 
the present case. Indeed, it relates the pleasure that has been replaced by an 
instrument (object a in the formula) here to the kind of sustained division of 
the subject that experience orders. 

This only occurs when its apparent agent freezes with the rigidity of an 
object, in view of having his division as a subject entirely reflected in the 
Other. 

From the vantage point of the unconscious, a quadripartite structure can 
always be required in the construction of a subjective ordering. My didactic 
schemas take this into account. 

Let us modulate the Sadean fantasy with a new schema of this kind: 

SCHEMA I 



d — ► a a 




The lower line accounts for the order of fantasy insofar as it props up the 
Utopia of desire. 



775 



654 Ecrits 

The curvy line depicts the chain that allows for a calculus of the subject. It 
is oriented, and its orientation constitutes here an order in which the appear- 
ance of object a in the place of the cause is explained by the universality of its 
relationship to the category of causality; forcing its way into Kant's tran- 
scendental deduction, this universality would base a new Critique of Reason 
on the linchpin [ckeville] of impurity. 

Next there is the V which, occupying the place of honor here, seems to 
impose the will [volonte] that dominates the whole business, but its shape also 
evokes the union [reunion] of what it divides by holding it together with a 
vel — namely, by offering up to choice what will create the $ of practical rea- 
son from S, the brute subject of pleasure (the "pathological" subject). 

Thus it is clearly Kant's will that is encountered in the place of this will 
that can only be said to be a will to jouissance if we explain that it is the sub- 
ject reconstituted through alienation at the cost of being nothing but the 
instrument of jouissance. Thus Kant, being interrogated "with Sade" — that 
is, Sade serving here, in our thinking as in his sadism, as an instrument — 
avows what is obvious in the question "What does he want?" which hence- 
forth arises for everyone. 

Let us now make use of this graph in its succinct form to find our way 
around in the forest of the fantasy that Sade develops according to a system- 
atic plan in his work. 

We will see that there is a statics of the fantasy, whereby the point of 
aphanisis, assumed to lie in $, must in one's imagination be indefinitely 
pushed back. This explains the hardly believable survival that Sade grants to 
the victims of the abuse and tribulations he inflicts in his fable. The moment 
of their death seems to be motivated there merely by the need to replace them 
in a combinatory, which alone requires their multiplicity. Whether unique 
(Justine) or multiple, the victim is characterized by the monotony of the sub- 
ject 's relation to the signifier, in which, if we rely on our graph, she consists. 
The troupe of tormentors (see Juliette) , being object a in the fantasy and sit- 
uating themselves in the real, can have more variety. 

The requirement that the victims' faces always be of incomparable (and, 
moreover, unalterable, as I just said) beauty is another matter, which we can- 
not account for with a few banal and quickly fabricated postulates about sex 
appeal. Rather, we should see here the grimace of what I have shown regard- 
776 ing the function of beauty in tragedy: the ultimate barrier that forbids access 

to a fundamental horror. Consider Sophocles' Antigone and the moment 
when the words Epcog avixaxe ^laKav ring out. 5 

This excursus would be of no value here did it not introduce what one 
might call the discordance between the two deaths, introduced by the exis- 



Kant with Sade 655 

tence of the condemnation. The between-two-deaths of the shy of [I'en-defd] 
is essential to show us that it is no other than the one by which the beyond 
[I'au-deld] is sustained. 

This can be clearly seen in the paradox constituted in Sade 's work by his 
position regarding hell. The idea of hell, refuted a hundred times by him and 
cursed as religious tyranny's way of constraining people, curiously returns 
to explain the gestures of one of his heroes who is, nevertheless, among the 
most taken with libertine subversion in its reasonable form: the hideous 
Saint-Fond. 6 The practices, whose final agony he imposes on his victims, are 
based on his belief that he can render their torment eternal in the hereafter 
[I'au-deld]. He highlights the authenticity of this behavior by concealing it 
from his accomplices and the authenticity of this credence by the difficulty he 
has explaining himself. Thus we hear him, a few pages later, try to make his 
behavior and credence sound plausible in his discourse with the myth of an 
attraction tending to gather together the "particles of evil." 

This incoherence in Sade 's work, overlooked by sadists (they, too, are a 
bit hagiographic), could be explained by noting in his writings the formally 
expressed term "the second death." The assurance he expects from it against 
the awful routine of nature (which crime, as he tells us elsewhere, serves to 
disrupt) would require that it go to an extreme in which the vanishing 
[evanouissement] of the subject is redoubled. He symbolizes this in his wish 
that the very decomposed elements of our body be destroyed so that they can 
never again be assembled. 

The fact that Freud nevertheless recognizes the dynamism of this wish 7 in 
certain of his clinical cases, and that he very clearly, perhaps too clearly, 
reduces its function to something analogous to the pleasure principle by 777 

relating it to a "death drive" (demand [demande] for death) — this will not be 
accepted by those who have been unable to learn from the technique they 
owe Freud, or from his teachings, that language has effects that are not sim- 
ply utilitarian or, at the very most, for purposes of display. Freud is [only] of 
use to them at conventions. 

In the eyes of such puppets, the millions of men for whom the pain of exis- 
tence is the original reason for the practices of salvation that they base on 
their faith in Buddha, are undoubtedly underdeveloped; or, rather, they think 
like Buloz, the director of La Revue des Deux Mondes, who told Renan 8 
straight out when he turned down his article on Buddhism (this according to 
Burnouf ) at some point during the eighteen-fifties, that it is "impossible that 
there are people that dumb." 

If they believe that they have better ears than other psychiatrists, have 



656 Ecrits 

they somehow escaped hearing such pain in a pure state model the song of 
certain patients referred to as melancholic? 

Have they not heard one of those dreams by which the dreamer remains 
overwhelmed, having, in the felt condition of an inexhaustible rebirth, 
plumbed the depths of the pain of existence? 

Or, in order to put hell's torments back in their place, torments which 
could never be imagined beyond what men traditionally inflict in this world, 
shall we implore them to think of our everyday life as having to be eternal? 

We must hope for nothing, not even hopelessness, to combat such stupid- 
ity, which is, in the end, sociological; I am mentioning it here only so that 
people on the outside will not expect too much, concerning Sade, from the 
circles of those who have a surer experience of forms of sadism. 

Especially regarding a certain equivocal notion that has been gaining 
ground about the relation of reversion that supposedly unites sadism with a 
certain idea of masochism — it is difficult for those outside such circles to 
imagine the muddle this notion creates. We would do better to learn from it 
the lesson contained in a fine little tale told about the exploitation of one man 
by another, which is the definition of capitalism, as we know. And socialism, 
then? It is the opposite. 

Unintended humor — this is the tone with which a certain circulation of 
psychoanalysis occurs. It fascinates people because it goes, moreover, 
unnoticed. 
778 But there are doctrinaires who strive for tidier appearances. One acts the 

part of a do-good existentialist, another, more soberly, that of a ready-made* 
personalist. This results in the claim that the sadist "denies the Other's exis- 
tence." Which is precisely, one must admit, what has just come out in my 
analysis. 

To pursue my analysis, is it not the case, rather, that the sadist discharges 
the pain of existence into [rejette dans] the Other, but without seeing that he 
himself thereby turns into an "eternal object," if Whitehead is willing to let 
us have this term back. 

But why wouldn't it belong to both of us? Isn't this — redemption and 
immortal soul — the status of the Christian? Let us not proceed too quickly, 
so as not to go too far either. 

Let us note, instead, that Sade is not duped by his fantasy, insofar as the 
rigor of his thinking is integrated into the logic of his life. 

Let me give my readers an assignment here. 

The fact that Sade delegates a right to jouissance to everyone in his 
Republic is not translated in my graph by any symmetrical reversal [reversion] 



Kant with Sade 65y 

along an axis or around some central point, but only by a 90-degree rotation 
of the graph, as follows: 

SCHEMA 2 




V, the will to jouissance, leaves no further doubt as to its nature, because it 
appears in the moral force implacably exercised by the President of Mon- 
treuil [Sade's mother-in-law] on the subject; it can be seen that the subject's 
division does not have to be pinned together [reunie] in a single body. 

(Let us note that it is only the First Consul who seals this division with its 
effect of administratively confirmed alienation.) 

This division here pins together [reunit] as S the brute subject incarnating 
the heroism characteristic of the pathological in the form of faithfulness to 779 

Sade manifested by those who at first tolerated his excesses — his wife, his 
sister-in-law, and why not his manservant too? 9 — and others who have been 
effaced from his history. 

For Sade, $ (barred S), we finally see that, as a subject, it is through his 
disappearance that he makes his mark, things having come to their term. 
Incredibly, Sade disappears without anything — even less than for Shake- 
speare — of his image remaining to us, after he gave orders in his will to have 
a thicket efface the very last trace on stone of a name that sealed his fate. 

Mr| (jptivai, 10 "not to be born" — Sade's curse is less holy than Oedipus', 
and does not carry him toward the Gods, but is immortalized in his work, 
whose unsinkable buoyancy Jules Janin backhandedly shows us, saluting it 
behind the books that hide it, if we are to believe him, in every worthy 
library, like the writings of St. John Chrysostom or Pascal's Pensees. 

But Sade's work is annoying, according to you — yes, like thieves at a 
fair — your honor and member of the Academie Franchise; but his work 
always suffices to bother you, one of you by the other, both one and the 
other, and one in the other. 11 

A fantasy is, in effect, quite bothersome, since we do not know where to 
situate it due to the fact that it just sits there, complete in its nature as a fan- 



658 Ecrits 

tasy, whose only reality is as [de] discourse and which expects nothing of your 
powers, asking you, rather, to square accounts with your own desires. 

The reader should now reverentially approach those exemplary figures who, 
in the Sadean boudoir, assemble and disassemble in a carnival-act-like rite: 
"Change of positions." 

It is a ceremonial pause, a sacred scansion. 
780 Let us salute here the objects of the law, of which you will know nothing 

unless you know how to find your way around in the desires those objects 
cause. 

It is good to be charitable 

But to whom? That is the question. 

A certain Monsieur Verdoux answered this question every day by putting 
women in an oven until he himself got the electric chair. He thought that his 
family wanted to live in greater comfort. More enlightened, the Buddha 
offered himself up to be devoured by those who did not know the way. 
Despite this eminent patronage, which might well be based solely on a mis- 
understanding (it is not clear that a tigress enjoys eating Buddha), Verdoux's 
abnegation stemmed from an error that deserves to be dealt with severely, 
since a little lesson from the Critique, which does not cost much, would have 
helped him avoid it. No one doubts but that the practice of Reason would 
have been both more economical and more legal, even if his family would 
have had to go hungry now and then. 

"But what's with all these metaphors," you will say, "and why . . . ?" 

The molecules that are monstrous insofar as they assemble here for an 
obscene jouissance, awaken us to the existence of other more ordinary jouis- 
sances encountered in life, whose ambiguities I have just mentioned. They 
are suddenly more respectable than these latter, appearing purer in their 
valences. 

Desires . . . here are the only things that bind them, and they are exalted in 
making it clear that desire is the Other's desire. 

If you have read my work up to this point, you know that, more accurately 
stated, desire is propped up by a fantasy, at least one foot [pied] of which is in 
the Other, and precisely the one that counts, even and above all if it happens 
to limp. 

The object, as I have shown in Freudian experience — the object of desire, 
where we see it in its nakedness — is but the slag of a fantasy in which the sub- 
ject does not come to after blacking out [syncope]. It is a case of necrophilia. 



Kant with Sade 65^ 

The object generally vacillates in a manner that is complementary to the 
subject's vacillation]. 

This is what makes it as ungraspable as is the object of the Law according 
to Kant. But here we suspect that a rapprochement is necessary: Doesn't the 
moral law represent desire in the case in which it is no longer the subject, but 
rather the object that is missing [fait defaut]? 

Doesn't the subject — alone remaining present, in the form of the voice 781 

within, speaking nonsensically most of the time — seem to be adequately sig- 
nified by the bar with which the signifier $ bastardizes him, that signifier 
being released from the fantasy ($§a) from which it derive , in the two senses 
of the term [derive meaning both derives and drifts]? 

Although this symbol returns the commandment from within at which 
Kant marvels to its rightful place, it opens our eyes to the encounter which, 
from Law to desire, goes further than the slipping away of their object, for 
both the Law and desire. 

It is the encounter in which the ambiguity of the word "freedom" plays a 
part; the moralist, by grabbing freedom for himself, always strikes me as 
more impudent still than imprudent. 

But let us listen to Kant himself illustrate it once more: 

Suppose someone alleges that his lustful inclination is quite irresistible 
to him when he encounters the favored object and the opportunity. [Ask 
him] whether, if in front of the house where he finds this opportunity a 
gallows were erected on which he would be strung up immediately after 
gratifying his lust, he would not then conquer his inclination. One does 
not have to guess long what he would reply. But ask him whether, if his 
prince demanded, on the threat of the same prompt penalty of death, 12 
that he give false testimony against an honest man whom the prince would 
like to ruin under specious pretenses, he might consider it possible to 
overcome his love of life, however great it may be. He will perhaps not 
venture to assure us whether or not he would overcome that love, but 
he must concede without hesitation that doing so would be possible for 
him. He judges, therefore, that he can do something because he is con- 
scious that he ought to do it, and he cognizes freedom within himself — 
the freedom with which otherwise, without the moral law, he would have 
remained unacquainted. 13 

The first response that is presumed to be given here by a subject, about 
whom we are first told that a great deal transpires by means of words, gives 
me the impression that we are not being given the letter [of what he said] 



66o Ecrits 

when that is the crux of the matter. For the fact is that, in order to express it, 
Kant prefers to rely on someone whose sense of shame we would, in any case, 

782 risk offending, for in no case would he stoop so low: namely, the ideal bour- 
geois to whom Kant elsewhere declares that he takes his hat off, no doubt in 
order to counter Fontenelle, the overly gallant centenarian. 14 

We will excuse the hoodlum, then, from having to testify under oath. But it 
is possible that a partisan of passion, who would be blind enough to combine 
it with questions of honor, would make trouble for Kant by forcing him to rec- 
ognize that no occasion precipitates certain people more surely toward their 
goal than one that involves defiance of or even contempt for the gallows. 

For the gallows is not the Law, nor can the gallows be wheeled in by the 
Law here. Only the police have the necessary trucks, and while the police can 
be the State, as Hegel says, the Law is something else, as we have known 
since Antigone. 

Kant, besides, does not contradict this with his apologue. The gallows is 
brought in merely so that he can attach to it, along with the subject, his love 
of life. 

Now, this is what the desire in the maxim Et non propter vitam vivendi 
perdere cansas can become in a moral being, rising, precisely because he is 
moral, to the rank of a categorical imperative, assuming he has his back to the 
wall [aupieddu mur] — which is precisely where he is forced here. 

Desire, what is called desire, suffices to make life meaningless if it turns 
someone into a coward. And when law is truly present, desire does not 
stand up, but that is because law and repressed desire are one and the same 
thing — which is precisely what Freud discovered. We are ahead at half- 
time, professor. 

Let us chalk up our success to the infantry, the key to the game, as we know. 
For we have not brought in either our knight — which would have been easy, 
since it would be Sade, whom we believe to be qualified enough here — our 
bishop, our rook (human rights, freedom of thought, your body is your prop- 
erty), or our queen, an appropriate figure with which to designate the daring 
deeds of courtly love. 

This would have involved moving too many people for a less certain 
result. 

For if I claim that for a few bantering remarks, Sade risked — knowing full 
well what he was doing (consider what he did with his "outings," whether 

783 licit or illicit) — imprisonment in the Bastille for a third of his lifetime (it was 
rather well-aimed banter, no doubt, but all the more demonstrative with 



Kant with Sade 661 

respect to its recompense), I'll have Pinel and his Pinelopies taking aim at me. 
Moral madness, the latter opine. In any case, a fine affair it is! I am reminded 
to show respect for Pinel, to whom we owe one of the noblest steps of 
humanity. "Thirteen years in Charenton for Sade were, however, part of this 
step," [I retort]. "But he should not have been sent there," [I am told]. 
"That's the whole point," [I continue]. It was Pinel's step that led him there. 
His place, and all thinkers agree on this point, was elsewhere. But there you 
have it: those who think clearly [quipensent Hen] think that his place was out- 
side, and the right-thinking [les iien-pensants], starting with Royer-Collard, 
who demanded it at the time, wanted him condemned to hard-labor, if not to 
the scaffold. This is precisely why Pinel was an important moment in the his- 
tory of thought. Willy-nilly, he supported the destruction, on the right and 
the left, by thought of freedoms that the Revolution had just promulgated in 
the very name of thought. 

For if w« consider human rights from the vantage point of philosophy, we 
see what, in any case, everyone now knows about their truth. They boil down 
to the freedom to desire in vain. 

A lot of good that does us [Belle jambe\\ But it gives us an opportunity to 
recognize in it the impulsive [de prime-saut] freedom we saw earlier, and to 
confirm that it is clearly the freedom to die. 

But it also gives us the opportunity to be frowned upon by those who find 
it low in nutritional value. They are plentiful in our time. We see here the 
renewed conflict between needs and desires in which, as if by chance, it is the 
Law that empties the shell [qui vide Vecaille\ 

To counter Kant's apologue, courtly love offers us a no less tempting 
path, but it requires us to be erudite. To be erudite by one 's position is to 
bring on the attack of the erudites, and in this field that is tantamount to the 
entrance of the clowns. 

Kant could very easily make us lose our serious demeanor here already 
since he hasn't the slightest sense of comedy (this is proved by what he says 
about it when he discusses it). 

But someone who has no sense of comedy whatsoever is Sade, as has been 
pointed out. This topic could perhaps be fatal to him, but a preface is not 
designed to do the author a disservice. 15 

Let us thus turn to the second stage of Kant's apologue. It no more proves his 784 

point than the first stage did. For assuming that Kant's helot here has the slight- 
est presence of mind, he will ask Kant if perchance it would be his duty to bear 
true witness were this the means by which the tyrant could satisfy his desire. 



662 Ecrits 

Should he say that the innocent man is a Jew, for example, if he truly is one, 
before a tribunal (we have seen such situations) that considers this a punish- 
able offense? Or that he is an atheist, when it is quite possible that he himself 
has a better grasp on the import of the accusation than a consistory that sim- 
ply wants to establish a file? And in the case of some deviation from "the party 
line," will he plead that this deviation is not guilty at a time and a place where 
the name of the game is autocritique? Why wouldn't he? After all, is an inno- 
cent man ever completely spotless? Will he say what he knows? 

We could make the maxim that one must counter a tyrant's desire into a 
duty, if a tyrant is someone who appropriates the power to enslave the 
Other's desire. 

Thus with regard to the two examples (and the precarious mediation 
between them) that Kant uses as a lever to show that the Law weighs in the 
scales not only pleasure but also pain, happiness and even the burden of 
abject poverty, not to mention the love of life — in short, everything patho- 
logical — it turns out that desire can have not only the same success but can 
obtain it more legitimately. 

But if the credence we lent the Critique due to the alacrity of its argumen- 
tation owed something to our desire to know where it was heading, can't the 
ambiguity of this success turn the movement back toward a revising of the 
concessions we unwittingly made? 

For example, the disgrace that rather quickly befell all objects that were 
proposed as goods [Hens] because they were incapable of achieving a har- 
mony of wills: simply because they introduce competition. Such was the case 
of Milan, about which both Charles V and Francois I knew what it cost them 
for each to see the same good in it. 

For that is clearly to misrecognize the status of the object of desire. 

I can introduce its status here only by reminding you what I teach about 
desire, which must be formulated as the Other's desire [desir de VAutre] since 
it is originally desire for what the Other desires [desir de son desir] . This is what 
makes the harmony of desires conceivable, but not devoid of danger. For when 
desires line up in a chain that resembles the procession of Breughel's blind 
785 men, each one, no doubt, has his hand in the hand of the one in front of him, 

but no one knows where they are all going. 

Now, in retracing their steps, they all clearly experience a universal rule, 
but this is because they do not know any more about it. 

Would the solution in keeping with practical reason be that they go 
around in circles? 

Even when lacking, the gaze is clearly the object that presents each desire 



Kant with Sade 663 

with its universal rule, by materializing its cause, in binding to it the subject's 
division "between center and absence." 

Let us therefore confine ourselves to saying that a practice like psychoanaly- 
sis, which takes desire as the subject's truth, cannot misrecognize what follows 
without demonstrating what it represses. 

In psychoanalysis, displeasure is understood to provide a pretext for repress- 
ing desire, displeasure arising, as it does, along the pathway of desire 's satis- 
faction; but displeasure is also understood to provide the form this very 
satisfaction takes in the return of the repressed. 

Similarly, pleasure redoubles its aversion when it recognizes the law, by 
supporting the desire to comply with it that constitutes defense. 

If happiness means that the subject finds uninterrupted pleasure in his life, 
as the Critique of Practical Reason defines it quite classically, 16 it is clear that 
happiness is denied to whomever does not renounce the pathway of desire. 
This renunciation can be willed, but at the cost of man's truth, which is quite 
clear from the disapproval of those who upheld the common ideal that the 
Epicureans, and even the Stoics, met with. Their ataraxia deposed their wis- 
dom. We fail to realize that they degraded desire; and not only do we not 
consider the Law to be commensurably exalted by them, but it is precisely 
because of this degrading of desire that, whether we know it or not, we sense 
that they cast down the Law. 

Sade, the former aristocrat, takes up Saint- Just right where one should. 
The proposition that happiness has become a political factor is incorrect. It 
has always been a political factor and will bring back the scepter and the 
censer that make do with it very well. Rather, it is the freedom to desire that 
is a new factor, not because it has inspired a revolution — people have always 
fought and died for a desire — but because this revolution wants its struggle 
to be for the freedom of desire. 

Consequently, the revolution also wants the law to be free, so free that it 786 

must be a widow, the Widow par excellence, the one that sends your head to 
the basket if it so much as balks regarding the matter at hand. Had Saint- 
Just's head remained full of the fantasies in Organt, Thermidor might have 
been a triumph for him. 

Were the right to jouissance recognized, it would consign the domination 
of the pleasure principle to an obsolete era. In enunciating this right, Sade 
imperceptibly displaces for each of us the ancient axis of ethics, which is but 
the egoism of happiness. 



664 Ecrits 

One cannot say that every reference to it is eliminated in Kant's work, 
given the very familiarity with which it accompanies him, and still more 
given the offshoots of it seen in the exigencies that make him argue both for 
some retribution in the hereafter and progress in this world. 

Should another happiness be glimpsed whose name I first uttered, the sta- 
tus of desire would change, demanding a reexamination of it. 

But it is here that something must be gauged. How far does Sade lead us in 
the experience of this jouissance, or simply of its truth? 

For the human pyramids he describes, which are fabulous insofar as they 
demonstrate the cascading nature of jouissance, these water buffets of desire 
built so that jouissance makes the Villa d'Este Gardens sparkle with a 
baroque voluptuousness — the higher they try to make jouissance spurt up 
into the heavens, the more insistently the question "What is it that is flowing 
here?" demands to be answered. 

Unpredictable quanta by which the love /hate atom glistens in the vicinity 
of the Thing from which man emerges through a cry, what is experienced, 
beyond certain limits, has nothing to do with what desire is propped up by in 
fantasy, which is in fact constituted on the basis of these limits. 

We know that Sade went beyond these limits in real life. 

Otherwise, he probably would not have given us this blueprint of his fan- 
tasy in his work. 

Perhaps I will surprise people when I call into question what his work also 
tries to convey of this real experience. 

Confining our attention to the bedroom, for a rather lively glimpse of a 
girl's feelings about her mother, the fact remains that wickedness \mechancete\ 
787 so suitably situated by Sade in its transcendence, does not teach us much that 

is new here about her changes of heart. 

A work that wishes to be bad [mechant] cannot allow itself to be a bad piece 
of work, and one has to admit that Philosophy in the Bedroom leaves itself 
open to this ironic remark by a whole strain of good works found in it. 

It's a little too preachy. 

Of course, it is a treatise on the education of girls 17 and it is subject, as 
such, to the laws of a genre. Despite its merit of bringing to light the "anal 
sadism" that obsessively permeated this subject for the two preceding cen- 
turies, it remains a treatise on education. The victim is bored to death by the 
preaching and the teacher is full of himself. 

The historical or, better, erudite information here is dreary and makes us 
miss someone like La Mothe-le-Vayer. The physiology contained in it is 
made up of wet nurses' notions, and as for what might pass for sex education, 



Kant with Sade 665 

one has the impression that one is reading a modern medical treatise on the 
subject, which says it all. 

More coherence in his scandal would help him see, in the usual impotence 
of educational intentions, the very impotence against which fantasy here 
fights — whence arises the obstacle to every valid account of the effects of 
education, since what brought about the results cannot be admitted to in dis- 
cussing the intention. 

This remark [trait] would have been priceless, due to the praiseworthy 
effects of sadistic impotence. The fact that Sade failed to make it gives us 
pause for thought. 

His failure here is confirmed by another that is no less remarkable: The 
work never presents us with a successful seduction in which his fantasy 
would nevertheless find its crowning glory — that is, a seduction in which the 
victim, even if she were at her last gasp, would consent to her tormentor's 
intention, or even join his side in the fervor of her consent. 

This demonstrates from another vantage point that desire is the flip side of 
the law. In the Sadean fantasy, we see how they support each other. For Sade, 
one is always on the same side, the good or the bad; no wrongdoing can 
change that. It is thus the triumph of virtue: This paradox merely comes 
down to the derision characteristic of edifying books, the kind Justine aims at 
too much not to have adopted it. 

Apart from the nose that twitches, which we find at the end of The Dia- 788 

logue of a Priest with a Dying Man, a posthumous work (admit that this is a 
subject hardly suited to other graces than divine grace), a lack of witti- 
cisms — and, one might say, more broadly, of the wit*, the need for which 
Alexander Pope had, over a century before, already indicated — makes itself 
felt at times in Sade 's work. 

This is obviously forgotten owing to the invasion of pedantry that has 
weighed on French letters since W.W. II.* 

But if you need a strong stomach to follow Sade when he recommends 
calumny, the first article of morality that he would institute in his republic, 
one might prefer that he add the spice of someone like Renan. "Let us be 
thankful," the latter writes, "that Jesus encountered no law against insulting 
a whole class of citizens. For the Pharisees would have been inviolable." 18 
Renan continues: 

His exquisite mockery and magic provocations always hit home. The 
Nessus-tunic of ridicule that the Jew, the son of the Pharisees, has been 
dragging in tatters behind him for eighteen centuries, was woven by Jesus 
with divine skill. A masterpiece of high-level mockery, his scathing 



666 Ecrits 

remarks have become burned into the flesh of the hypocrite and of the 
falsely devout. Incomparable remarks, worthy of a Son of God! Only a 
God knows how to kill in this fashion. Socrates and Moliere merely graze 
the skin. Jesus carries fire and rage into the very depths of one 's bones. 19 

For these remarks derive their value from the sequel that we know, I mean 
his vocation as an Apostle from the rank of the Pharisees and the universal tri- 
umph of Pharisaic virtues. This, you will agree, lends itself to an argument that 
is more relevant than the rather sorry excuse that Sade is content with in his 
apology for calumny — namely, that an honest man will always triumph over it. 

This platitude does not encumber the somber beauty that radiates from 
this monument of challenges. This beauty evinces the experience that I am 
seeking behind the make-believe quality [faiulation] of the fantasy: it is a 
tragic experience, insofar as it projects its condition here in a light [that 
comes] from beyond all fear and pity. 
789 Bewilderment and shadows, such is the conjunction, unlike that found in 

jokes, 20 that fascinates us in these scenes with its ember-like brilliance. 

This tragedy is of the kind that becomes clearer later on in the century in 
more than one work, whether erotic novel or religious drama. I would call it 
senile tragedy; until I said so, no one realized, except schoolboys in their 
jokes, that it is but a stone's throw from noble tragedy. To see what I mean, 
read Claudel's trilogy, Le Pere humilie. (To see what I mean, one should also 
know that I have shown that this trilogy contains the characteristics of the 
most authentic tragedy. It is Melpomene who, along with Clio, is decrepit, 
without our knowing which one will bury the other.) 

We are now finally enjoined to examine Sade, My Neighbor, the invocation of 
which we owe to the perspicacity of Pierre Klossowski. Being extreme, his 
perspicacity has no need to resort to the same things as the highbrow literati. 21 

It is undoubtedly Klossowski's discretion that makes him justify his for- 
mulation with a reference to Saint Labre. I do not, however, feel inclined to 
give it the same justification. 

My structural reference points make it easy to grasp that the Sadean fan- 
tasy is better situated among the stays of Christian ethics than elsewhere. 

But what must be kept in mind is that Sade himself refuses to be my neigh- 
bor, not so that I can refuse to be his neighbor in turn but so as to recognize 
the meaning of his refusal here. 

In my view, Sade does not have neighborly enough relations with his own 
malice [mechancete] to encounter his neighbor in it, a characteristic he shares 
with many people and with Freud, in particular. For this is indeed the only 



Kant with Sade 66y 

reason why beings, who are sometimes experienced, back away from the 
Christian commandment. 

We see what is, to my mind, the crucial test of this in Sade 's rejection of 
the death penalty, the history of which would suffice to prove, if not its logic, 
at least that it is one of the correlates of Charity. 

Sade thus stopped at the point where desire and the law become bound up 
with each other [se noue]. 

If something in him let itself remain tied to the law in order to take the 
opportunity, mentioned by Saint Paul, to become inordinately sinful, who 790 

would cast the first stone? But Sade went no further. 

It is not simply that his flesh is weak, as it is for each of us; it is that the 
spirit is too willing not to be deluded. His apology for crime merely impels 
him to an oblique acceptance of the Law. The Supreme Being is restored in 
Evil Action [le Malefice]. 

Listen to him praise his technique of immediately implementing whatever 
comes into his head, thinking too that by replacing repentance with reitera- 
tion he can be done with the law within. To encourage us to follow his exam- 
ple, he comes up with nothing better than the promise that nature, woman 
that she is, will magically give us ever more. 

We would be foolish to have faith in this typical dream of potency. 

It indicates to us clearly enough, in any case, that it cannot be true that 
Sade, as Klossowski suggests — all the while noting that he does not believe 
it — achieved the sort of apathy that involves having "returned to nature's 
bosom, in the waking state, in our world" 22 inhabited by language. 

I have forbidden myself to say a word about what Sade is missing here. Let 
it be sensed in the climax of Philosophy in the Bedroom, it being the curved 
needle, dear to Bunuel's heroes, which is finally called upon to resolve in the 
girl dipenisneid [penis envy] that is posited to some degree in it. 

In any case, it appears that nothing has been gained by replacing Diotima 
here with Dolmance, a person whom the usual orifice seems to frighten more 
than is fitting, and who — did Sade see this? — concludes the whole business 
with a sort of Noli tangere matrem. Syphilized and sewn shut — the mother 
remains prohibited. My verdict is confirmed regarding Sade 's submission to 
the Law. 

There is thus precious little here — in fact, nothing — by way of a treatise 
that is truly on desire. 

What is announced about desire here, in this mistake based on an 
encounter, is at most but a tone of reason. 

R. G., September 1962 



668 



Ecrits 



Notes 



I. [Added in 1971:] This essay was commis- 
sioned from me for the abovementioned edition 
[but was not included in it]. I will add here, for 
the fun of it, that it was recommissioned from 
me when the success of my Ecrits rendered it 
plausible (. . . to the person who had replaced 
me?). [It was included as a postface in the same 
publisher's 1966 edition of Sade 's Oeuvres com- 
pletes.] 

2. 1 refer the reader to Barni's very accept- 
able French translation published in 1848, p. 247 
and following here, and to the Vorlander edition 
(published by Meiner) for the German text, p. 
86 here. 

3. See the Comment on Theorem III of the 
first chapter of the "Analytic of Pure Practical 
Reason," Barni, 1 63; Vorlander, 31 . [In English, 
Critique of Practical Reason, 40—41.] 

4. See Sade, Philosophie dans le boudoir in 
Oeuvres completes, vol. Ill (Paris: Cercle du livre 
precieux, 1963), 501—2. [In English, see Philos- 
ophy in the Bedroom in The Complete Justine, 
Philosophy in the Bedroom, and Other Writings, 
trans. R. Seaver and A. Wainhouse (New York: 
Grove Press, 1965), 318-19.] 

^.Antigone, v. 781. 

6. See Histoire de Juliette (Sceaux: Pauvert, 
1954), vol. II, 196-97. [In English, Juliette, 
369-70]. 

7. It is a subjective dynamism: physical death 
is the object of the wish for a second death. 

8. See Renan's preface to his Nouvelles etudes 
d'histoire religieuse (Paris: Calmann-Levy, 1884). 
[In English, see Ernest Renan, Studies in Reli- 
gious History (New York: Scribner and Welford, 
1887), 1-2.] 

9. It should not be thought that I am lending 
credence here to the legend that he personally 
intervened in Sade 's imprisonment. See Gilbert 
Lely, Vie du Marquis de Sade (Paris: Gallimard, 
1952-1957), vol. II, pp. 577-80, and p. 580, note 
1 . [In English, see The Marquis de Sade: A Biog- 
raphy, trans. A. Brown (New York: Grove Press, 
1962), 415-16.] 

10. This is the chorus of Oedipus at Colonus, 
v. 1225. 

II. See Maurice Gabon's U affaire Sade 
(Paris: Pauvert, 1957). He cites J. Janin from La 
Revue de Paris in 1834, in his plea, pp. 84-90. A 



second reference is found on page 62: J. Cocteau, 
as a witness, wrote that Sade is annoying, but did 
not fail to recognize him as a philosopher and a 
moralizer. 

12. The original German text reads: threat- 
ening to put him to death immediately. 

13. Barni, p. 173. This is found in the Com- 
ment on Problem II (Aufgabe) of Theorem III 
in the first chapter of the "Analytic of Pure Prac- 
tical Reason," ed. Vorlander, p. 35. 

14. See p. 253 of Barni's translation, p. 90 in 
the Vorlander edition. 

1 5. [Added in 1 97 1 :] What would I have writ- 
ten by way of a postface? 

16. Theorem II of the first chapter of the 
"Analytic of Pure Practical Reason," p. 25 in the 
Vorlander edition, altogether incorrectly trans- 
lated by Barni, p. 1 59. 

17. Sade expressly indicates this in his com- 
plete title. 

18. See Renan's Vie de Jesus, 17th edition, p. 
339 [(Paris: Calmann-Levy, [1863])]. [In Eng- 
lish, see The Life of Jesus, trans. J. H. Holmes 
(New York: Modern Library, 1927), 299 (trans- 
lation modified).] 

19. Renan, Vie de Jesus, 346. [In English, see 
The Life of Jesus, 304 (translation modified).] 

20. Freud, as we know, takes Heymans' 
Sideration etlumiere (bewilderment and light) as 
a starting point. [See SE VIII, 12-13, where the 
German Verbliiffung und Erleuchtung is ren- 
dered as "bewilderment and illumination."] 

21. [Added in 1971:] This last sentence was 
addressed to a future academician, himself an 
expert in malicious comments; I see that he rec- 
ognized himself in the one that opens this arti- 
cle. [Deleted in 1971:] Sade, monprochain is the 
title of Klossowski's work that was published by 
Seuil in 1947. It is the only contemporary con- 
tribution to the Sadean question that does not 
strike me as marred by the tics of the highbrow 
literati. (This sentence, too laudatory for oth- 
ers, was at first included in my text for a future 
academician, himself an expert in malicious 
comments). [In English, see Sade, My Neigh- 
bor, trans. A. Lingis (Evanston, 111.: Northwest- 
ern University Press, 1991).] 

22. See Klossowski's Sade, monprochain, p. 
94, note. 



The Subversion of the Subject 793 

and the Dialectic of Desire in the 
Freudian Unconscious 

This text represents my contribution to a conference on "La Dialectique," 
held at Royaumont from September 19 to 23, 1960. The conference was 
organized by the "Colloques philosophiques internationaux," and I was 
invited to participate by Jean Wahl. 

It is the date of this text — which predates the Bonneval Colloquium from 
which the text that follows stemmed ["Position of the Unconscious" follows 
this one in Ecrits 1966] — that leads me to publish it, in order to give the 
reader an idea how far my teaching has always been ahead of what I could 
make more widely available. 

(The graph presented here was constructed for my seminar on uncon- 
scious formations. It was worked out particularly in relation to the structure 
of jokes, which I took as a point of departure, before a surprised audience. 
That was in the first term of the seminar, which was the last term of 1957. An 
account of the seminar, along with the graph provided here, was published at 
the time in the Bulletin de psychologic) 



A structure is constitutive of the praxis known as psychoanalysis. This struc- 
ture cannot be immaterial to an audience like the one here today, which is 
supposed to be philosophically sophisticated. 

The thesis that being a philosopher means being interested in what every- 
one is interested in without knowing it has the interesting peculiarity that its 
relevance does not imply that it can be settled either way. For it can only be 
settled if everyone becomes a philosopher. 

I am talking about its philosophical relevance, for that is, in the end, the 
schema Hegel gave us of History in The Phenomenology of Mind. 

Summarizing it in this way has the advantage of providing us with a medi- 
ation that is convenient for situating the subject: on the basis of a relationship 
to knowledge. 

It is also convenient for demonstrating the ambiguity of such a relation- 794 

ship. 

This same ambiguity is manifested by the effects of science in the contem- 
porary universe. 

The scientist himself is a subject, one who is particularly qualified in his 



6j2 Ecrits 

constitution, as is shown by the fact that science did not come into the world 
all by itself (its birth was not without vicissitudes, and was preceded by a 
number of failures — abortion or prematurity). 

Now this subject who must know what he is doing, or so we presume, does 
not know what is already, in fact, of interest to everyone regarding the effects 
of science. Or so it would appear in the contemporary universe, where 
everyone finds himself at the same level as the scientist as far as this point of 
ignorance is concerned. 

In and of itself, this warrants our speaking of a subject of science — a 
notion to which an epistemology that can be said to display more pretension 
than success would like to measure up. 

Hence — let it be noted here — the entirely didactic reference I have made 
to Hegel in order to convey, for my analytic training purposes, where things 
stand regarding the question of the subject such as psychoanalysis properly 
subverts it. 

What qualifies me to proceed along this path is obviously my experience 
of this praxis. What made me decide to do so — those who follow my work 
will attest to this — is a failure of theory coupled with abuses in its transmis- 
sion, which, while presenting no danger to the praxis itself, result, in both 
cases, in a total absence of scientific status. To raise the question of the mini- 
mal conditions required for such a status was not perhaps an impertinent 
point of departure. It has turned out to lead a long way. 

I am not referring here to anything as broad in scope as a challenging of 
different societies' practices — in particular, to the stockpile of conclusions 
I have been forced to draw in order to counter the notorious deviations in 
analytic praxis that claim to be genuinely psychoanalytic in England and 
America. 

What I will specifically try to define is subversion, and I apologize to 
this assembly, whose qualifications I mentioned earlier, for being unable to 
do more in its presence than elsewhere — namely, to take this assembly as 
such as the pivot of my demonstration, the onus being on me to justify tak- 
ing such liberties with regard to it. 
795 Nevertheless, I shall take advantage of your kindness in assuming we 

agree that a science cannot be conditioned upon empiricism. 

Secondly, we encounter what has already been constituted, with a scien- 
tific label, by the name of psychology. 

Which I challenge — precisely because, as I will show, the function of the 
subject, as inaugurated by Freudian experience, disqualifies from the outset 
what, going by the name "psychology," merely perpetuates an academic 
framework, no matter how one dresses up its premises. 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 6>j 

Its criterion is the unity of the subject, which is one of the presupposi- 
tions of this sort of psychology; it should even be taken as symptomatic that 
this theme is ever more emphatically isolated, as if the return of a certain 
subject of consciousness [connaissance] were at stake, or as if the psychical 
had to obtain recognition as doubling the organism. 

Here we must take as exemplary the idea in which a whole body of tra- 
ditional thought comes together in accrediting a term, "state of conscious- 
ness," that is not without basis. Whether we're dealing with the states of 
enthusiasm described by Plato, the degrees of samadhi in Buddhism, or the 
experience (Erlebnis) one has under the influence of hallucinogens, it is 
important to know how much of this is authenticated by any theory. 

Authenticated in the register of what consciousness includes by way of 
connaturality. 

It is clear that Hegelian knowledge, in the logicizing Aufhebung [subla- 
tion] on which it is based, puts as little stock in these states as such as does 
modern science, which may recognize in them an object of experience, in 
the sense of an opportunity to define certain coordinates, but in no way an 
ascesis that could, so to speak, be "epistemogenic" or "noophoric." 

It is in this respect that reference to them is relevant to us. 

For I assume you are sufficiently informed about Freudian practice to 
realize that such states play no part in it; but what is not fully appreciated is 
the fact that this supposed "depth psychology" does not dream of using 
these states to obtain illumination, for example, or even assign any value to 
them along the path it sketches out. 

For that is why — though it is not stressed — Freud steers clear of hyp- 
noid states, even when it comes to explaining the phenomena of hysteria. 
That is the amazing thing: Freud prefers the hysteric's discourse to hypnoid 
states. What I have called "fertile moments" in my mapping of paranoiac 796 

knowledge [connaissance] is not a Freudian reference. 

I have some difficulty in getting across — in a circle infatuated with the 
most incredible illogicality — what it means to interrogate the unconscious 
as I do, that is, to the point at which it gives a reply that is not some sort of 
ravishment or takedown, but is rather a "saying why." 

If we conduct the subject anywhere, it is to a deciphering which assumes 
that a sort of logic is already operative in the unconscious, a logic in which, 
for example, an interrogative voice or even the development of an argu- 
ment can be recognized. 

The whole psychoanalytic tradition supports the view that the analyst's 
voice can intervene only if it enters at the right place, and that if it comes 
too early it merely produces a closing up. 



6j4 Ecrits 

In other words, a strain of psychoanalysis that is sustained by its alle- 
giance to Freud cannot under any circumstances pass itself off as a rite of 
passage to some archetypal, or in any sense ineffable, experience. The day 
someone who is not simply a moron obtains a hearing for a view of this 
kind will be the day all limits will have been abolished. We are still a long 
way from that. x 

Thus far we have merely broached our subject. For we must home in 
more precisely on what Freud himself articulates in his doctrine as consti- 
tuting a "Copernican" step. 

For such a step to be constituted, is it enough that a privilege should be 
revoked — in this case, the one that put the earth in the central place? Man's 
subsequent destitution from an analogous place due to the triumph of the 
idea of evolution gives one the sense that such revocation implies an advan- 
tage that is confirmed by its constancy. 

But can we be so sure this is an advantage or real progress? Does any- 
797 thing make it seem that the other truth, if we may so term revealed truth, 

has seriously suffered as a result? Don't we realize that, by exalting the cen- 
ter, heliocentrism is no less of a lure than seeing the earth as the center, and 
that the existence of the ecliptic probably provided a more stimulating 
model of our relations with truth, before it lost much of its interest when it 
was reduced to being no more than the earth bowing assent? 

In any case, it is not because of Darwin that men believe themselves to 
be any the less the best among the creatures, for it is precisely of this that he 
convinces them. 

The use of Copernicus' name as a reference has more hidden resources 
that touch specifically on what has already just slipped from my pen regard- 
ing our relation to the true — namely, the emergence of the ellipse as being 
not unworthy of the locus from which the so-called higher truths take their 
name. The revolution is no less important even though it concerns only 
"celestial revolutions." 

From that point on, to dwell on it no longer means simply revoking some 
idiotic notion stemming from the religious tradition, which, as can be seen 
well enough, is none the worse for it, but rather of tying more closely 
together the regime of knowledge and the regime of truth. 

For if Copernicus' work, as others have remarked before me, is not as 
Copernican as we think it is, it is because the doctrine of double truth con- 
tinues to offer shelter to a knowledge that, up until then, it must be said, 
appeared to be quite content with that shelter. 

So here we are at the palpable border between truth and knowledge; and 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 6y5 

it might be said, after all, that at first sight our science certainly seems to 
have readopted the solution of closing the border. 

Yet if the history of Science 's birth is still a sufficiently burning question 
for us to be aware that at that border something shifted at that time, it is per- 
haps here that psychoanalysis distinguishes itself by representing a new 
seism that occurred there. 

For let us reexamine from this angle the service we expect from Hegel's 
phenomenology: that of marking out an ideal solution — one that involves a 
permanent revisionism, so to speak, in which what is disturbing about truth 
is constantly being reabsorbed, truth being in itself but what is lacking in 
the realization of knowledge. The antinomy the Scholastic tradition posited 798 

as principial is here taken to be resolved by virtue of being imaginary. 
Truth is nothing but what knowledge can learn that it knows merely by 
putting its ignorance to work. This is a real crisis, in which the imaginary is 
eliminated in engendering a new symbolic form, to use my own categories. 
This dialectic is convergent and proceeds to the conjuncture defined as 
absolute knowledge. As it is deduced, this conjuncture can only be the con- 
junction of the symbolic with a real from which nothing more can be 
expected. What is this, if not a subject finalized in his self-identity? From 
which one can conclude that this subject is already perfect(ed) here and is 
the fundamental hypothesis of the entire process. He is named, in effect, as 
the substratum of this process; he is called Selbstbewusstsein, the being of 
the conscious, wholly conscious self. 

Would that it were so! But the history of science itself — I mean of our 
science, since its inception, assuming we situate its first birth in Greek 
mathematics — presents itself, rather, in the form of detours that comply 
very little with this immanentism. And scientific theories — let us not be 
misled on this score by any resorption of the special theory of relativity into 
the general theory — do not, in any way, fit together according to the the- 
sis/antithesis/synthesis dialectic. 

Indeed, a number of creaks — confusedly given voice to by the great 
minds responsible for some of the cardinal changes in physics — remind us 
that, after all, it is elsewhere that the moment of truth must sound for this 
field of knowledge as for others. 

Why wouldn't we think that the astonishing indulgence science is show- 
ing toward psychoanalytic hype may be due to the theoretical hope psycho- 
analysis offers — a hope that is not merely the result of the prevailing 
confusion? 

I am not, of course, referring to the extraordinary lateral transference by 



6j6 Ecrits 

which psychology reimmerses its categories in psychoanalysis to reinvigo- 
rate its lowly purposes of social exploitation. For the reason already stated, 
I regard the fate of psychology as irremediably sealed. 

In any case, my two-pronged reference to Hegel's absolute subject and 

to science's abolished subject sheds the light necessary to accurately for- 

799 mulate Freud's dramatism: the return of truth to the field of science at the 

same time as it comes to the fore in the field of its praxis — repressed, it 

reappears there. 

Who cannot see the distance that separates the unhappiness of con- 
sciousness — which, however deeply ingrained it may be in Hegel's work, 
can still be said to be but the suspension of knowing — from civilization's 
discontents in Freud's work, even if it is only in the inspiration of a sen- 
tence which is, as it were, disavowed, that Freud marks for us what, on 
reading it, cannot be articulated otherwise than the skewed relation that 
separates the subject from sex? 

There is nothing, then, in my approach to situating Freud that owes any- 
thing to the judicial astrology in which the psychologist is immersed. Noth- 
ing that proceeds on the basis of quality, much less of intensity, or of any 
phenomenology from which idealism may draw reassurance. In the Freudian 
field, the words notwithstanding, consciousness is a characteristic that is as 
obsolete to us in grounding the unconscious — for we cannot ground it on the 
negation of consciousness (that unconscious dates back to Saint Thomas 
Aquinas) — as affect is unsuited to play the role of the protopathic subject, 
since it is a function without a functionary. 

Starting with Freud, the unconscious becomes a chain of signifiers that 
repeats and insists somewhere (on another stage or in a different scene, as 
he wrote), interfering in the cuts offered it by actual discourse and the cog- 
itation it informs. 

In this formulation, which is mine only in the sense that it conforms as 
closely to Freud 's texts as to the experience they opened up, the crucial term 
is the signifier, revived from ancient rhetoric by modern linguistics, in a 
doctrine whose various stages I cannot trace here, but of which the names 
Ferdinand de Saussure and Roman Jakobson stand for its dawn and its 
present-day culmination, not forgetting that the pilot science of structural- 
ism in the West has its roots in Russia, where formalism first flourished. 
Geneva 1910 and Petrograd 1920 suffice to explain why Freud did not have 
this particular instrument at his disposal. But this historically motivated 
lacuna makes all the more instructive the fact that the mechanisms described 
by Freud as those of the primary process, by which the unconscious is gov- 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 677 

erned, correspond exactly to the functions this school of linguistics believes 
determine the most radical axes of the effects of language, namely metaphor 
and metonymy — in other words, the effects of the substitution and combi- 
nation of signif iers in the synchronic and diachronic dimensions, respectively, 800 
in which they appear in discourse. 

Once the structure of language is recognized in the unconscious, what 
sort of subject can we conceive of for it? 

In a concern for method, we can try to begin here with the strictly lin- 
guistic definition of / as signifier, where it is nothing but the shifter* or 
indicative that, qua grammatical subject of the statement, designates the 
subject insofar as he is currently speaking. 

That is to say, it designates the enunciating subject, but does not signify 
him. This is obvious from the fact that there may be no signifier of the 
enunciating subject in the statement — not to mention that there are signi- 
fies that differ from I, and not only those that are inadequately called cases 
of the first person singular, even if we add that it can be lodged in the plu- 
ral invocation or even in the Self [Soi] of auto-suggestion. 

I believe, for example, that I have detected the enunciating subject in the 
French signifier ne, said by grammarians to be "expletive," a term that 
already prefigures the incredible opinion of those among the best who 
regard its form as subject to sheer whimsy. Would that the weight I give it 
make them think twice, before it not but become obvious they have missed 
the point [avant qu 'il ne soit avere qu 'Us ny comprennent rien] — take out that 
"not but" [ne] and my enunciation loses its force as an attack, / eliding me 
in the impersonal. Yet I fear that in this way they could not but come to vil- 
ify me [Mais je crains ainsi qu'ils nen viennent a me honnir] — skip that "not 
but" [n'] and its absence, toning down my alleged fear to declare my repug- 
nance to a timid assertion, reduces the emphasis of my enunciation by situ- 
ating me in the statement. 

But if I say "tue" (kill), because they are killing me, where am I situating 
myself if not in the tu on the basis of which I glare at them [rowe]? 

Don't sulk — I am merely referring obliquely to what I am reluctant to 
cover over with the inevitable map of clinical work. 

Namely, the right way to answer the question "Who is speaking?" when 
the subject of the unconscious is at stake. For the answer cannot come from 
him if he doesn't know what he is saying, or even that he is speaking, as all 
of analytic experience teaches us. 

Hence the place of the "inter-said" [inter-dit], constituted by the "intra- 
said" [intra-dit] of a between-two-subjects, is the very place at which the 



6j8 Ecrits 

transparency of the classical subject divides, undergoing, as it does, the 
effects of fading* that specify the Freudian subject due to its occulta tion by 

80 1 an ever purer signifier; may these effects lead us to the frontiers where slips 
of the tongue and jokes become indistinguishable in their collusion, or even 
where elision is so much more allusive in driving presence back to its lair, 
that we are astonished the hunt for Dasein hasn't made any more of it. 

Lest our hunt be in vain, we analysts must bring everything back to the 
cut qua function in discourse, the most significant being the cut that consti- 
tutes a bar between the signifier and the signified. Here we come upon the 
subject who interests us since, being bound up in signification, he seems to 
be lodging in the preconscious. This would lead us to the paradox of con- 
ceiving that discourse in an analytic session is worthwhile only insofar as it 
stumbles or even interrupts itself — were not the session itself instituted as a 
break in a false discourse, that is, in what discourse realizes when it 
becomes empty as speech, when it is no more than the worn coinage Mal- 
larme speaks of that is passed from hand to hand "in silence." 

The cut made by the signifying chain is the only cut that verifies the 
structure of the subject as a discontinuity in the real. If linguistics enables us 
to see the signifier as the determinant of the signified, analysis reveals the 
truth of this relationship by making holes in meaning the determinants of 
its discourse. 

This is the path by which an imperative can be fulfilled, the imperative 
Freud raised to the sublime stature of a pre-Socratic gnome in his formula- 
tion, "Wo Es war, soil Ich werden," which I have commented upon more 
than once, and which I am now going to inflect differently. 

I will limit myself to examining one step in its grammar: "where it 
was ..." [Id ou cefut . . .] — what does that mean? If it were but this [ga] 
that might have been (to use the aoristic form), how to come to the same 
place in order to make myself be there, by stating it now? 

But the French translation says: "La ouc'etait . . ." Let us take advantage 
of the distinct imperfect it provides. Where it was just now, where it was for 
a short while, between an extinction that is still glowing and an opening up 
that stumbles, / can [peut] come into being by disappearing from my state- 
ment \dit\. 

An enunciation that denounces itself, a statement that renounces itself, 
an ignorance that sweeps itself away, an opportunity that self-destructs — 
what remains here if not the trace of what really must be in order to fall 
away from being? 

A dream related by Freud in his article, "Formulations on the Two Prin- 

802 ciples of Mental Functioning," gives us a sentence, related to the pathos 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 6j9 

with which the figure of a dead father returning as a ghost would be 
invested: "He did not know he was dead." 2 

I have already used this sentence to illustrate the subject's relation to the 
signifier — through an enunciation that makes a human being tremble due 
to the vacillation that comes back to him from his own statement. 

If this figure of the dead father subsists only by virtue of the fact that one 
does not tell him the truth of which he is unaware, what then is the status of 
the / on which this subsistence depends? 

He did not know ... He was to know a bit later. Oh! may that never hap- 
pen! May / die rather than have him know. Yes, that's how I get there, 
where it was (to be): who knew, thus, that /was dead? 

Being of non-being, that is how / comes on the scene as a subject who is 
conjugated with the double aporia of a veritable subsistence that is abol- 
ished by his knowledge, and by a discourse in which it is death that sustains 
existence. 

Will we weigh this being against the being Hegel as subject forged — 
Hegel being the subject who, regarding history, adopts the discourse of 
absolute knowledge? We recall that Hegel admitted to having experienced 
the temptation of madness. Isn't our path the one that overcomes that, by 
going right to the truth of the vanity of this discourse? 

I will not expound my doctrine on madness here. For I have included this 
eschatological excursion only to designate the gap that separates the two 
relations — Freudian and Hegelian — between the subject and knowledge. 

And to show that there is no surer root of these relations than the differ- 
ent ways in which the dialectic of desire is distinguished in them. 

For in Hegel's work it is desire {Begierde) that is given responsibility for 
the minimal link the subject must retain to Antiquity's knowledge [connais- 
sance] if truth is to be immanent in the realization of knowledge. The "cun- 
ning of reason" means that, from the outset and right to the end, the subject 
knows what he wants. 

It is here that Freud reopens the junction between truth and knowledge 
to the mobility out of which revolutions arise. 

In this respect: that desire becomes bound up at that junction with the 
Other's desire, but that the desire to know lies in this loop. 

Freud's biologism has nothing to do with the preachy abjection that 803 

wafts up to us from psychoanalytic headquarters. 

And you had to be made to experience the death instinct, which is held 
in such abomination there, to get on the true wavelength of Freud's biol- 
ogy. For to evade the death instinct in his doctrine is not to know his doc- 
trine at all. 



68o Ecrits 

On the basis of the approach I have prepared for you, you should recog- 
nize in the metaphor of the return to the inanimate — which Freud ascribes 
to every living body — the margin beyond life that language assures the 
human being of due to the fact that he speaks, and which is precisely the 
margin where this being places in signifying position, not only those parts 
of his body that lend themselves to this because they are exchangeable, but 
the body itself. Thus it becomes apparent that the object's relation to the 
body can in no way be defined as based on a partial identification that 
would have to be totalized there, since, on the contrary, this object is the 
prototype of the body's signifierness as the human being's ante. 

Here I will take up the challenge made to me when people translate as 
"instinct" what Freud calls Trieb — which "drive" would seem to translate 
quite well into English, but which is avoided in the Standard Edition. In 
French, my last resort would be derive [drift], if I were unable to give the 
bastardized term pulsion [drive or urge] its point of impact. 

And so I insist on promoting the idea that, whether grounded or not in 
biological observation, instinct — among the modes of knowledge [connais- 
sance] required by nature of living beings so that they satisfy its needs — is 
defined as a kind of [experiential] knowledge [connaissance] we admire 
because it cannot become [articulated] knowledge [un savoir]. But in 
Freud's work something quite different is at stake, which is a savoir cer- 
tainly, but one that doesn't involve the slightest connaissance, in that it is 
inscribed in a discourse of which the subject — who, like the messenger- 
slave of Antiquity, carries under his hair the codicil that condemns him to 
death — knows neither the meaning nor the text, nor in what language 
[langue] it is written, nor even that it was tattooed on his shaven scalp while 
he was sleeping. 

This apologue barely exaggerates just how little the unconscious has to 
do with physiology. 

This can be gauged by crosschecking the contribution made by psycho- 
analysis to physiology since its inception: its contribution has been nil, even 
as far as the sexual organs are concerned. No amount of fabulation will pre- 
vail against this balance sheet. 
804 For, of course, psychoanalysis concerns the reality [reel] of the body and 

of its imaginary mental schema. But to recognize their import in the per- 
spective authorized by "development," we must first realize that the more 
or less fragmented integrations that seem to account for the order of devel- 
opment, function first and foremost like elements of a heraldry, a heraldry 
of the body. This is confirmed by the use that is made of them in reading 
children's drawings. 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 68 1 

This is the crux — to which I shall return later — of the paradoxical priv- 
ilege the phallus continues to have in the unconscious dialectic, the theory 
of the part-object not sufficing to explain it. 

Need I now say — if one understands the kind of support I have sought in 
Hegel's work by which to criticize a degradation of psychoanalysis that is 
so inept that it has no other claim to fame than that of being contempo- 
rary — that it is inadmissible that I should be accused of having been lured 
by a purely dialectical exhaustion of being, and that I can but hold a partic- 
ular philosopher 3 responsible for authorizing this misunderstanding? 

For far from giving myself over to some logicizing reduction where desire 
is at stake, I detect in desire 's irreducibility to demand the very mainspring of 
what also prevents it from being reduced to need. To put it elliptically: it is 
precisely because desire is articulated that it is not articulable — by which I 
mean in the discourse that suits it, an ethical, not a psychological discourse. 

I must now lay out for you in much greater detail the topology that I 
have developed in my teaching over the past few years, that is, introduce a 
certain graph, which, I should indicate, also serves purposes other than the 
one I have in mind here, having been constructed and perfected quite 
explicitly in order to map out on its different levels the most broadly prac- 
tical structure of the data of analytic experience. It will serve here to show 805 
where desire is situated in relation to a subject defined on the basis of his 
articulation by the signifier. 

graph 1 




This is what might be called its elementary cell (see Graph 1). In it is artic- 
ulated what I have called the "button tie" [point de capiton\ by which the sig- 
nifier stops the otherwise indefinite sliding of signification. The signifying 
chain is assumed to be borne by the vector S.S'. Without even going into the 



682 Ecrits 

subtleties of the negatively oriented direction in which its double intersection 
with the vector A.$ occurs — only in this latter vector does one see the fish it 
hooks, a fish less suitable for representing what it withdraws from our grasp 
in its vigorous swimming than the intention that tries to drown it in the flood- 
tide of pre-text, namely, the reality that is imagined in the ethological schema 
of the return of need. 

The diachronic function of this button tie can be found in a sentence, inso- 
far as a sentence closes its signification only with its last term, each term 
being anticipated in the construction constituted by the other terms and, 
inversely, sealing their meaning by its retroactive effect. 

But the synchronic structure is more hidden, and it is this structure that 
brings us to the beginning. It is metaphor insofar as the first attribution is 
constituted in it — the attribution that promulgates "the dog goes meow, the 
cat goes woof-woof, " by which, in one fell swoop, the child, by disconnect- 
ing the thing from its cry, raises the sign to the function of the signifier and 
reality to the sophistics of signification, and in his contempt for verisimili- 
tude, makes necessary the verification of multiple objectifications of the 
same thing. 
806 Does this possibility require the topology of a four-corners game? This 

sort of question seems innocent enough, but it may give us some trouble if 
the subsequent construction must depend on it. 

I will spare you the stages by revealing directly the function of the two 
points of intersection in this elementary graph [see Graph 2]. The first, 
labeled A, is the locus of the treasure trove of signifiers, which does not mean 
of the code, for the one-to-one correspondence between a sign and a thing is 
not preserved here, the signifier being constituted on the basis of a syn- 
chronic and countable collection in which none of the elements is sustained 
except through its opposition to each of the others. The second, labeled j(A), 
is what may be called the punctuation, in which signification ends as a fin- 
ished product. 

Let us observe the dissymmetry between the one, which is a locus (a place, 
rather than a space), and the other, which is a moment (a scansion, rather 
than a duration). 

Both are related to the offer to the signifier that is constituted by the hole 
in the real, the one as a hollow for concealment, the other as drilling toward 
a way out. 

The subject's submission to the signifier, which occurs in the circuit that 
goes from s(A) to A and back from A to j(A), is truly a circle, inasmuch as 
the assertion that is established in it — being unable to close on anything but 
its own scansion, in other words, failing an act in which it would find its cer- 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 683 

tainty — refers back only to its own anticipation in the composition of the sig- 
nifier, which is in itself meaningless [insignifiante]. 

To be possible, the squaring of this circle only requires the completeness 
of the signifying battery installed in A, henceforth symbolizing the Other's 
locus. This allows us to see that this Other is but the pure subject of modern 
game strategy, and is as such perfectly accessible to the calculation of conjec- 
ture — in the sense that the real subject, in making his own calculations, need 
not take into account any so-called subjective (in the usual, that is, psycho- 
logical, sense of the term) aberration, but only the inscription of a combina- 
tory whose combinations may be exhaustively enumerated. 

This squaring of the circle is nevertheless impossible, but solely because 
the subject constitutes himself only by subtracting himself from it and by 
decompleting it essentially, such that he must, at one and the same time, 807 

count himself here and function only as a lack here. 

The Other, as preliminary site of the pure subject of the signifier, occupies 
the key [maitresse] position here, even before coming into existence here as 
absolute Master — to use Hegel's term with and against him. For what is omit- 
ted in the platitude of modern information theory is the fact that one cannot 
even speak of a code without it already being the Other's code; something 
quite different is at stake in the message, since the subject constitutes himself 
on the basis of the message, such that he receives from the Other even the 
message he himself sends. Thus the notations A and s(A) are justified. 

Code messages and message codes separate out into pure forms in the psy- 
chotic subject, the subject who makes do with this preliminary Other alone. 

Observe, as an aside, that this Other, distinguished as the locus of Speech, 
nevertheless emerges as Truth's witness. Without the dimension it consti- 
tutes, the deceptiveness of Speech would be indistinguishable from the feint, 
which, in fighting or sexual display, is nevertheless quite different. Deployed 
in imaginary capture, the feint is integrated into the play of approach and 
retreat that constituted the first dance, in which these two vital situations find 
their scansion, and the partners who fall into step with it find what I will dare 
to write as their "dancity." Moreover, animals show that they are capable of 
such behavior when they are being hunted down; they manage to throw their 
pursuers off the scent by briefly going in one direction as a lure and then 
changing direction. This can go so far as to suggest on the part of game ani- 
mals the nobility of honoring the parrying found in the hunt. But an animal 
does not feign feigning. It does not make tracks whose deceptiveness lies in 
getting them to be taken as false, when in fact they are true — that is, tracks 
that indicate the right trail. No more than it effaces its tracks, which would 
already be tantamount to making itself the subject of the signifier. 



684 Ecrits 

All this has been articulated only in a confused way by philosophers who 
are nevertheless professional. But it is clear that Speech begins only with the 
passage from the feint to the order of the signifier, and that the signifier 
requires another locus — the locus of the Other, the Other as witness, the wit- 
ness who is Other than any of the partners — for the Speech borne by the sig- 
nifier to be able to lie, that is, to posit itself as Truth. 
808 Thus Truth draws its guarantee from somewhere other than the Reality it 

concerns: it draws it from Speech. Just as it is from Speech that Truth 
receives the mark that instates it in a fictional structure. 

The first words spoken decree, legislate, aphorize, and are an oracle; they 
give the real other its obscure authority. 

Take just one signifier as an insignia of this omnipotence, that is, of this 
wholly potential power, of this birth of possibility, and you have the unary 
trait which — filling in the invisible mark the subject receives from the signi- 
fier — alienates this subject in the first identification that forms the ego-ideal. 

This is inscribed by the notation 1(A), which I must substitute, at this 
stage, for $, the barred S of the negatively oriented vector, moving $ from 
the vector's endpoint to its starting point (see Graph 2). 

graph 2 




Signifier \\ //. Voice 



1(A) $ 



This is a retroversion effect by which the subject, at each stage, becomes 
what he was (to be) [etait] before that, and "he will have been" is only 
announced in the future perfect tense. 

Here arises the ambiguity of a misrecognizing that is essential to knowing 
myself \un meconnaitre essentiel au me connaitre]. For, in this "rear view," all 
the subject can be sure of is the anticipated image — which he had caught of 
himself in his mirror — coming to meet him. I won't go back over the func- 
tion of my "mirror stage" here, the first strategic point I developed as an 
objection to the supposedly "autonomous ego" in favor in psychoanalytic 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 685 

theory, whose academic restoration justified the mistaken proposal to 
strengthen the ego in a type of treatment diverted thereafter toward success- 
ful adaptation — a phenomenon of mental abdication tied to the aging of the 
psychoanalytic group in the Diaspora owing to the war, and the reduction of 
an eminent practice to a Good Housekeeping seal of approval attesting to its 
suitability to the "American way of life."* 4 809 

Be that as it may, what the subject finds in this altered image of his body is 
the paradigm of all the forms of resemblance that will cast a shade of hostil- 
ity onto the world of objects, by projecting onto them the avatar of his nar- 
cissistic image, which, from the jubilation derived from encountering it in the 
mirror, becomes — in confronting his semblables — the outlet for his most 
intimate aggressiveness. 

It is this image that becomes fixed — this is the ideal ego — from the point 
at which the subject fixates as ego-ideal. The ego is thus a function of mas- 
tery, a game of bearing, and constituted rivalry. In the capture it undergoes 
due to its imaginary nature, the ego masks its duplicity; that is, consciousness, 
in which the ego assures itself an indisputable existence (a naivete that is dis- 
played in Fenelon's work), is in no way immanent in the ego, but rather tran- 
scendent, since consciousness is based on the ego-ideal as unary trait (the 
Cartesian cogito does not fail to recognize this). 5 As a result, the transcen- 
dental ego itself is relativized, implicated as it is in the misrecognition in 
which the ego's identifications originate. 

This imaginary process, which goes from the specular image to the con- 
stitution of the ego along the path of subjectification by the signifier, is signi- 
fied in my graph by the i(a).m vector, which is one-way but doubly 
articulated, first as a short circuit of the 3.1(A) vector, and second as a return 
route of the A.j(A) vector. This shows that the ego is only completed by 
being articulated not as the / of discourse, but as a metonymy of its signifi- 
cation (what Damourette and Pichon take as the "filled out" person, as 
opposed to the "ethereal" person, the latter being no other than the function 
I designated earlier as that of the shifter*). 

The promotion of consciousness as essential to the subject in the historical 
aftermath of the Cartesian cogito is indicative, to my mind, of a misleading 
emphasis on the transparency of the / in action at the expense of the opacity 
of the signifier that determines it; and the slippage by which Bewusstsein 
serves to cover over the confusion of the Selbst actually reveals, in The Phe- 810 

nomenology ofMind, that the reason for Hegel's error lies in his rigor. 

The very movement that shifts the axis of the phenomenon of mind 
toward the imaginary relation to the other (that is, to the semblable connoted 
by a lowercase a), brings its effect to light: namely, the aggressiveness that 



686 Ecrits 

becomes the balance arm of the scales around which the equilibrium of sem- 
blable to semblable decomposes in the relationship between Master and 
Slave, a relationship that is replete with all the cunning tricks by which rea- 
son advances its impersonal reign. 

Regarding this slavery that inaugurates the roads to freedom — a myth 
rather than an actual genesis, no doubt — I can point here to what it hides pre- 
cisely because I have revealed what it hides as no one had before. 

The struggle that gives rise to this slavery is rightly called a struggle of 
pure prestige, and what is at stake — life itself — is well suited to echo the dan- 
ger of the generic prematurity of birth, which Hegel was unaware of, and 
which I have situated as the dynamic mainspring of specular capture. 

But death — precisely because it is dragged into the stakes (making this a 
more honest wager than Pascal's, though Hegel's too is a poker game, since 
limits are placed on how high the bid can be raised) — simultaneously shows 
what is elided by a preliminary rule as well as by the final settlement. For, in 
the final analysis, the loser must not perish if he is to become a slave. In other 
words, a pact always precedes violence before perpetuating it, and what I call 
the symbolic dominates the imaginary, allowing us to wonder whether or not 
murder really is the absolute Master. 

For it is not enough to decide the question on the basis of its effect: Death. 
We need to know which death, 6 the one that life brings or the one that brings 
life. 

Without criticizing the Hegelian dialectic for what it leaves out — the lack 
of a bond that would keep the society of masters together was pointed out 
long ago — I simply wish to stress what, on the basis of my own experience, 
strikes me as blatantly symptomatic in it, that is, as indicative of repression. 
8 1 1 This is clearly the theme of the cunning of reason, whose seductiveness is in 

no wise lessened by the error I pointed out above. The work, Hegel tells us, 
to which the slave submits in giving up jouissance out of fear of death, is pre- 
cisely the path by which he achieves freedom. There can be no more obvious 
lure than this, politically or psychologically. Jouissance comes easily to the 
slave, and it leaves work in serfdom. 

The cunning of reason is a seductive notion because it echoes a well- 
known individual myth characteristic of obsessives, obsessive structure 
being known to be common among the intelligentsia. But even if someone in 
this category avoids the professor's bad faith, he cannot easily deceive him- 
self that his work will grant him access to jouissance. Paying truly uncon- 
scious homage to the story as written by Hegel, he often finds his alibi in the 
death of the Master. But what of this death? He quite simply waits for it. 

In fact, it is from the Other's locus where he situates himself that he fol- 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 68y 

lows the game, thus eliminating all risk to himself — especially the risk of a 
joust — in a "self-consciousness" for which death is but a joke. 

I say this so that philosophers will not believe they can minimize the 
importance of the irruption constituted by what Freud said about desire. 

And this on the pretext that demand, along with the effects of frustration, 
has buried everything that trickles down to them from a practice which has 
degenerated into an educative banality that is no longer even redeemed by its 
laziness. 

Yes, the enigmatic traumas of the Freudian discovery are now considered 
to be merely suppressed cravings. Psychoanalysis is nourished by the obser- 
vation of children and by the childishness of the observations. Let us skip the 
reports thus generated, edifying as they all are. 

And devoid, as they all are now, of the slightest hint of humor. 

Their authors are now far too concerned with obtaining a respectable 
position to leave any room for the irremediable ludicrousness the uncon- 
scious owes to its roots in language. 

Yet it is impossible, for those who claim that discordance is introduced 
into the needs assumed to exist at the subject's origins by the way demand is 
received, to neglect the fact that there is no demand that does not in some 
respect pass through the defiles of the signifier. 

And while the somatic ananke of man's inability to move, much less be 
self-sufficient, for some time after birth provides grounds for a psychology 812 

of dependence, how can that psychology elide the fact that this dependence is 
maintained by a universe of language? Indeed, needs have been diversified 
and geared down by and through language to such an extent that their import 
appears to be of a quite different order, whether we are dealing with the sub- 
ject or politics. In other words, to such an extent that these needs have passed 
over into the register of desire, with everything it forces us to face in this new 
experience of ours: the age-old paradoxes desire has created for moralists and 
the mark of the infinite that theologians find in it, not to mention the precar- 
iousness of its status, as expressed in its most recent form by Sartre — desire, 
a useless passion. 

What psychoanalysis shows us about desire in what might be called its 
most natural function, since the survival of the species depends on it, is not 
only that it is subjected, in its agency, its appropriation, and even its very 
normality, to the accidents of the subject's history (the notion of trauma as 
contingency), but also that all this requires the assistance of structural elements 
— which, in order to intervene, can do very well without these accidents. 
The inharmonious, unexpected, and recalcitrant impact of these elements 
certainly seems to leave to the experience [of desire in its most natural func- 



688 Ecrits 

tion] a residue that drove Freud to admit that sexuality had to bear the mark 
of some hardly natural flaw. 

We would be mistaken if we thought that the Freudian Oedipus myth puts 
an end to theology on the matter. For the myth does not confine itself to 
working the puppet of sexual rivalry. It would be better to read in it what 
Freud requires us to contemplate using his coordinates; for they boil down to 
the question with which he himself began: What is a Father? 

"It is the dead Father," Freud replies, but no one hears him; and it is 
regrettable that, due to the mere fact that Lacan takes it up again under the 
heading of the "Name-of-the-Father," a situation that is hardly scientific 
should still deprive him of his normal audience. 7 
$13 Yet analytic reflection has vaguely revolved around the problematic mis- 

recognition of the function of the sire among certain primitive peoples, and 
psychoanalysts — rallying round the contraband flag of "culturalism" — 
have even argued about the forms of an authority about which it cannot 
even be said that any branch of anthropology has provided a definition of 
any importance. 

Will we wait until we are confronted with a practice, which may in the 
course of time become standard practice, of artificially inseminating women 
who are at odds with phallicism with the sperm of some great man, before we 
deign to pronounce a verdict on the paternal function? 

Yet the Oedipal show cannot run indefinitely in forms of society that are 
losing the sense of tragedy to an ever greater extent. 

Let us begin with the conception of the Other as the locus of the signifier. 
No authoritative statement has any other guarantee here than its very enun- 
ciation, since it would be pointless for the statement to seek it in another sig- 
nifier, which could in no way appear outside that locus. I formulate this by 
saying that there is no metalanguage that can be spoken, or, more aphoristi- 
cally, that there is no Other of the Other. And when the Legislator (he who 
claims to lay down the Law) comes forward to make up for this, he does so as 
an impostor. 

But the Law itself is not an impostor, nor is he who authorizes his actions 
on its basis. 

The fact that the Father may be regarded as the original representative of 
the Law's authority requires us to specify by what privileged mode of pres- 
ence he sustains himself beyond the subject who is led to really occupy the 
place of the Other, namely, the Mother. The question is thus pushed back a 
step. 

It will seem strange that — in opening up here the incommensurate space 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 689 

all demand implies, since it is a request for love — I didn't allow for more 
"making" and debating on this point. 

And that instead I focused it on what closes shy of it, due to the same effect 
of demand, to truly create the place of desire. 

Indeed, it is quite simply, and I am going to say in what sense, as the 
Other's desire that man's desire takes shape, though at first only retaining a 
subjective opacity in order to represent need in it. 

I will now explain in what way this opacity in some sense constitutes the 
substance of desire. 

Desire begins to take shape in the margin in which demand rips away from 814 

need, this margin being the one that demand — whose appeal can be uncon- 
ditional only with respect to the Other — opens up in the guise of the possible 
gap need may give rise to here, because it has no universal satisfaction (this is 
called "anxiety"). A margin which, as linear as it may be, allows its vertigi- 
nous character to appear, provided it is not trampled by the elephantine feet 
of the Other's whimsy. Nevertheless, it is this whimsy that introduces the 
phantom of Omnipotence — not of the subject, but of the Other in which the 
subject's demand is instated (it's about time this idiotic cliche was, once and 
for all, and for all parties, put in its place) — and with this phantom, the neces- 
sity that the Other be bridled by the Law. 

But I will stop here again in order to return to the status of desire, which 
presents itself as independent of the Law's mediation, because Law originates 
in desire — owing to the fact that, by an odd symmetry, desire reverses the 
unconditionality of the demand for love, in which the subject remains sub- 
jected to the Other, in order to raise it to the power of an absolute condition 
(in which "absolute" also implies "detachment"). 

Given the advantage won over the anxiety related to need, this detach- 
ment is successful right from its humblest mode — that in which it was 
glimpsed by a certain psychoanalyst in his work with children, which he 
called the "transitional object," in other words, the shred of blanket or 
beloved shard the child 's lips or hands never stop touching. 

This is, frankly, no more than an emblem; representation's representative 
in the absolute condition is in its proper place in the unconscious, where it 
causes desire in accordance with the structure of fantasy I will extract from it. 

For it is clear here that man's continued nescience of his desire is not so 
much nescience of what he demands, which may after all be isolated, as 
nescience of whence he desires. 

This is where my formulation that the unconscious is (the) discourse 
about the Other [discours de VAutre\ fits in, in which the de should be under- 



6go Ecrits 

stood in the sense of the Latin de (objective determination): de Alio in ora- 
tione (you complete it: tua res agitur). 

But we must also add that man's desire is the Other's desire [le de'sir de 
Vhomme est le desir de VAutre\ in which the de provides what grammarians call 
a "subjective determination" — namely, that it is qua Other that man desires 
(this is what provides the true scope of human passion). 
h 5 This is why the Other's question [la question de UAutre\ — that comes back 

to the subject from the place from which he expects an oracular reply — 
which takes some such form as "Che vuoi?, " "What do you want?," is the 
question that best leads the subject to the path of his own desire, assuming 
that, thanks to the know-how of a partner known as a psychoanalyst, he takes 
up that question, even without knowing it, in the following form: "What 
does he want from me?" 

graph 3 




1(A) $ 



It is this superimposed level of structure that will nudge my graph (see 
Graph 3) toward its completed form, inserting itself there first like the out- 
line of a question mark planted in the circle of the capital A, for Other, sym- 
bolizing the question it signifies with a disconcerting collineation. 

Of what bottle is this the opener? Of what answer is it the signifier, the 
master key? 

It should be noted that a clue may be found in the clear alienation that leaves 
it up to the subject to butt up against the question of his essence, in that he may 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 691 

not misrecognize that what he desires presents itself to him as what he does 
not want — a form assumed by negation in which misrecognition is inserted 
in a very odd way, the misrecognition, of which he himself is unaware, by 
which he transfers the permanence of his desire to an ego that is nevertheless 
obviously intermittent, and, inversely, protects himself from his desire by 
attributing to it these very intermittences. 

Of course, one may be surprised by the extent of what is accessible to self- 
consciousness, on the condition that one has learnt it through another channel. 
Which is certainly the case here. 

For if we are to rediscover the pertinence of all this, a sufficiently sophisti- 
cated study, that can only be situated in the context of analytic experience, must 
enable us to complete the structure of fantasy by essentially linking here, regard- 
less of its occasional elisions, the moment of a fading* or eclipse of the sub- 816 
ject — which is closely tied to the Spaltung or splitting he undergoes due to his 
subordination to the signifier — to the condition of an object (whose privilege 
I have done no more than touch on above in reference to diachrony). 

This is what is symbolized by the abbreviation ($0a), which I have intro- 
duced as an algorithm; and it is no accident that it breaks the phonemic ele- 
ment constituted by the signifying unit right down to its literal atom. For it is 
designed to allow for a hundred and one different readings, a multiplicity that 
is acceptable as long as what is said about it remains grounded in its algebra. 

This algorithm and the analogs of it used in the graph in no way contra- 
dict what I said earlier about the impossibility of a metalanguage. They are 
not transcendent signifiers; they are indices of an absolute signification, a 
notion which will, I hope, seem appropriate to the condition of fantasy with- 
out further commentary. 

The graph shows that desire adjusts to fantasy as posited in this way — like 
the ego does in relation to the body image — but the graph also shows the 
inversion of the misrecognitions on which the one and the other are based, 
respectively. Thus closes the imaginary path, by which I must come into 
being in analysis, where the unconscious was (to be) itself. 

Let us say — borrowing the metaphor used by Damourette and Pichon 
about the grammatical ego and applying it to a subject to which it is better 
suited — that fantasy is really the "stuff" of the /that is primally repressed, 
because it can be indicated only in the fading* of enunciation. 

Indeed, our attention is now drawn to the subjective status of the signify- 
ing chain in the unconscious or, better, in primal repression (Urverdr'dngung). 

In my deduction, it is easier to understand why it was necessary to investi- 
gate the function on which the subject of the unconscious is based, because we 
realize that it is difficult to designate that subject anywhere as subject of a 



692 Ecrits 

statement — and therefore as articulating it — when he does not even know he 
is speaking. Hence the concept of the drive, in which the subject is designated 
on the basis of a pinpointing that is organic, oral, anal, and so on, which satis- 
fies the requirement that the more he speaks, the further he is from speaking. 

8 1 7 COMPLETE GRAPH 



Jouissance/^-T^ Vr^\ Castration 




Signifier \\ // Voice 

m ' v x 



But while my complete graph allows us to situate the drive as the treasure 
trove of signifier s, its notation, ($v\D), maintains its structure by linking it to 
diachrony. The drive is what becomes of demand when the subject vanishes 
from it. It goes without saying that demand also disappears, except that the 
cut remains, for the latter remains present in what distinguishes the drive 
from the organic function it inhabits: namely, its grammatical artifice, so 
manifest in the reversals of its articulation with respect to both source and 
object. (Freud is a veritable wellspring on this point.) 

The very delimitation of the "erogenous zone" that the drive isolates from 
the function's metabolism (the act of devouring involves organs other than 
the mouth — just ask Pavlov's dog) is the result of a cut that takes advantage 
of the anatomical characteristic of a margin or border: the lips, "the enclo- 
sure of the teeth," the rim of the anus, the penile groove, the vagina, and the 
slit formed by the eyelids, not to mention the hollow of the ear (I am avoid- 
ing going into embryological detail here). Respiratory erogeneity has been 
little studied, but it is obviously through spasms that it comes into play. 

Let us note that this characteristic of the cut is no less obviously prevalent 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 693 

in the object described by analytic theory: the mamilla, the feces, the phallus 
(as an imaginary object), and the urinary flow. (An unthinkable list, unless 
we add, as I do, the phoneme, the gaze, the voice . . . and the nothing.) For 
isn't it plain to see that the characteristic of being partial, rightly emphasized 
in objects, is applicable not because these objects are part of a total object, 
which the body is assumed to be, but because they only partially represent the 
function that produces them? 

A common characteristic of these objects as I formulate them is that they 818 

have no specular image, in other words, no alterity. 8 This is what allows them 
to be the "stuff" or, better put, the lining — without, nevertheless, being the 
flip side — of the very subject people take to be the subject of consciousness. 
For this subject, who thinks he can accede to himself by designating himself 
in the statement, is nothing but such an object. Ask someone with writer's 
block about the anxiety he experiences and he will tell you who the turd is in 
his fantasy. 

It is to this object that cannot be grasped in the mirror that the specular 
image lends its clothes. A substance caught in the net of shadow, and which, 
robbed of its shadow-swelling volume, holds out once again the tired lure of 
the shadow as if it were substance. 

What the graph now offers us is situated at the point at which every signi- 
fying chain takes pride in closing its signification. If we are to expect such an 
effect from unconscious enunciation, it is here in S($) and read as: signifier 
of a lack in the Other, a lack inherent in the Other's very function as the 
treasure trove of signifiers. And this is so insofar as the Other is called upon 
(che vuoi) to answer for the value of this treasure, that is, to answer for its 
place in the lower chain certainly, but with the signifiers constitutive of the 
upper chain — in other words, in terms of the drive. 

The lack at stake is one I have already formulated: that there is no Other 
of the Other. But is this characteristic of truth's Faithlessness really the last 
word worth giving in answer to the question, "What does the Other want 
from me?" when we analysts are its mouthpiece? Surely not, and precisely 
because there is nothing doctrinal about our role. We need not answer for 
any ultimate truth, and certainly not for or against any particular religion. 

It is already significant that I had to situate here [in S(^)] the dead Father 
in the Freudian myth. But a myth is nothing if it props up no rites, and psy- 
choanalysis is not the Oedipal rite — a point to be expanded on later. 

No doubt a corpse is a signifier, but Moses' tomb is as empty for Freud as 
Christ's was for Hegel. Abraham revealed his mystery to neither of them. 

For my part, I will begin with what the abbreviation S(^) articulates, 819 

being first of all a signifier. My definition of the signifier (there is no other) 



6<)4 Ecrits 

is as follows: a signifier is what represents the subject to another signifier. 
This latter signifier is therefore the signifier to which all the other signifiers 
represent the subject — which means that if this signifier is missing, all the 
other signifiers represent nothing. For something is only represented to. 

Now insofar as the battery of signifiers is, it is complete, and this signifier 
can only be a line that is drawn from its circle without being able to be 
counted in it. This can be symbolized by the inherence of a (-1) in the set of 
signifiers. 

It is, as such, unpronounceable, but its operation is not, for the latter is 
what occurs whenever a proper name is pronounced. Its statement is equal to 
its signification. 

Hence, by calculating this signification according to the algebra I use, 
namely: 

S (signifier) 

= s (the statement), 

s (signified) 

with S - (-1), we find: s = vQ 

This is what the subject is missing in thinking he is exhaustively accounted 
for by his cogito — he is missing what is unthinkable about him. But where 
does this being, who appears in some way missing from the sea of proper 
names, come from? 

We cannot ask this question of the subject qua /. He is missing everything 
he needs in order to know the answer, since if this subject, /, was dead [moi 
J'etais mort], he would not know it, as I said earlier. Thus he does not know 
Fm alive. How, therefore, will /prove it to myself? 

For I can, at most, prove to the Other that he exists, not, of course, with 
the proofs of the existence of God with which the centuries have killed him, 
but by loving him, a solution introduced by the Christian kerygma. 

It is, in any case, too precarious a solution for us to even think of using it 
to circumvent our problem, namely: What am /? 

/ am in the place from which "the universe is a flaw in the purity of Non- 
Being" is vociferated. 

And not without reason for, by protecting itself, this place makes Being 
itself languish. This place is called Jouissance, and it is Jouissance whose 
absence would render the universe vain. 

Am I responsible for it, then? Yes, of course. Is this Jouissance, the lack of 

820 which makes the Other inconsistent, mine, then? Experience proves that it is 

usually forbidden me, not only, as certain fools would have it, due to bad 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 6c>5 

societal arrangements, but, I would say, because the Other is to blame — if he 
was to exist [existait], that is. But since he doesn't exist, all that's left for me is 
to place the blame on /, that is, to believe in what experience leads us all to, 
Freud at the head of the list: original sin. For even if we did not have Freud's 
express and sorrowful avowal, the fact remains that the myth we owe to 
him — the most recent in history — is of no more use than the myth of the for- 
bidden fruit, except for the fact (and this is not one of its assets as a myth) 
that, being more succinct, it is considerably less stultifying. 

But what is not a myth, although Freud formulated it just as early on as he 
formulated the Oedipus myth, is the castration complex. 

In the castration complex we find the mainspring of the very subversion I 
am trying to articulate here by means of its dialectic. For this complex, which 
was unknown as such until Freud introduced it into the formation of desire, 
can no longer be ignored in any reflection on the subject. 

In psychoanalysis it seems that, rather than attempting to carry its articu- 
lation further, people have deliberately avoided providing any explanation of 
it. Which is why this great Samson-like body has been reduced to providing 
grist for the mill of the Philistines of general psychology. 

Certainly there is a bone(r) [os] here. Since it is precisely what I am claim- 
ing — namely, what structures the subject — it essentially constitutes in the 
subject the gap that all thought has avoided, skipped over, circumvented, or 
stopped up whenever thought apparently succeeds in sustaining itself circu- 
larly, whether the thought be dialectical or mathematical. 

This is why I am given to guiding my students to the places where logic is 
disconcerted by the disjunction that breaks through from the imaginary to 
the symbolic, not in order to indulge in the paradoxes that are thus generated, 
or in some supposed crisis in thought, but, on the contrary, to redirect their 
fake shine to the gap they designate — which I always find quite simply edi- 
fying — and above all to try to create a method from a sort of calculus whose 
very inappropriateness would flush out the secret. 

Such is the phantom known as the cause, which I have pursued in the 
purest symbolization of the imaginary through the alternation from the sim- 821 

ilar to the dissimilar. 9 

Let us observe carefully, therefore, what it is that objects to conferring on 
my signifier S(^) the meaning of mana or of any such term. It is the fact that 
we cannot be satisfied to explain it on the basis of the poverty of the social 
fact, even if the latter were traced back to some supposedly total fact. 

Claude Levi-Strauss, commenting on Mauss' work, no doubt wished to 
see in mana the effect of a zero symbol. But it seems that what we are dealing 
with in our case is rather the signifier of the lack of this zero symbol. This is 



6<)6 Ecrits 

why, at the risk of incurring a certain amount of opprobrium, I have indicated 
how far I have gone in distorting mathematical algorithms in my own use of 
them: for example, my use of the symbol, v-1, also written i in the theory of 
complex numbers, can obviously be justified only if I give up any claim to its 
being able to be used automatically in subsequent operations. 

We must keep in mind that jouissance is prohibited [interdite] to whoever 
speaks, as such — or, put differently, it can only be said [elite] between the 
lines by whoever is a subject of the Law, since the Law is founded on that 
very prohibition. 

Indeed, were the Law to give the order, "Jouisl" ["Enjoy!" or "Come!"], 
the subject could only reply "J'oui's" ["I hear"], in which the jouissance 
would no longer be anything but understood [sous-entendue]. 

But it is not the Law itself that bars the subject's access to jouissance — it 
simply makes a barred subject out of an almost natural barrier. For it is plea- 
sure that sets limits to jouissance, pleasure as what binds incoherent life 
together, until another prohibition — this one being unchallengeable — arises 
from the regulation that Freud discovered as the primary process and rele- 
vant law of pleasure. 

It has been said that in this discovery Freud merely followed the course 
already being pursued by the science of his time — nay, a long-standing tra- 
dition. To appreciate the true audacity of his step, we have only to consider 
his reward, which was not long in coming: the stalemate regarding the hete- 
roclite nature of the castration complex. 
822 The latter is the sole indication of this jouissance in its infinitude, which 

brings with it the mark of its prohibition, and which requires a sacrifice in 
order to constitute this mark: the sacrifice implied in the same act as that of 
chosing its symbol, the phallus. 

This choice is allowed because the phallus — that is, the image of the 
penis — is negativized where it is situated in the specular image. That is what 
predestines the phallus to give body to jouissance in the dialectic of desire. 

We must distinguish, therefore, between the principle of sacrifice, which 
is symbolic, and the imaginary function which is devoted to it, but which 
veils the principle at the same time that it gives it its instrument. 

The imaginary function is the one Freud formulated as governing object 
cathexis as narcissistic. I came back to this myself when I showed that the 
specular image is the channel taken by the transfusion of the body's libido 
toward the object. But insofar as a part remains preserved from this immer- 
sion, concentrating in itself the most intimate aspect of autoeroticism, its 
position as a "pointy extremity" in the form predisposes it to the fantasy of it 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire 6gy 

falling off — in which its exclusion from the specular image is completed as is 
the prototype it constitutes for the world of objects. 

It is thus that the erectile organ — not as itself, or even as an image, but as 
a part that is missing in the desired image — comes to symbolize the place of 
jouissance; this is why the erectile organ can be equated with the \^-l, the 
symbol of the signification produced above, of the jouissance it restores — by 
the coefficient of its statement — to the function of a missing signifier: (-1). 

If it serves to tie together in this way the prohibition of jouissance, it is 
nevertheless not for reasons of form, but because the supersession of these 
reasons signifies what reduces all coveted jouissance to the brevity of auto- 
eroticism. The pathways that are altogether traced out by the anatomical 
conformation of speaking beings — namely, the further perfected hand of the 
monkey — have not, in effect, been disdained in a certain philosophical asce- 
sis as pathways of a wisdom that has incorrectly been termed cynical. Certain 
individuals 10 in our times, obsessed no doubt by this memory, have suggested 
to me that Freud himself belongs to the tradition of "bodily techniques," as 
Mauss calls it. The fact remains that analytic experience demonstrates the 
original character of the guilt generated by such practices. 823 

Guilt that is related to the reminder of the jouissance that is not found in 
the service rendered to the real organ, and consecration of the signifier's 
imaginary function of prohibiting objects. 

Indeed, this is the radical function for which a wilder analytic era found 
more accidental causes (due to education), just as it reinterpreted the other 
forms — in which it took an interest, to its credit — of sanctification of the 
organ (circumcision) as traumas. 

The shift of (-qp) (lowercase phi) as phallic image from one side to the 
other of the equation between the imaginary and the symbolic renders it pos- 
itive in any case, even if it fills a lack. Although it props up (-1), it becomes 
O (capital phi) there, the symbolic phallus that cannot be negativized, the sig- 
nifier of jouissance. And it is this characteristic of O that explains both the 
particularities of women's approach to sexuality, and what makes the male 
sex the weaker sex with regard to perversion. 

I will not take up perversion here, inasmuch as it barely accentuates the 
function of desire in man, insofar as desire institutes the dominance — in the 
privileged place of jouissance — of object a in fantasy, which desire substi- 
tutes for ^L Perversion adds to that a recuperation of qp that would scarcely 
seem original if it did not concern the Other as such in a very particular way. 
Only my formula for fantasy allows us to bring out the fact that the subject 
here makes himself the instrument of the Other's jouissance. 



698 Ecrits 

It is of more concern to philosophers to grasp the relevance of this for- 
mula in the case of the neurotic, precisely because the neurotic skews it. 

Indeed, the neurotic, whether hysteric, obsessive, or, more radically, 
phobic, is the one who identifies the Other's lack with the Other's demand, 
O with D. 

Consequently, the Other's demand takes on the function of the object in 
the neurotic's fantasy — that is, his fantasy (my formulas make it possible to 
realize this immediately) is reduced to the drive: ($0^). This is why it was 
possible to catalog all the neurotic's drives. 

But the prevalence given by the neurotic to demand — which, in an ana- 
lytic movement opting for facility, shifted the whole treatment toward the 
824 handling of frustration — hides the anxiety induced in him by the Other's 

desire, anxiety that cannot be misrecognized when it is covered over by the 
phobic object alone, but which is more difficult to understand in the case of 
the other two neuroses when one is not in possession of the thread that makes 
it possible to posit fantasy as the Other's desire. Once we posit this, we find 
fantasy's two terms split apart, as it were: the first, in the case of the obses- 
sive, inasmuch as he negates the Other's desire, forming his fantasy in such a 
way as to accentuate the impossibility of the subject vanishing, the second, in 
the case of the hysteric, inasmuch as desire is sustained in fantasy only by the 
lack of satisfaction the hysteric brings desire by slipping away as its object. 

These features are confirmed by the obsessive 's fundamental need to be 
the Other's guarantor, and by the Faithlessness of hysterical intrigue. 

In fact, the image of the ideal Father is a neurotic's fantasy. Beyond the 
Mother — demand's real Other, whose desire (that is, her desire) we wish she 
would tone down — stands out the image of a father who would turn a blind 
eye to desires. This marks — more than it reveals — the true function of the 
Father, which is fundamentally to unite (and not to oppose) a desire to the 
Law. 

The Father the neurotic wishes for is clearly the dead Father — that is plain 
to see. But he is also a Father who would be the perfect master of his desire — 
which would be just as good, as far as the subject is concerned. 

This is one of the stumbling blocks the analyst must avoid, and the crux of 
the interminable aspect of transference. 

It is why a calculated vacillation of the analyst's "neutrality" may be more 
valuable to a hysteric than any number of interpretations — provided, of 
course, that the fright this risks bringing about in the patient does not lead to 
a breaking off of the analysis, and that the analysand is convinced by what 
follows that the analyst's desire was in no way involved in the matter. This, 
of course, is not a recommendation regarding technique, but a perspective on 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire (%)£) 

the question of the analyst's desire for those who could not otherwise have 
any notion of it: how the analyst must safeguard the imaginary dimension of 
his nonmastery and necessary imperfection for the other, is as important a 
matter to deal with as the deliberate reinforcement in the analyst of his 
nescience regarding each subject who comes to him for analysis, of an ever 
renewed ignorance so that no one is considered a typical case. 

To return to fantasy, let us say that the pervert imagines he is the Other in 
order to ensure his own jouissance, and that this is what the neurotic reveals 825 

when he imagines he is a pervert — in his case, to ensure control over the 
Other. 

This explains the supposed perversion at the crux of neurosis. Perversion 
is in the neurotic's unconscious in the guise of the Other's fantasy. But this 
does not mean that the pervert's unconscious is right out in the open. He, too, 
defends himself in his desire in his own way. For desire is a defense, a defense 
against going beyond a limit in jouissance. 

In its structure as I have defined it, fantasy contains (-(p), the imaginary 
function of castration, in a hidden form that can switch from one of its terms 
to the other. That is to say, like a complex number, it alternatively imaginar- 
izes (if you will allow me this term) one of these terms in relation to the other. 

Included in object a is agalma, the inestimable treasure that Alcibiades 
declares is contained in the rustic box the figure of Socrates is to him. But let 
us note that a minus sign (-) is attributed to it. It is because Alcibiades has not 
seen Socrates' prick — permit me to follow Plato here, who does not spare us 
the details — that Alcibiades the seducer exalts in Socrates the agalma, the 
marvel that he would have liked Socrates to cede to him by avowing his 
desire. Alcibiades' subjective division, which he carries within him, shines 
through quite clearly on this occasion. 

Such is woman concealed behind her veil: it is the absence of the penis that 
makes her the phallus, the object of desire. Evoke this absence in a more pre- 
cise way by having her wear a cute fake one under a fancy dress, and you, or 
rather she, will have plenty to tell us about: the effect is 100 percent guaran- 
teed, for men who don't beat around the bush, that is. 

Thus by exhibiting his own object as castrated, Alcibiades flaunts the fact 
that he is imbued with desire — a fact that does not escape Socrates' atten- 
tion — for someone else who is present, Agathon. Socrates, as the precursor 
of psychoanalysis, and confident of his position at this fashionable gathering, 
does not hesitate to name Agathon as the transference object, bringing to 
light through an interpretation a fact that many analysts are still unaware of: 
that the love-hate effect in the psychoanalytic situation is found outside of it. 

But Alcibiades is by no means a neurotic. In fact, it is because he is the 



700 Ecrits 

826 epitome of desirousness, and a man who pursues jouissance as far as possible, 
that he can thus (though with the help of an instrumental drunkenness) pro- 
duce before everyone 's eyes the central articulation of the transference, when 
in the presence of the object adorned with its sparkle. 

The fact remains that he projected onto Socrates the ideal of the perfect 
Master — that he completely imaginarized Socrates through the action of (-(jp). 

In the case of the neurotic, (-qp) slips under the $ in fantasy, favoring the 
imagination that is characteristic of him, that of the ego. For the neurotic 
underwent imaginary castration at the outset; it sustains the strong ego that is 
his, so strong, one might say, that his proper name bothers him, so strong that 
deep down the neurotic is Nameless. 

Yes, it is behind this ego, which certain analysts choose to strengthen still 
more, that the neurotic hides the castration he denies. 

But, contrary to appearances, he cleaves to this castration. 

What the neurotic does not want, and what he strenuously refuses to do 
until the end of his analysis, is to sacrifice his castration to the Other's jouis- 
sance, by allowing it to serve the Other. 

And, of course, he is not wrong, for — although, deep down, he feels he is 
the most vain thing in existence, a Want-To-Be or a One-Too-Many — why 
would he sacrifice his difference (anything but that) to the jouissance of an 
Other, which, let us not forget, does not exist. Yes, but if by chance it was to 
exist [existait], it would enjoy it [il en jouirait]. And that is what the neurotic 
does not want. For he figures that the Other demands his castration. 

What analytic experience attests to is that castration is what regulates 
desire, in both normal and abnormal cases. 

Providing it oscillates by alternating between % and a in fantasy, castration 
makes of fantasy a chain that is both supple and inextensible by which the fix- 
ation of object cathexis, which can hardly go beyond certain natural limits, 
takes on the transcendental function of ensuring the jouissance of the Other 
that passes this chain on to me in the Law. 

Anyone who really wants to come to terms with this Other has open to 
him the path of experiencing not the Other's demand, but its will. And then: 
to either realize himself as an object, turning himself into the mummy of 
some Buddhist initiation, or satisfy the will to castrate inscribed in the 
Other, which leads to the supreme narcissism of the Lost Cause (the latter 

827 being the path of Greek tragedy, which Claudel rediscovers in a Christianity 
of despair). 

Castration means that jouissance has to be refused in order to be attained 
on the inverse scale of the Law of desire. 
I won't go any further here. 



The Subversion of the Subject and the Dialectic of Desire yo i 

[Endnote] 

This article is coming out here for the first time: an unexpected shortage of 
the funds that are usually provided in ample quantity to publish the complete 
proceedings of such colloquia having left it in abeyance, along with all the 
fine things that adorned it. 

I should mention, for the record, that the "Copernican" discussion was 
added later, and that the end of the article on castration was not delivered at 
the colloquium due to lack of time, and was in fact replaced by a few words 
on the machine, in the modern sense of the word, by which the subject's rela- 
tion to the signifier can be materialized. 

From the fellow feeling natural in any discussion, let us not exclude the fel- 
low feeling aroused in me by a particular disagreement. The term "a-human," 
which someone wanted to attribute to what I had said, did not bother me in the 
least; I was flattered, rather, as I had helped occasion the birth of the new ele- 
ment it brings to the category. I noted with no less interest the sizzling, that 
followed soon afterward, of the word "hell," since the voice that pronounced 
it gave it a certain distinctive piquancy owing to the speaker's declared alle- 
giance to Marxism. I must admit that I appreciate humanism when it comes 
from a camp where, although employed with no less cunning than elsewhere, 
it at least has a certain candor about it: "When the miner comes home, his wife 
rubs him down ..." That leaves me defenseless. 

In a private conversation, someone close to me asked me (this was the 
form his question took) whether talking to a brick wall implied faith in an 
eternal scribe. Such faith is not necessary, was the reply, to whoever knows 
that every discourse derives its effects from the unconscious. 



Notes 

1. (Added in 1966:) Even in attempting to Sartre, she's a respectable girl: she won't walk 

interest people in telepathy, under the heading the street on just any side, 
of psychological phenomena — or in the whole 2. G/^VIII, 237-38. 

Gothic psychology that can be resuscitated on 3. I am referring here to the friend who 

the basis of Myers' work — the crudest adven- invited me to this conference, after having, 

turer will be unable to break out of the field in some months before, revealed in print his reser- 

which Freud has already confined him, by pre- vations — based on his personal ontology — 

senting what he accepts of these phenomena as about "psychoanalysts" who were too 

requiring translation, in the strict sense of the "Hegelian" for his liking, as if anyone in this 

term, in the corroborative effects of contem- group but me could even be associated with 

porary discourses. Hegel. 

Even when prostituted, psychoanalytic the- This in the hodgepodge text of pages from 

ory remains sanctimonious (a well-known his diary cast to the four winds (of chance, no 

characteristic of the brothel). As we say since doubt), from which a journal {La Nouvelle 



J02 



Ecrits 



Revue frangaise) had nevertheless benefited. 

Regarding which I pointed out to him that 
in the, even entertaining, terms in which he 
dressed up this ontology of his in his informal 
notes, I found its "certainly not, but perhaps" 
procedure designed to mislead. 

4. 1 have left this paragraph in the text only 
as a monument to an outdated battle (added in 
1962: What was I thinking? {1966. 1957. 1968 
...ha, ha!}). 

5. (Added in 1962:) The words in paren- 
theses here have been added with a view to 
pinpointing later developments regarding 

identification. 

6. This, too, is a reference to what I prof- 
fered in my seminar, L'Ethique de la psych- 
analyse (1959-1960, forthcoming), on the 
second death. I agree with Dylan Thomas that 
there aren't two. But is the absolute Master, 
then, the only one that remains? 



7. [Added in 1966:] The very fact that I said 
this at the time at this point in my paper, even 
if I didn't put it more forcefully, suggests an 
appointment with fate since, three years later, 
it was precisely regarding the theme of the 
Name-of-the-Father that I adopted the sanc- 
tion of laying to rest the theses I had promised 
in my seminar, due to the permanence of this 
situation. 

8. (Added in 1962:) I have since justified this 
by means of a topological model borrowed 
from surface theory in an analysis situs. 

9. (Added in 1962:) More recently, in the 
opposite direction, in the attempt to correlate 
topologically defined surfaces with the terms I 
employ here in the subjective articulation. Not 
to mention in the simple refutation of the sup- 
posed paradox, "I am lying." 

10. (Added in 1971:) This plural covers an 
eminent contemporary philosopher. 



Position of the Unconscious 829 

Remarks made at the 1960 Bonneval Colloquium, rewritten in 1964 

Henri Ey — thanks to his authority which has made him the most influential 
figure in French psychiatric circles — brought together in his ward at Bon- 
neval Hospital a very broad spectrum of specialists around the theme of the 
Freudian unconscious (October 30 to November 2, 1960). 

The talk given by my students Laplanche and Leclaire promoted at the 
colloquium a conception of my work which, since the talk was published in 
Les temps modernes, has become definitive, despite the divergence between 
their positions that was manifested therein. 

Interventions made at a colloquium, when there is something at stake in 
the debate, sometimes require a good deal of commentary to be situated. 

And once all the papers given there have been thoroughly rewritten, the 
task becomes an arduous one. 

Its interest wanes, moreover, with the time it takes to rewrite them, for 
one would have to replace it with what takes place during that time consid- 
ered as logical time. 

In short, three and a half years later, though barely having had the leisure 
to monitor the interval, I made a decision that Henri Ey, in a book on the col- 
loquium to be published by Desclee de Brouwer, introduces in the following 
way: 

This text summarizes Jacques Lacan's interventions which, due to 
their importance, formed the axis of all the discussions. The tran- 
scripts of these interventions have been condensed by Jacques Lacan 
in these pages written at my request in March 1964. 

I hope the reader will allow that for me this logical time has been able to 
reduce the circumstances, in a text extracted from a more intimate gathering, 
to this mention of them. (1966) 

Remarks made at a colloquium such as this, inviting philosophers, psychia- 830 

trists, psychologists, and psychoanalysts on the basis of their respective 
expertise, fail to agree on the level of truth of Freud's texts. 

Concerning the unconscious, one must go straight to the crux of Freud's 
experience. 

The unconscious is a concept founded on the trail [trace] left by that which 
operates to constitute the subject. 

The unconscious is not a species defining the circle of that part of psychi- 
cal reality which does not have the attribute (or the virtue) of consciousness. 



J04 Ecrits 

There may be phenomena that are subsumed by the unconscious accord- 
ing to both of these acceptations; the latter remain no less foreign to each 
other. The only relation between them is one of homonymy. 

The importance I attribute to language as the cause of the subject requires 
that I be more specific: aberrations abound when the concept "unconscious" 
is depreciated by being applied ad libitum to phenomena that can be classified 
under the homonymous species. It is unthinkable that the concept might be 
restored on the basis of these phenomena. 

Let me specify my own position concerning the equivocation to which the 
"is" and "is not" of my initial positions might give rise. 

The unconscious is what I say it is, assuming we are willing to hear what 
Freud puts forward in his theses. 

Saying that for Freud the unconscious is not what goes by that name in 
other contexts would be of little value if what I meant were not grasped: the 
unconscious, prior to Freud, is not purely and simply. This is because it names 
nothing [prior to Freud] that counts any more as an object — nor warrants 
being granted any more existence — than what would be defined by situating 
it in the "un-black" [Im-noir]. 

The unconscious before Freud has no more consistency than this un- 
black — namely, the set of what could be classified according to the various 
meanings of the word "black," by dint of its refusal of the attribute (or 
virtue) of blackness (whether physical or moral). 

What, indeed, could the following possibly have in common — to take the 
eight definitions collated by Dwelshauvers in a book that is old (1916), but 
not so far out-of-date that, were such a catalogue to be prepared anew today, 
its heterogeneity would not be diminished: the sensory unconscious (implied 
83 1 by the so-called optical effects of contrast and illusion); the automatic uncon- 

scious developed by habit; the co-consciousness (?) of split personalities; 
ideational emergences of a latent activity that appears in creative thought as 
if it were oriented, and telepathy which certain people would like to relate to 
such diought; the learned and even integrated reserves of memory; the pas- 
sions in our character which get the better of us; the heredity that is recog- 
nized in our natural gifts; and finally the rational or metaphysical unconscious 
that is implied by "mental acts"? 

(None of them can be grouped together, except confusedly, because of 
what psychoanalysts have added by way of obscurantism in failing to distin- 
guish the unconscious from instinct, or, as they say, from the instinctual — the 
archaic or primordial, succumbing thereby to an illusion decisively dispelled 
by Claude Levi-Strauss — and even from the genetic character of a supposed 
"development.") 



Position of the Unconscious jo5 

My claim is that they have nothing in common if one grounds oneself in 
psychological objectivity, even if the latter is derived by extension from the 
schemas of psychopathology, and that this chaos merely reflects psychol- 
ogy's central error. This error consists in taking the very phenomenon of 
consciousness to be unitary, speaking of the same consciousness — believed 
to be a synthetic faculty — in the illuminated area of a sensory field, in the 
attention that transforms it, in the dialectic of judgment, and in ordinary day- 
dreaming. 

This error is based on the undue transfer to these phenomena of the value 
of a thought experiment that uses them as examples. 

The Cartesian cogito is the major, and perhaps terminal, feat of this exper- 
iment in that it attains knowledge certainty. But it merely indicates all the 
more clearly just how privileged the moment upon which it is based is, and 
how fraudulent it is to extend its privilege to phenomena endowed with con- 
sciousness, in order to grant them a status. 

For science, the cogito marks, on the contrary, the break with every assur- 
ance conditioned by intuition. 

And the much sought-after [reckerckee] latency of this founding moment, 
as Selbstbewusstsein [self-consciousness], in the dialectical sequence of 
Hegel's phenomenology of mind, is based upon the presupposition of 
absolute knowledge. 

Everything, on the contrary, points to the distribution of consciousness in 
psychical reality — however the latter's texture is ordered — that distribution 
being heterotopic in terms of levels and erratic at each level. 

The only homogeneous function of consciousness is found in the ego's 832 

imaginary capture by its specular reflection, and in the function of misrecog- 
nition that remains tied to it. 

The negation inherent in psychology in this regard should rather, following 
Hegel, be chalked up to the law of the heart and the frenzy of self-conceit. 

The credit granted to this perpetuated presumption, to consider only what 
it receives by way of scientific honors, raises the question of where its value 
is situated; it cannot come down to the mere publication of more or less copi- 
ous treatises. 

Psychology transmits ideals: the psyche therein no longer represents any- 
thing but the sponsorship that makes it qualify as academic. Ideals are society's 
slaves. 

A certain kind of progress in our own society illustrates this, when psy- 
chology not only furnishes the means, but even defers to the wishes of market 
research. 

When a market study had concluded upon the proper means by which to 



yo€ Ecrits 

sustain consumption in the U.S.A., psychology enlisted, enlisting Freud 
along with it, to remind the half of the population most exposed to business' 
goal that women only realize their potential through gender ideals (see Betty 
Friedan on the concerted effort to create a "feminine mystique" in that post- 
war decade). 

Perhaps psychology reveals, through this ironic channel, why it has 
always subsisted. But scientists may recall that the ethics implicit in their 
training commands them to refuse all such blatant ideology. The unconscious 
as understood by psychologists is thus debilitating for thought, due to the 
very credence thought must lend it in order to argue against it. 

Now the debates that have taken place during this colloquium have been 
remarkable in that they have constantly turned to the Freudian concept in all 
its difficulty, and have derived their very strength from this difficulty. 

This is remarkable inasmuch as psychoanalysts' only endeavor, in today's 
world, is to enter psychology's ranks. The aversion everything coming from 
Freud meets with in their community has been plainly avowed, especially by 
a subset of the psychoanalysts present. 

This fact cannot be excluded from the examination of the issue at hand. 
833 No more than can another fact: that it is due to my teaching that this collo- 

quium has reversed the trend. I am saying this not merely to make mention of 
the fact — many have done so — but also to note that this obliges me to 
account for the paths I have followed. 

What psychoanalysis finds itself enjoined to do when it returns to the fold 
of "general psychology" is to sustain what deserves to be exposed — right 
here and not in the far-off realms of our former colonies — as primitive men- 
tality. For the kind of interest that psychology comes to serve in our present 
society, of which I have given an idea, finds therein its advantage. 

Psychoanalysis thus underwrites it by furnishing an astrology that is more 
decent than the one to which our society continues to surreptitiously sacrifice. 

I thus consider justified the prejudice psychoanalysis encounters in East- 
ern Europe. It was up to psychoanalysis not to deserve that prejudice, as it 
was possible that, presented with the test of different social exigencies, psy- 
choanalysis might have proved less tractable had it received harsher treat- 
ment. I gauge that on the basis of my own position in psychoanalysis. 

Psychoanalysis would have done better to examine its ethics and learn 
from the study of theology, following a path indicated by Freud as unavoid- 
able. At the very least, its deontology in science should make it realize that it 
is responsible for the presence of the unconscious in this field. 

This function was served by my students at this colloquium, and I con- 
tributed thereto in accordance with the method that I have constantly 



Position of the Unconscious 707 

adopted on such occasions, situating each in his position in relation to the 
subject. The main axis is indicated clearly enough in the written responses. 

It would be of some interest, if only to the historian, to have the transcripts 
of the talks actually given, even if they were cut where blanks appeared due 
to defects in the recording devices. They underscore the absence of he whose 
services designated him as the person who could highlight with the greatest 
tact and accuracy the detours of a moment of combat in a place where ideas 
were exchanged — his connections, his culture, and even his social savvy 
allowing him to understand better than anyone else the recordings with 
their intonations. His failure already ensconced him in the good graces of 
defection. 

I will stop deploring the opportunity that was missed, everyone having 
since taken ample advantage of a time-worn practice, carefully reworking his 834 

presentation. I will take the opportunity to explain my present doctrine of the 
unconscious, all the more legitimately as the resistances of a peculiar alloca- 
tion of roles impeded me from saying more about it at the colloquium. 

This consideration is not political, but technical. It is related to the follow- 
ing condition, established by my doctrine: psychoanalysts are part and parcel 
of the concept of the unconscious, as they constitute that to which the uncon- 
scious is addressed. I thus cannot but include my discourse on the uncon- 
scious in the very thesis it enunciates: the presence of the unconscious, being 
situated in the locus of the Other, can be found in every discourse, in its 
enunciation. 

The very subject of he who would propose to sustain this presence — the 
analyst — must, according to this hypothesis, in the same movement be given 
form [informe] and "called into question," in other words, be put to the test of 
his own splitting by the signifier. 

This explains the sense of an arrested spiral one has in reading the work 
presented by my students, Serge Leclaire and Jean Laplanche. For they lim- 
ited him to the kind of testing one does on a spare part. 

Which is the very sign that my statements are, in all their rigor, made first 
of all for the function they only serve in their stead. 

In the introductory phase, one can illustrate the effect of enunciation by 
asking a student if he can imagine the unconscious existing in animals, unless 
they have some degree of language — human language. If he indeed agrees 
that this is the condition that would allow him to at least consider the possi- 
bility, you have verified that he distinguishes between "unconscious" and 
"instinct." 

Propitious initial omen, for if we were to call upon each analyst as well, 
regardless of the doctrine he was most trained in, and ask him whether, in ful- 



yo8 Ecrits 

filling his role (fostering the patient's discourse, restoring its meaning effect, 
putting himself on the line \sy mettre en cause] by responding, as well as by 
remaining silent), he ever had the feeling he was dealing with anything like 
an instinct — could he say yes? 

Reading analytic writings and official translations of works by Freud 
(who never wrote the word "official") that use the term "instinct" right and 
left, it is perhaps worth obviating a rhetoric that obturates the concept's 
effectiveness. The style appropriate for a paper on analytic experience does 
835 not constitute the whole of theory. But it guarantees that the statements by 

which analytic experience operates preserve within themselves the backward 
movement [recul] of enunciation in which metaphorical and metonymical 
effects are constituted — namely, in accordance with my theses, the very 
mechanisms Freud described as those of the unconscious. 

But here the question is legitimately raised: are they effects of language or 
of speech? Let us assume that the question here only assumes the outlines of 
Saussure 's dichotomy. Directed at what interests Saussure — effects on lan- 
guage [la langue] — it supplies warp and woof to what is woven between syn- 
chrony and diachrony. 

When it is directed back at what calls us into question (as much as at he 
who questions us, if he is not already lost in the stays of his question) — 
namely, the subject — the alternative [language or speech] proposes itself as a 
disjunction. Now it is this very disjunction that provides us with the answer, 
or, rather, it is in leading the Other to constitute itself as the locus of our 
answer — the Other furnishing the answer in a form that inverts the question 
into a message — that we introduce the effective disjunction on the basis of 
which the question has meaning. 

The effect of language is to introduce the cause into the subject. Through 
this effect, he is not the cause of himself; he bears within himself the worm of 
the cause that splits him. For his cause is the signifier, without which there 
would be no subject in the real. But this subject is what the signifier repre- 
sents, and the latter cannot represent anything except to another signifier: to 
which the subject who listens is thus reduced. 

One therefore does not speak to the subject. It speaks of him, and this is 
how he apprehends himself; he does so all the more necessarily in that, before 
he disappears as a subject beneath the signifier he becomes, due to the simple 
fact that it addresses him, he is absolutely nothing. But this nothing is sus- 
tained by his advent, now produced by the appeal made in the Other to the 
second signifier. 

As an effect of language, in that he is born of this early split, the subject 
translates a signifying synchrony into the primordial temporal pulsation that 



Position of the Unconscious 709 

is the constitutive fading* of his identification. This is the first movement. 

But in the second, desire — bedding down in the signifying cut in which 
metonymy occurs, the diachrony (called "history") that was inscribed in fad- 
ing — returns to the kind of fixity Freud grants unconscious wishes (see the 
last sentence of the Traumdeutung [The Interpretation of Dreams]). 

This secondary subornation not only closes the effect of the first by pro- 836 

jecting the topology of the subject into the instant of fantasy; it seals it, refus- 
ing to allow the subject of desire to realize that he is an effect of speech, to 
realize, in other words, what he is in being but the Other's desire. 

This is why any discourse is within its rights to consider itself not respon- 
sible for this effect. Any discourse except that of the teacher when he 
addresses psychoanalysts. 

I have always considered myself accountable for such an effect, and, while 
unequal to the task of guarding against it \dyparer\ it was the secret prowess 
of each of my "seminars." 

For the people who come to hear me are not the first communicants Plato 
exposed to Socrates' questioning. 

The fact that the "secondary" they come out of must be doubled with a 
preparatory, says enough about its shortcomings and superfluities. Of their 
"philosophy [classes]," most have retained but a grab-bag of phrases — a cat- 
echism gone haywire — which anaesthetizes them from being surprised by 
truth. 

They are thus even more easily preyed upon by prestige operations, and 
by the ideals of high personalism by which civilization presses them to live 
beyond their means. 

Intellectual means, that is. 

The ideal of authority with which the analytic candidate who is a physi- 
cian falls in; the public opinion poll with which the mediator of relational 
impasses lets himself off the hook; the meaning of meaning* in which every 
quest finds its alibi; phenomenology, a lap that awaits whatever may fall into 
it — the range is vast and the dispersion great at the outset of an ordered 
obtuseness. 

Resistance, equal in its denial effect despite Hegel and Freud, unhappy 
consciousness and discontent in civilization. 

A Koivrj of subjectification underpins resistance, which objectifies the 
false evidence of the ego and routes every proof away from certainty and 
towards endless procrastination. (Should I be opposed by an appeal to Marx- 
ists, Catholics, or even Freudians, I promise to request a roll call.) 

This is why only the kind of teaching that grinds up this Koivrj can trace 
out the path of what is known as "training analysis" [analyse didactique\ for 



j io Ecrits 

the results of analytic experience are distorted by the very fact of being 
inscribed in this Koivrj . 

837 This doctrinal contribution has a name — it is, quite simply, "scientific 
spirit"; that spirit is altogether lacking in the places where psychoanalysts are 
recruited. 

My teaching is anathema in that it is inscribed in this truth. 

The objection that has been raised, concerning the impact of my teaching 
on the transference of analysts in training, will make future analysts laugh, if, 
thanks to me, there are still analysts for whom Freud exists. But what it 
proves is the absence of any doctrine of training analysis that includes the lat- 
ter's relations with the affirmation of the unconscious. 

It will thus be understood that my use of Hegel's phenomenology bore no 
allegiance to his system, but was intended as an example with which to 
counter the obvious fact of identification. It is in the way in which one con- 
ducts an examination of a patient and draws one 's conclusions that a critique 
of intellectual fables is proposed. It is by not avoiding the ethical implications 
of our praxis for deontology and scientific debate that the beautiful soul will 
be unmasked. The law of the heart, as I have said, is a bigger nuisance than 
paranoia. It is the law of a ruse which, in the cunning [ruse] of reason, traces 
out a meander whose current is seriously slowed. 

Beyond that, the statements Hegel makes, even if one sticks to the text, 
provide the opportunity to always say something Other. Something Other 
which corrects their fantasmatic link with synthesis, while preserving the 
effect they have of exposing the lures of identification. 

That is my Aufhebung [sublation], which transforms Hegel's (his own 
lure) into an occasion to point out — in lieu and place of the leaps of an "ideal 
progress" — the avatars of a lack. 

To confirm the function of this point of lack, nothing is better, after that, 
than Plato's dialogue, insofar as it comes under the genre of comedy, does not 
shy away from indicating the point at which one can do nothing but oppose the 
"marionette 's mask to wooden insults," and remains stone-faced through the 
centuries, rooted to a hoax, waiting for someone to find a better hold than 
the one it clings to in its judo match with the truth. 

This is why Freud is a guest one can risk inviting impromptu to the Sym- 
posium^ if only on the basis of the short note in which he indicates what he 
owes to its clear-sightedness concerning love, and perhaps to the tranquillity 

838 of its view of transference. He is probably the kind of man who would revive 
its bacchant lines, which no one remembers having said after the drunkenness. 

My seminar was not "where it speaks" [la oil caparle\ as people happened 
to say jokingly. It brought forth the place from which it could speak, opening 



Position of the Unconscious yi i 

more than one ear to hear things that would have been passed over indiffer- 
ently since they would not have been recognized. One of my auditors put this 
naively, announcing the marvelous fact that, that very evening, or perhaps 
just the day before, he had come across in a session with a patient what I had 
said in my seminar — verbatim. 

The place in question is the entrance to the cave, towards the exit of which 
Plato guides us, while one imagines seeing the psychoanalyst entering there. 
But things are not that easy, as it is an entrance one can only reach just as it 
closes (the place will never be popular with tourists), and the only way for it 
to open up a bit is by calling from the inside. 

This is not unsolvable — assuming the "open sesame" of the unconscious 
consists in having speech effects, since it is linguistic in structure — but 
requires that the analyst reexamine the way in which it closes. 

What we have to account for is a gap, beat, or alternating suction, to fol- 
low some of Freud's indications, and that is what I have proceeded to do in 
grounding the unconscious in a topology. 

The structure of what closes [seferme] is, indeed, inscribed in a geometry 
in which space is reduced to a combinatory: it is what is called an "edge" in 
topology. 

By formally studying the consequences of the irreducibility of the cut it 
makes, one could rework some of the most interesting functions between aes- 
thetics and logic. 

One notices here that it is the closing of the unconscious which provides the 
key to its space — namely, the impropriety of trying to turn it into an inside. 

This closing also demonstrates the core of a reversion time, quite neces- 
sarily introduced [if we are to explain] the efficiency of discourse. It is rather 
easily perceived in something I have been emphasizing for a long time: the 
retroactive effect of meaning in sentences, meaning requiring the last word of 
a sentence to be sealed [se houcler], 

Nachtraglichkeit (remember that I was the first to extract it from Freud's 839 

texts) or deferred action \apres-coup\ by which trauma becomes involved in 
symptoms, reveals a temporal structure of a higher order. 

But above all, experience with this closing shows that it would not be gra- 
tuitous on the part of psychoanalysts to reopen the debate over the cause, a 
phantom that cannot be banished from thought, whether critical or not. For 
the cause is not, as is said of being as well, a lure of forms of discourse — oth- 
erwise it would have already been dispelled. It perpetuates the reason that 
subordinates the subject to the signifier's effect. 

It is only as instance of the unconscious, the Freudian unconscious, that 
one grasps the cause at the level at which someone like Hume attempts to 



yiz Ecrits 

flush it out, which is precisely the level at which it takes on consistency: the 
retroaction of the signifier in its efficiency, which must be rigorously distin- 
guished from the final cause. 

Were we to demonstrate that it is the only true first cause, the apparent 
discordance of Aristotle 's four causes would, in fact, dissipate; from their ter- 
rain, analysts could contribute to this reformulation. 

They would have the benefit of being able to use the Freudian term 
"overdetermination" as something other than an evasive answer. What fol- 
lows introduces the feature that commands the functioning relationship 
between these forms: their circular, albeit nonreciprocal, articulation. 

While there is closing and entry, they do not necessarily separate: they 
provide two domains with a mode of conjunction. They are the subject and 
the Other, respectively, and these domains are to be substantified here only 
on the basis of my theses concerning the unconscious. 

The subject, the Cartesian subject, is what is presupposed by the uncon- 
scious — I have shown that elsewhere. 

The Other is the dimension required by the fact that speech affirms itself 
as truth. 

The unconscious is, between the two of them, their cut in action. 

This cut is seen to command the two fundamental operations with which the 
840 subject's causation should be formulated. These operations are ordered in a 

circular, yet nonreciprocal, relationship. 

The first, alienation, constitutes the subject as such. In a field of objects, 
no relationship is conceivable that engenders alienation apart from the rela- 
tionship with the signifier. Let us take as our point of departure the fact that 
no subject has any reason to appear in the real unless there are speaking 
beings in it. A physics is conceivable that accounts for everything in the 
world, including its animate part; a subject intervenes only inasmuch as there 
are, in this world, signifiers that mean nothing and must be deciphered. 

To grant priority to the signifier over the subject is, in my book, to take 
into account the experience Freud opened up for us: the signifier plays and 
wins, if I may say so, before the subject is aware of it, to such an extent that in 
the play of JViti (in witticisms, for example) it may surprise the subject. 
What it lights up with its flash is the subject's division from himself. 

But the fact that the signifier reveals to the subject his own division should 
not make us forget that this division stems from nothing other than that very 
same play, the play of signifiers — signifiers, not signs. 

Signs are polyvalent: they no doubt represent something to someone, but 



Position of the Unconscious J13 

the status of that someone is uncertain, as is that of the supposed language of 
certain animals, a sign language which neither allows for metaphor nor 
engenders metonymy. 

This someone could, by some stretch of the imagination, be the universe, 
insofar as information, so we are told, circulates in it. Any center in which 
information is total(iz)ed can be taken for a someone, but not for a subject. 

The register of the signif ier is instituted on the basis of the fact that a sig- 
nifier represents a subject to another signif ier. This is the structure of all 
unconscious formations: dreams, slips of the tongue, and witticisms. The 
same structure explains the subject's original division. Produced in the locus 
of the yet-to-be-situated Other, the signifier brings forth a subject from a 
being that cannot yet speak, but at the cost of freezing him. The ready- to- 
speak that was to be there — in both senses of the French imperfect "ily avait" 
placing the ready-to-speak an instant before (it was there but is no longer), 
but also an instant after (a few moments more and it would have been there 
because it could have been there) — disappears, no longer being anything but 
a signifier. 

It is thus not the fact that this operation begins in the Other that leads me 841 

to call it "alienation." The fact that the Other is, for the subject, the locus of 
his signifying cause merely explains why no subject can be his own cause [cause 
de soi]. This is clear not only from the fact that he is not God, but from the 
fact that God himself cannot be his own cause if we think of him as a subject; 
Saint Augustine saw this very clearly when he refused to refer to the personal 
God as "self-caused" [cause de soi]. 

Alienation resides in the subject's division, the cause of which I just desig- 
nated. Let us proceed to discuss its logical structure. This structure is a vel, 
which shows its originality here for the first time. In order to do so, it must be 
derived from what is known, in so-called mathematical logic, as union 
(which has already been acknowledged to define a certain kind oivel). 

This union is such that the vel of alienation, as I call it, imposes a choice 
between its terms only to eliminate one of them — always the same one 
regardless of one's choice. The stakes are thus apparently limited to the 
preservation or loss of the other term, when the union involves two terms. 

This disjunction is incarnated in a highly illustratable, if not dramatic, 
way as soon as the signifier is incarnated at a more personalized level in 
demand or supply: in "your money or your life" or "liberty or death." 

It is merely a question of knowing whether or not (sic aut non) you want to 
keep life or refuse death, because, regarding the other term in the alternative, 
money or liberty, your choice will in any case be disappointing. 



j 14 Ecrits 

You should be aware that what remains is, in any case, diminished: it will 
be life without money and, having refused death, a life somewhat inconve- 
nienced by the cost of freedom. 

This is the stigma of the fact that the vel here, functioning dialectically, 
clearly operates on the vel of logical union, which is known to be equivalent 
to an "and" (sic et non). This is illustrated by the fact that, in the long run, you 
will have to give up your life after your money, and in the end the only thing 
left will be your freedom to die. 

Similarly, our subject is subjected to the vel of a certain meaning he must 
receive or petrification. But should he retain the meaning, the nonmeaning 
842 produced by his change into a signifier will encroach on this field (of mean- 

ing). This nonmeaning clearly falls within the Other's field, although it is 
produced as an eclipse of the subject. 

This [la chose] is worth saying, for it qualifies the field of the unconscious 
to take a seat, I would say, in the place of the analyst — let us take that liter- 
ally — in his armchair. We have arrived at such a pass that we should leave 
him this armchair in a "symbolic gesture." The latter is an expression com- 
monly used to say "a gesture of protest," and its import would be to chal- 
lenge the order — so prettily avowed by its crude motto in "Francglaire" (to 
coin a term), directly issuing from thea^iaGta a princess perpetrated upon 
French psychoanalysis by replacing the pre-Socratic tone of Freud's precept, 
"Wo Es war, soil Ich werden," with the croaking strains of — "the ego" (the 
analyst's, no doubt) "must dislodge the id" (the patient's, of course). 

The fact that people have objected to Serge Leclaire 's claim that the uni- 
corn sequence is unconscious, by pointing out that Leclaire himself is con- 
scious of it, means that they do not see that the unconscious only has meaning 
in the Other's field; still less do they see the consequence thereof: that it is not 
the effect of meaning that is operative in interpretation, but rather the articu- 
lation in the symptom of signifiers (without any meaning at all) that have 
gotten caught up in it. 1 

Let us turn now to the second operation, in which the subject's causation 
closes, to test the structure of the edge in its function as a limit, but also in the 
twist that motivates the encroachment of the unconscious. I call this opera- 
tion "separation." We will see that it is what Freud called " Icfispaltung" or 
the splitting of the subject, and grasp why Freud, in the text in which he 
introduces it ["The Splitting of the Ego"], grounds it in a splitting, not of the 
subject, but of the object (namely, the phallic object). 

The logical form dialectically modified by the second operation is called 
"intersection" in symbolic logic; it is also the product formulated by a 



Position of the Unconscious yi5 

belonging to and to This function is modified here by a part taken 

from a lack situated within another lack, through which the subject finds 843 

anew in the Other's desire the equivalent of what he is qua subject of the 
unconscious. 

In this way, the subject is actualized in the loss in which he surged forth as 
unconscious, through the lack he produces in the Other, following the course 
Freud considered to constitute the most radical drive: the "death drive," as he 

called it. A belonging neither to is called upon here to fill a nor to 

Empedocles' act, responding thereto, shows that a will [vouloir] is involved. 
The vel returns in the form of a velle. That is the end of the operation. Now 
for the process. 

Separare, separating, ends here in se parere, engendering oneself. Let us 
dispense with the obvious gems we find in the works of Latin etymologists 
concerning the slippage in meaning from one verb to the other. One should 
simply realize that this slippage is grounded in the fact that they are both 
paired with the function of the pars. 

The part is not the whole, as they say, though usually without thinking. 
For it should be emphasized that the part has nothing to do with the whole. 
One has to come to terms with it [en prendre son parti]; it plays its game [sa 
partie] all by itself. Here the subject proceeds from his partition to his partu- 
rition. This does not imply the grotesque metaphor of giving birth to himself 
anew. Indeed, language would be hard pressed to express that with an origi- 
nal term, at least in Indo-European climes where all the words used for this 
purpose are of juridical or social origin. "Parere" was first of all to procure (a 
child for one's husband). This is why the subject can procure for himself 
what interests him here — a status I will qualify as "civil." Nothing in any- 
one 's life unleashes more determination to succeed in obtaining it. In order 
to be pars, he would easily sacrifice the better part of his interests, though not 
in order to become part of the whole, which, moreover, is in no way consti- 
tuted by others' interests, still less by the general interest which is distin- 
guished therefrom in an entirely different manner. 

Separare, separare: in order to attribute to himself [separer] the signifier to 
which he succumbs, the subject attacks the chain — that I have reduced to a 
binary, at its most elementary level — at its interval. The repeating interval, 
the most radical structure of the signifying chain, is the locus haunted by 
metonymy, the latter being the vehicle of desire (at least that is what I teach). 

It is, in any case, through the impact whereby the subject experiences in 
this interval something that motivates him Other [Autre chose] than the mean- 
ing effects by which a discourse solicits him, that he in fact encounters the 844 
Other's desire, before he can even call it desire, much less imagine its object. 



yi6 Ecrits 

What he will place there is his own lack, in the form of the lack he would 
(like to) produce in the Other through his own disappearance — the disap- 
pearance (which he has at hand, so to speak) of the part of himself he receives 
from his initial alienation. 

But what he thus fills is not the lack [faille] he encounters in the Other, but 
rather, first of all, the lack that results from the constitutive loss of one of his 
parts, by which he turns out to be made of two parts. Therein lies the twist 
whereby separation represents the return of alienation. For the subject oper- 
ates with his own loss, which brings him back to his point of departure. 

His "can he lose me?" is, no doubt, the recourse he has against the opacity 
of the desire he encounters in the Other's locus, but it merely brings the sub- 
ject back to the opacity of the being he receives through his advent as a sub- 
ject, such as he was first produced by the other's summoning. 

It is an operation whose fundamental outlines are found in psychoanalytic 
technique. For it is insofar as the analyst intervenes by scanding the patient's 
discourse that an adjustment occurs in the pulsation of the rim through which 
the being that resides just shy of it must flow. 

The true and final mainspring of what constitutes transference is the 
expectation of this being's advent in relation to what I call "the analyst's 
desire," insofar as something about the analyst's own position has remained 
unnoticed therein, at least up until now. 

This is why transference is a relationship that is essentially tied to time and 
its handling. But what is the being that responds to us, operating in the field 
of speech and language, from shy of the cave 's entrance? I would go so far as 
to embody it in the form of the very walls of the cave that would (like to) live, 
or rather come alive with palpitations whose living movement must be 
grasped now — that is, now that I have articulated the function and field of 
speech and language in their conditioning. 

I do not see how anyone can rightfully claim that I neglect dynamics in my 
topology; I orient it, which is better than to make a commonplace of it (the 
most verbal is not where people are willing to say it is). 
845 As for sexuality, which people would like to remind me is the force we deal 

with and that it is biological, I retort that analysts perhaps have not shed as 
much light as people at one time hoped on sexuality 's mainsprings, recom- 
mending only that we be natural, repeatedly trotting out the same themes of 
billing and cooing. I will try to contribute something newer by resorting to a 
genre that Freud himself never claimed to have superseded in this area: myth. 

To compete with Aristophanes on his own turf in the above-mentioned 
Symposium, let us recall his primitive double-backed creatures in which two 



Position of the Unconscious jij 

halves are fused together as firmly as those of a Magdeburg sphere; the 
halves, separated later by a surgical operation arising from Zeus' jealousy, 
represent the beings we have become in love, starving for our unfindable 
complement. 

In considering the sphericity of primordial Man as much as his division, it 
is the egg that comes to mind and that has thus perhaps been repressed since 
Plato, given the preeminence granted for centuries to the sphere in a hierar- 
chy of forms sanctioned by the natural sciences. 

Consider the egg in a viviparous womb where it has no need for a shell, 
and recall that, whenever the membranes burst, a part of the egg is harmed, 
for the membranes of the fertilized egg are offspring [filles] just as much as 
the living being brought into the world by their perforation. Consequently, 
upon cutting the cord, what the newborn loses is not, as analysts think, its 
mother, but rather its anatomical complement. Midwives call it the "after- 
birth" [delivre]. 

Now imagine that every time the membranes burst, a phantom — an infi- 
nitely more primal form of life, in no wise willing to settle for a duplicate role 
in some microcosmic world within a world — takes flight through the same 
passage. 

Man [/'Homme] is made by breaking an egg, but so is the "Manlet" 
\l'Hommelette\. 

Let us assume the latter to be a large crepe that moves like an amoeba, so 
utterly flat that it can slip under doors, omniscient as it is guided by the pure 
life instinct, and immortal as it is fissiparous. It is certainly something that 
would not be good to feel dripping down your face, noiselessly while you 
sleep, in order to seal it. 

If we are willing to allow the digestive process to begin at this point, we 846 

realize that the Manlet has ample sustenance for a long time to come (remem- 
ber that there are organisms, which are quite differentiated, that have no 
digestive tract). 

It goes without saying that a struggle would soon ensue with such a fear- 
some being, and that the struggle would be fierce. For it can be assumed that, 
since the Manlet has no sensory system, it has for guidance but the pure real; 
it thus has an advantage over us men who must always provide ourselves 
with a homunculus in our heads in order to turn that real into a reality. 

Indeed, it would not be easy to obviate the paths of its attacks, which 
would, moreover, be impossible to predict, as it would also know no obsta- 
cles. It would be impossible to educate and just as impossible to trap. 

As for destroying the Manlet, one had best avoid letting it proliferate, for 



yi8 Ecrits 

to cut it up would help it reproduce, and the least of its cuttings to survive — 
even after having been set afire — would preserve all of its destructive pow- 
ers. Apart from killing it with a lethal ray that has yet to be tested, the only 
solution would be to lock it up, placing it in the jaws of a Magdeburg sphere, 
for example, which turns up again here, as if by chance, as the only appropri- 
ate tool for the job. 

But the whole Manlet would have to slip into the sphere, and would have to 
do so by itself. Even the bravest person would be justified in thinking twice 
before touching it in order to shove a negligible overflowing amount [un rien] 
back in, for fear that it would slip between his fingers and take up its abode 
who knows where? 

Except for its name, that I will now change to a more decent one, 
"lamella" (of which the word "omelette" is, in fact, but a metastasis), 2 this 
image and this myth seem to me apt for both illustrating and situating what I 
call "libido." 

This image shows "libido" to be what it is — namely, an organ, to which its 
habits make it far more akin than to a force field. Let us say that it is qua sur- 
face that it organizes this force field. This conception can be tested by realiz- 
ing that Freud considered the drive to be structured like a montage, and by 
relating it to that. 
847 Referring to electromagnetic theory, and, in particular, to a theorem 

known as Stokes' theorem, would allow me to situate the reason for the con- 
stancy of the drive 's pressure, which Freud emphasizes so greatly, 3 in the fact 
that this surface is based on a closed rim, which is the erogenous zone. 

It is also clear that what Freud calls the Schub or flow [coulee] of the drive 
is not its discharge, but should rather be described as the turning inside out 
and outside in of an organ whose function should be situated in relation to the 
preceding subjective coordinates. 

This organ must be called "unreal," in the sense in which the unreal is not 
the imaginary and precedes the subjective realm it conditions, being in direct 
contact with the real. 

That is what my myth, like any other myth, strives to provide a symbolic 
articulation for, rather than an image. 

My lamella represents here the part of a living being that is lost when that 
being is produced through the straits of sex. 

This part is certainly indicated in the media that microscopic anatomy 
materializes in the globules expulsed at the two stages of the phenomena 
organized around chromosome reduction and in the maturation of a sexed 
gonad. 

Represented here by a deadly being, it marks the relationship — in which 



Position of the Unconscious jig 

the subject plays a part — between sexuality, specified in the individual, and 
his death. 

Regarding what is represented thereof in the subject, what is striking is 
the type of anatomical cut (breathing new life into the etymological mean- 
ing of the word "anatomy") by which the function of certain objects — 
which should not be called partial, but which stand apart from the others — is 
determined. 

The breast, to take an example of the problems to which these objects give 848 

rise, is not merely a source of "regressive" nostalgia, having been a source of 
highly prized nourishment. It is, I am told, related to the mother's body, to its 
warmth, and even to tender loving care. But that does not sufficiently explain 
its erotic value, which a painting (in Berlin) by Tiepolo, in the exalted horror 
with which it presents Saint Agatha after her ordeal, illustrates far better. 

In fact, it is not a question of the breast [sein\ in the sense of the mother's 
womb [matrice; sein also means womb], even though people mix as they like 
resonances in which the signifier relies heavily on metaphor. It is a question 
of the breast specified in the function of weaning which prefigures castration. 

Weaning has been too extensively situated, since Klein's investigations, in 
the fantasy of the partition of the mother's body for us not to suspect that the 
plane of separation, which makes the breast the lost object involved [en cause] 
in desire, passes between the breast and the mother. 

For if we recall that mammalian organization places the young, from the 
embryo right up to the newborn, in a parasitical relation to the mother's 
body, the breast appears as the same kind of organ — to be understood as the 
ectopia of one individual onto another — as that constituted by the placenta at 
the beginning of the growth of a certain type of organism which remains 
specified by this intersection. 

Libido is this lamella that the organism's being takes to its true limit, which 
goes further than the body's limit. Its radical function in animals is material- 
ized in a certain ethology by the sudden decline [chute] in an animal's ability 
to intimidate other animals at the boundaries of its "territory." 

This lamella is an organ, since it is the instrument of an organism. It is 
sometimes almost palpable [comme sensible], as when an hysteric plays at test- 
ing its elasticity to the hilt. 

Speaking subjects have the privilege of revealing the deadly meaning of 
this organ, and thereby its relation to sexuality. This is because the signifier 
as such, whose first purpose is to bar the subject, has brought into him the 
meaning of death. (The letter kills, but we learn this from the letter itself.) 
This is why every drive is virtually a death drive. 



7-20 Ecrits 

849 It is important to grasp how the organism is taken up in the dialectic of the 
subject. The organ of what is incorporeal in the sexed being is the aspect of 
the organism that the subject manages to invest [placer] when his separation 
occurs. It is through this organ that he can really make his death the object of 
the Other's desire. 

In this way, the object he naturally loses, excrement, and the props he 
finds in the Other's desire — the Other's gaze or voice — come to this place. 

The activity in the subject I call "drive" (Trieb) consists in dealing with 
these objects in such a way as to recover from them, to restore to himself, his 
earliest loss. 

There is no other pathway by which the impact of sexuality is manifested 
in the subject. A drive, insofar as it represents sexuality in the unconscious, is 
never anything but a partial drive. This is the essential failing [carence] — 
namely, the absence [carence] of anything that could represent in the subject 
the mode of what is male or female in his being. 

The vacillation that psychoanalytic experience reveals in the subject 
regarding his masculine or feminine being is not so much related to his bio- 
logical bisexuality, as to the fact that there is nothing in his dialectic that rep- 
resents the bipolarity of sex apart from activity and passivity, that is, a drive 
versus outside-action polarity, which is altogether unfit to represent the true 
basis of that bipolarity. 

That is the point I would like to make here — sexuality is distributed on 
one side or the other of our rim as a threshold of the unconscious in the fol- 
lowing manner: 

On the side of the living being as a being that will be taken up in speech — 
never able in the end to come to be altogether in speech, remaining shy of the 
threshold which, notwithstanding, is neither inside nor out — there is no 
access to the opposite sex as Other except via the so-called partial drives 
wherein the subject seeks an object to take the place of the loss of life he has 
sustained due to the fact that he is sexed. 

On the side of the Other — the locus in which speech is verified as it 
encounters the exchange of signifiers, the ideals they prop up, the elementary 
structures of kinship, the metaphor of the father considered as a principle of 
separation, and the ever reopened division in the subject owing to his initial 
alienation — on this side alone and by the pathways I have just enumerated, 
order and norms must be instituted which tell the subject what a man or a 
woman must do. 

850 It is not true that God made them male and female, even if the couple 
Adam and Eve imply that; such a notion is also explicitly contradicted by the 



Position of the Unconscious 



J 21 



highly condensed myth found in the same text regarding the creation of 
Adam's companion. 

No doubt Lilith was there from before, but that does not explain anything. 

Breaking off here, I leave to the past the debates [at the Bonneval colloquium] 
in which, concerning the Freudian unconscious, irresponsible interventions 
were quite welcome, precisely because those responsible for them only came 
there halfheartedly, not to say from a certain side \bord\ 

One of the results was, nevertheless, that the order issued by this side to 
pass over my teaching in silence was not respected. 

The fact that, regarding the Oedipus complex, the last act — or rather the 
role of warm-up band — went to a hermeneutic feat, confirms my assessment 
of this colloquium and has since revealed its consequences. 

At my own risk, I indicate here the means [/ appareil] by which accuracy 
could return. 4 



Notes 



1 . Abbreviated version of my answer to an 
ineffective objection. 

2. 1 hear that those who espouse the virtues 
of mother's milk laugh at my references to . . . 
metastasis and metonymy (sic). But the one 
whose face is perfect for illustrating the slo- 
gan that I would make its brand name, rarely 
makes people laugh: laughing cow dung [la 
bouse de vache qui rii\. 

3. It is well known what this theorem states 
about curl flux. It assumes a continuously dif- 
ferentiable vector field. In such a field, since 
the curl of a vector is based on the derivatives 
of the vector's components, it can be shown 
that the circulation of this vector along a 
closed curve is equal to the curl flux calculated 
for the surface whose boundary is defined by 
this curve. In other words, by positing this 
flux as invariable, the theorem establishes the 
notion of a flux "through" an orificial circuit, 
that is, such that the original surface need no 
longer be taken into account. 

Fortopologists:J dl. V = Jj dS. Curl V. 

4. Let it be pointed out, nevertheless, that 
in restoring here, in an ironic way, the func- 



tion of the "partial" object, without making 
the reference to regression in which it is usu- 
ally shrouded (let it be understood that this 
reference can only be operative on the basis of 
the structure defining the object that I call 
object a), I have not been able to extend it to 
the point that constitutes its crucial interest — 
namely, the object (-cp) as "cause" of the cas- 
tration complex. 

This object is discussed in the next paper in 
this volume. 

But the castration complex, which is at the 
crux [noeud] of my current work, exceeds the 
limits assigned to the theory by tendencies in 
psychoanalysis that were claiming to be new 
shortly before the war and by which it is still 
affected as a whole. 

The size of the obstacle I must overcome 
here can be gauged by the time it took me to 
provide this sequel to my Rome discourse and 
by the fact that, even now as I correct the 
proofs [for the 1966 Seuil edition], the original 
collection that is to include it still has not been 
published. 



8 5 i On Freud VTrieb" 

and the Psychoanalyst's Desire 1 



The drive, as it is constructed by Freud on the basis of the experience of the 
unconscious, prohibits psychologizing thought from resorting to "instinct," 
with which it masks its ignorance by assuming the existence of morals in 
nature. 

It can never be often enough repeated, given the obstinacy of psycholo- 
gists who, as a group and perse, are in the service of technocratic exploitation, 
that the drive — the Freudian drive — has nothing to do with instinct (none of 
Freud's expressions allows for confusion here). 

Libido is not sexual instinct. Its reduction, when taken to an extreme, to 
male desire, indicated by Freud, should suffice to alert us to this fact. 

Libido, in Freud's work, is an energy that can be subjected to a kind of 
quantification which is all the easier to introduce in theory as it is useless, 
since only certain quanta of constancy are recognized therein. 

Its sexual coloring, so categorically maintained by Freud as its most cen- 
tral feature, is the color of emptiness: suspended in the light of a gap. 

This gap is the gap desire encounters at the limits imposed upon it by the 
principle ironically referred to as the "pleasure principle," the latter being 
852 relegated to a reality which, indeed, is but the field of praxis here. 

It is from this very field that Freudianism hews a desire, the crux of which 
is essentially found in impossibilities. 

Such are the outlines moralists could have discerned therein were our 
times not so prodigiously tormented by idyllic exigencies. 



On Freud's "Trieb" 723 

This is what is meant by Freud's constant reference to Wunschgedanken 
(wishful thinking*) and the omnipotence of thought: it is not megalomania 
that he points to with them, but rather the reconciliation of opposites. 

This might mean that Venus is proscribed from our world, implying the- 
ological decline. 

But Freud reveals to us that it is thanks to the Name-of-the-Father that 
man does not remain bound [attache] to the sexual service of his mother, that 
aggression toward the Father is at the very heart of the Law, and that the Law 
is at the service of the desire that Law institutes through the prohibition of 
incest. 

For the unconscious demonstrates that desire is tied to prohibition and 
that the Oedipal crisis is determinant in sexual maturation itself. 

Psychologists immediately turned this discovery into its opposite in order 
to draw from it the moral of the importance of being gratified by one 's 
mother — a form of psychotherapy that infantilizes adults, without recogniz- 
ing children any better. 

All too often, the psychoanalyst toes the same line. What is eluded 
thereby? 

If the fear of castration is at the crux of sexual normalization, let us not 
forget that, since it no doubt bears upon the transgression it prohibits in the 
Oedipus complex, it nevertheless seeks to bring about obedience thereto in it, 
by stopping its slippage in a homosexual direction. 

Thus it is, rather, the assumption [assomption] of castration that creates the 
lack on the basis of which desire is instituted. Desire is desire for desire, the 
Other's desire, as I have said, in other words, subjected to the Law. 

(It is the fact that a woman must go through the same dialectic, whereas 
nothing seems to oblige her to do so — she must lose what she does not 
have — which tips us off, allowing us to articulate that it is the phallus by 
default that constitutes the amount of the symbolic debt: a debit account 853 

when one has it, a disputed credit when one does not.) 

Castration is the altogether new mainspring Freud introduced into desire, 
giving desire 's lack the meaning that remained enigmatic in Socrates' dialec- 
tic, although it was preserved in the recounting of the Symposium. 

The ayak\xa in the eparv proves to be the motor force [principe] by which 
desire changes the nature of the lover. In his quest, Alcibiades spills the beans 
regarding love 's deception and its baseness (to love is to want to be loved) to 
which he was willing to consent. 

The discussion at the colloquium did not permit me to go so far as to 
demonstrate that the concept of the drive represents the drive as a montage. 

The drives are our myths, said Freud. This must not be understood as a 



J24 Ecrits 

reference to the unreal. For it is the real that the drives mythify, as myths usu- 
ally do: here it is the real which creates [fait] desire by reproducing in it the 
relationship between the subject and the lost object. 

There is no lack of objects involving profits and losses to occupy its place. 
But only a limited number of them can play the role best symbolized by the 
lizard's self-mutilation, its tail being jettisoned when in distress. Misadven- 
ture of desire at the hedges of jouissance, watched out for by an evil god. 

This drama is not as accidental as it is believed to be. It is essential: for 
desire comes from the Other, and jouissance is located on the side of the 
Thing. 

Freud's second topography concerns the pluralizing quartering of the 
subject that results therefrom — yet another opportunity not to see what 
should strike us, which is that identifications are determined by desire there 
without satisfying the drive. 

This occurs because the drive divides the subject and desire, the latter sus- 
taining itself only by the relation it misrecognizes between this division and 
an object that causes it. Such is the structure of fantasy. 

What then can the analyst's desire be? What can the treatment to which 
the analyst devotes himself be? 

Will he fall into the kind of preaching that discredits the preacher whose 
noble feelings have replaced faith, and adopt, like him, an unwarranted 
"direction"? 

One cannot but note here that, apart from the libertine who was the great 
854 writer of comedies in the century of genius, no one, not even during the 

Enlightenment, has challenged the physician's privilege, although it is no less 
religious than others. 

Can the analyst take cover behind this ancient investiture when it is mov- 
ing in a secularized form towards a kind of socialization that can avoid nei- 
ther eugenics nor the political segregation of anomalies? 

Will the psychoanalyst take up the torch, not of an eschatology, but of the 
rights of a primary aim [fin premiere]? 

What then is the aim [fin] of analysis beyond therapeutics? It is impossi- 
ble not to distinguish the two when the point is to create an analyst. 

For, as I have said, without going into the mainspring of transference, it is 
ultimately the analyst's desire that operates in psychoanalysis. 

The style of a philosophical conference inclines everyone, so it seems, to 
highlight instead his own impermeability. 

I am no more unable to do so than the next person, but in the field of psy- 
choanalytic training, the displacement process makes teaching cacophonous. 



On Freud's "Trieb" j25 

Let us say that, in teaching, I relate technique to the primary aim [fin 
premiere]. 

I regretted in concluding that, on the whole, Enrico Castelli's profound 
question was left aside. 

Blame it on nihilism here (and the reproach of nihilism) for keeping me 
from confronting the demonic, or anxiety, whichever one prefers. 

Note 

1. This is a summary of the comments I made at a remarkable colloquium organized in Rome 
by Professor Enrico Castelli, the second in a series on ethical problems posed by the effects of 
science, which Enrico Castelli admirably knows how to turn into questioning aporias. 

This colloquium, entitled "Technique and Casuistry," was held at the University of Rome on 
January 7 to 12, 1964. 

I avoided spelling out too quickly, in a way that would not have been controllable, what I 
later articulated concerning the drive in my lectures [Seminar XI] at the Ecole Normale 
Superieure, which began several days later. 

This text was given to the A tti of the colloquium to serve as a summary of my paper and my 
remarks. 



855 Science and Truth 



This is the typescript of the opening class of the seminar I gave during the 
1965—1966 school year at the Ecole Nor male Superieure on The Object of 
Psychoanalysis [Seminar XIII], as a lecturer for the Ecole Pratique des Hautes 
Etudes (Section 6). 

The text of this class came out in the first issue of Cahiers Pour V Analyse, 
published by the "Epistemology Circle" at the Ecole Normale Superieure, in 
January of 1966. 



Shall I say that I established the status of the subject in psychoanalysis last 
year? I went so far as to develop a structure that accounts for the state of split- 
ting [refente] or Spaltung where the psychoanalyst detects it in his praxis. 

He detects it on a more or less daily basis. He accepts it as a given, since 
the mere recognition of the unconscious suffices to ground it and since it also 
submerges him, so to speak, by its constant manifestation. 

But for him to know the status of his praxis, or to simply direct it in keep- 
ing with what is accessible to him, it is not enough for him to take this divi- 
sion as an empirical fact, or even for the empirical fact to become a paradox. 
A certain reduction is necessary that is sometimes long in completion, but 
always decisive in the birth of a science; such a reduction truly constitutes its 
object. Epistemology takes upon itself the job of defining this in each and 
every case, without having proven, at least to my mind, equal to the task. 

For I do not believe that epistemology has fully accounted in this manner 
for the decisive change that, with physics paving the way, founded Science in 
the modern sense, a sense that is posited as absolute. Science 's position is jus- 
tified by a radical change in the tempo of its progress, by the galloping form 
856 of its interference in our world, and by the chain reactions that characterize 

what one might call the expansions of its energetics. In this situation, what 
seems radical to me is the modification that has occurred in our subject posi- 
tion [position de sujet\ in the sense that it is inaugural therein and that science 
continues to strengthen it ever further. 



Science and Truth 727 

Koyre is my guide here and, as we know, he is still unrecognized [meconnu]. 

I did not thus just make an immediate pronouncement concerning psy- 
choanalysis' vocation as a science. But it might have been noticed that I took 
my lead last year from a certain moment of the subject that I consider to be an 
essential correlate of science, a historically defined moment, the strict 
repeatability in experience of which perhaps remains to be determined: the 
moment Descartes inaugurates that goes by the name of cogito. 

This correlate, as a moment, is the defile of a rejection of all knowledge, 
but is nevertheless claimed to establish for the subject a certain anchoring in 
being; I sustain that this anchoring constitutes the definition of the subject of 
science, "definition" to be understood in the sense of a narrow doorway. 

This lead did not guide me in vain, for it led me at year end to formulate 
our experienced division as subjects as a division between knowledge and 
truth, and to accompany it with a topological model, the Mobius strip; this 
strip conveys the fact that the division in which these two terms come 
together is not to be derived from a difference in origin. 

Whoever lends credence to the technique for reading Freud that I had to 
impose when the task at hand was simply one of synchronically resituating 
each of his terms, will be able to proceed in reverse chronological order from 
the Ichspaltung (to which death put an end), to the articles on fetishism (1927) 
and the loss of reality (1924), to observe that the doctrinal revamping known 
as the second topography introduced the terms Ich, Uber-Ich, and even Es 
without certifying them as apparatuses, introducing instead a reworking of 
analytic experience in accordance with a dialectic best defined as what struc- 
turalism has since allowed us to elaborate logically: namely, the subject — the 
subject caught up in a constituting division. 

After that, the reality principle loses the discordance that supposedly char- 
acterizes it in Freud 's work when, on the basis of a comparison of texts, it is 
thought to be split between a notion of reality that includes psychical reality 
and another that makes it the correlate of the perception-consciousness system. 

The reality principle must be read as it is in fact designated: as the strain of 857 

experience sanctioned by the subject of science. 

It suffices to give this some thought for the following ideas, which are dis- 
allowed as overly obvious, to assume their proper place. 

For example, that it is unthinkable that psychoanalysis as a practice and 
the Freudian unconscious as a discovery could have taken on their roles 
before the birth — in the century that has been called the century of genius, 
that is, the seventeenth century — of science. "Science" should be taken here 
in the absolute sense just indicated, a sense which does not efface what for- 
merly went by the same name, but which, rather than harking back to its 



yz8 Ecrits 

archaic roots, draws to itself the latter's lead in such a way as to better demon- 
strate its difference from any other science. 

One thing is certain: If the subject is truly there, at the nexus [noeud] of 
that difference, all humanist references become superfluous in science, the 
subject cutting them short. 

In saying this about psychoanalysis and Freud's discovery, I am not con- 
cerned with the incidental fact that it was because his patients came to him in 
the name of science, and because of the prestige science conferred upon its 
servants — even its lowly ones — at the end of the nineteenth century, that 
Freud was able to found psychoanalysis by discovering the unconscious. 

I am saying, contrary to what has been trumped up about a supposed 
break on Freud 's part with the scientism of his time, that it was this very sci- 
entism — which one might designate by its allegiance to the ideals of Briicke, 
themselves passed down from Helmholtz and Du Bois-Reymond's pact to 
reduce physiology, and the mental functions considered to be included 
therein, to the mathematically determined terms of thermodynamics (the lat- 
ter having attained virtual completion during their lifetimes) — that led 
Freud, as his writings show, to pave the way that shall forever bear his name. 

I am saying that this way never shed the ideals of this scientism, as it is 
called, and that the mark it bears of the latter is not contingent but, rather, 
remains essential to it. 

Its credit is preserved by this mark, despite the deviations to which it gave 
rise, Freud having opposed these deviations with timely sureness and inflex- 
ible rigor. 
858 Witness his break with the most prestigious of his followers, Jung, as soon 

as the latter slipped into something whose function can only be defined as an 
attempt to reinstate a subject endowed with depths (with an "s"), that is, a 
subject constituted by a relationship — said to be archetypal — to knowledge. 
The said relationship was not reduced to that exclusively allowed by modern 
science, the latter being no other than the one I defined last year as punctual 
and vanishing: that relationship to knowledge which, since its historically 
inaugural moment, has retained the name "cogito." 

It is due to this indubitable origin, blatant in all of Freud's work, and to the 
lesson he left us as head of a school, that Marxism is unable — and I do not 
believe any Marxist has seriously contested this point — to attack his ideas on 
the basis of their historical extraction. 

I have in mind here his affiliation with the society of the dual monarchy, 
Freud remaining confined within Judaizing limits in his spiritual aversions; 
and with the capitalist order that conditioned his political agnosticism (who 



Science and Truth 729 

among you will write an essay worthy of Lamennais on indifference in polit- 
ical matters?); and, I would add, with bourgeois ethics, for which the dignity 
of his life inspires in us a respect that has prevented his work from attaining 
a stature — otherwise than in our misunderstanding of it and confusions 
about it — comparable to that of the only men of truth we still have: revolu- 
tionary agitators, writers whose style leaves its mark on language (I'm 
thinking of someone in particular), and the precursor of the thought that 
renews being. 

You sense my haste here to put behind me the many precautions taken to 
remind psychoanalysts of their least debatable certainties. 

I will nevertheless have to rehash them, even if it entails a certain heavy- 
handedness. 

To say that the subject upon which we operate in psychoanalysis can only 
be the subject of science may seem paradoxical. It is nevertheless here that a 
demarcation must be made, failing which everything gets mixed up and a 
type of dishonesty sets in that is elsewhere called objective; but it is people's 
lack of audacity and failure to locate the object that backfires. One is always 
responsible for one's position as a subject. Those who would like to may call 
that terrorism. I have the right to be amused, for it is not in a setting where 859 

doctrine is fair game for bargaining that I should fear obfuscating anyone by 
formulating that guileless errors are the most unforgivable of all errors. 

The psychoanalyst's position leaves no escape, excluding as it does the 
tenderness of the beautiful soul. If it is a paradox even just to say so, it is per- 
haps once again the same paradox. 

Be that as it may, I posit that every attempt, or even temptation, in which 
current theory persists in being a relapse, further incarnating the subject, 
amounts to errancy — ever fruitful in error, but as such faulty [fautive]. For 
example, when the subject is incarnated in man, himself nothing in such the- 
ories but a child. 

For man is then taken to be a primitive, distorting the whole primary 
process, just as children are taken to be underdeveloped men, masking the 
truth about what originally happens during childhood. In short, what Claude 
Levi-Strauss has denounced as the archaic illusion is inevitable in psycho- 
analysis if one is not steadfast in one 's theory regarding the principle I just 
mentioned: only one subject is accepted as such in psychoanalysis, the one 
that can make it scientific. 

Which suffices to indicate that I do not believe that, in this respect, psy- 
choanalysis lays claim to any special privileges. 

There is no such thing as a science of man, and this should be understood 



J30 Ecrits 

along the lines of "there 's no such thing as an insignificant savings." There is 
no such thing as a science of man because science 's man does not exist, only 
its subject does. 

My lifelong repugnance for the appellation "human sciences" is well 
known; it strikes me as the very call of servitude. 

But the fact is that the term is also incorrect, except in the case of psychol- 
ogy which has discovered ways to outlive itself by providing services to the 
technocracy — sliding, as it were (as a sensational article by Canguilhem con- 
cludes, with truly Swiftian humor), like a toboggan from the Pantheon to the 
Prefecture of Police. Psychology will thus meet with failure at the level of the 
selection of creators in science, and of the encouragement and backing of 
research. 

It is easy to see that none of the other sciences in this class constitutes an 
anthropology. Consider Levy-Bruhl and Piaget. Their concepts — so-called 
860 prelogical mentality and supposedly egocentric thought or discourse — refer 

only to the assumed mentality, presumed thought, and actual discourse of 
science 's subject (not science 's man). The upshot being that too many people 
now think that limits (mental, certainly), weakness of thought (presumable), 
and actual discourse (a bit tricky in the case of the man of science, for he is 
someone rather different) lend weight to these constructions, whereas the 
latter, while probably not devoid of objectivity, are relevant to science only 
insofar as they contribute nothing about the magician, for example, and little 
about magic; and if they contribute something about the traces of these latter, 
the traces are of but the magician or magic, as it was not Levy-Bruhl who 
traced them. The reckoning in Piaget 's case is still more unfavorable: He 
contributes nothing about children and little about their development, miss- 
ing as he does what is essential therein; and, as concerns the logic he displays 
(Piaget 's child, that is) in his responses to statements whose series constitutes 
the test he undergoes, Piaget comes up with nothing other than the very same 
logic that governs the enunciation of the statements that make up the test — 
that is, the logic of the man of science, in which the logician, I will not deny 
it, in this case maintains his importance. 

In sciences that are far more valuable, although their status stands in need 
of reevaluation, one finds that proscription of the archaic illusion — an illu- 
sion we can generalize with the expression "psychologization of the subject" — 
in no way fetters fecundity. 

A case in point is game theory, better called strategy, which takes advantage 
of the thoroughly calculable character of a subject strictly reduced to the for- 
mula for a matrix of signifying combinations. 

The case of linguistics is subtler as it must take into account the difference 



Science and Truth 73 z 

between the enunciated and enunciation, that is, the impact of the subject 
who speaks as such (and not of the subject of science). This is why linguistics 
revolves around something else — namely, the battery of signifiers, whose 
prevalence over signification effects must be ensured. Here too antinomies 
appear, scaled to the extremism of the position adopted in object selection. 
What is clear is that one can go very far in the elaboration of the effects of 
language, since one can construct a poetics that owes no more to references 
to the mind of the poet than to its incarnation. 

It is in the realm of logic that the theory's various refractive indices appear 861 

in relation to the subject of science. They differ as regards the lexicon, syn- 
tactic morphemes, and sentential syntax. 

Hence the theoretical differences between linguists such as Jakobson, 
Hjelmslev, and Chomsky. 

It is logic that serves here as the subject's navel, logic insofar as it is in no 
way linked to the contingencies of a grammar. 

The formalization of grammar must literally circumvent this logic if it is 
to be successfully carried out, but the circumventing movement is inscribed 
in this very operation. 

I will indicate further along how modern logic is situated (see the third 
example below). It is indisputably the strictly determined consequence of an 
attempt to suture the subject of science, and Godel's last theorem shows that 
the attempt fails there, meaning that the subject in question remains the cor- 
relate of science, but an antinomic correlate since science turns out to be 
defined by the deadlocked endeavor to suture the subject. 

One should descry therein the crucially important mark of structuralism. 
It ushers into every "human science" it conquers a very particular mode of 
the subject for which the only index I have found is topological: the generat- 
ing sign of the Mobius strip that I call the "inner eight." 

The subject is, as it were, internally excluded from its object [en exclusion 
interne a son objei\. 

The allegiance to such a structuralism manifested in Claude Levi-Strauss' 
work can be accredited to my thesis, assuming I confine myself for the 
moment to its periphery. It is clear, notwithstanding, that he highlights the 
scope of the natural classifications savages invent — especially their knowl- 
edge of fauna and flora, Levi-Strauss emphasizing the fact that it surpasses 
our own — precisely because he can argue for a certain recuperation occur- 
ring in chemistry, owing to a physics of sapid and odorous qualities, other- 
wise stated, to a correlation between perceptual values and molecular 
architecture arrived at by means of combinatorial analysis, that is, by the 
mathematics of the signifier, as has been the case in every science to date. 



7J-2 Ecrits 

862 Knowledge is thus clearly separated here from the subject along the cor- 
rect lines, entailing no postulation of insufficient development, which, inci- 
dentally, would not be easy to substantiate. 

What's more, when Levi-Strauss, after having extracted the combinatory 
latent in the elementary structures of kinship, reports that a certain 
"informer," to use the ethnologist's term, is himself fully capable of drawing 
the Levi-Straussian graph, what is he telling us if not that, here again, he 
extracts the subject from the combinatory in question — the subject who on 
the graph has no other existence than the denotation ego} 

In demonstrating the power of the apparatus constituted by the mytheme 
in analyzing mythogenic transformations, which at this stage seem to become 
established in a synchrony simplified by their reversibility, Levi-Strauss does 
not presume to deliver up to us the nature of the myth-maker. He simply 
knows here that his informer, while able to write The Raw and the Cooked — 
though lacking the genius whose mark has been left there — cannot do it, 
however, without checking at the cloakroom, that is, at the Museum of Man, 
a certain number of operative instruments, otherwise known as rituals, that 
consecrate his subject existence as a myth-maker; in checking them, what in 
another grammar would be called his assent is rejected from the field of 
structure. (See Newman's Grammar of Assent, somewhat powerful, albeit 
written for execrable purposes — I will perhaps be led to mention it again.) 

The object of mythogeny thus is not linked to any development or stasis 
of the responsible subject. It is not concerned with this latter subject but 
rather with the subject of science. And the closer the informer himself is to 
reducing his presence to that of the subject of science, the more correctly is 
the collecting [of myth versions] carried out. 

I believe, however, that Levi-Strauss would have reservations about the 
introduction, during the collection of documents, of a psychoanalytically 
inspired approach, a sustained collection of dreams for example, with all that 
would entail by way of transferential relationships. But why would he, when 
I maintain to him that our praxis, far from altering the subject of science — 
the only one about which he can or wants to know anything — is entitled to 
intervene only when it tends toward this subject's satisfactory realization in 
the very field that interests Levi-Strauss? 

863 Is this to say that a nonsaturated but calculable subject would be the object 
that, in accordance with the forms of classical epistemology, subsumes the 
body of sciences that one might call "conjectural" — which I myself have 
opposed to the term "human sciences"? 

I believe it to be all the less indicated as this subject is part of the conjunc- 
ture constituting science as a whole. 



Science and Truth 7jj 

The opposition between exact sciences and conjectural sciences is no 
longer sustainable once conjecture is subject to exact calculation (using prob- 
ability) and exactness is merely grounded in a formalism separating axioms 
and compounding laws from symbols. 

We cannot, however, be satisfied with the simple observation that a par- 
ticular formalism is more or less successful, for in the final analysis we must 
explain its trappings — trappings that have not arisen miraculously, but that 
have instead undergone renewal after crises which, since a certain unswerv- 
ing direction seems to have been taken in science, have been terribly effective. 

Let me reiterate that there is something in the status of science's object 
that seems to me to have remained unelucidated since the birth of science. 

And let me remind you that while, certainly, to now pose the question of 
psychoanalysis' object is to reraise a question I broached upon first mounting 
this rostrum — that of psychoanalysis' position inside or outside of science — 
I have also indicated that the question probably cannot be answered without 
the object's status in science as such being thereby modified. 

The object of psychoanalysis (I am laying down my cards now — you may 
have already guessed my hand, given this talk of the object) is no other than 
what I have already proposed about the function played in analysis by object 
a. Is knowledge of object a thus the science of psychoanalysis? 

This is precisely the equation that must be avoided, since object a must be 
inserted, as we already know, into the division of the subject by which the 
psychoanalytic field is quite specifically structured — this is the point with 
which I resumed my seminar today. 

This is why it was important to promote firstly, and as a fact to be distin- 
guished from the question of knowing whether psychoanalysis is a science 
(that is, whether its field is scientific), the fact that its praxis implies no other 
subject than that of science. 

What you will be so kind as to permit me to conjure up, with an image like 864 

that of the opening up of the subject in psychoanalysis, must be reduced to 
this great an extent if we are to grasp what the subject receives therein by way 
of truth. 

One senses that this is a tortuously circuitous process akin to taming. 
Object a is not peaceful, or rather one should say, could it be that it does not 
leave you in peace? least of all those of you who have the most to do with it: 
psychoanalysts, who are thus those I electively try to target with my dis- 
course. It's true. The scheduled starting point of our meeting today, being 
the one at which I left you last year — that of the subject's division between 
truth and knowledge — is a familiar point to them. It is the one to which 
Freud urges them with his call "Wo Es war, soil Ich werden," which I retrans- 



734 Ecrits 

late, once again, to accentuate it here, as "Where it was, there must I come to 
be as a subject." 

Now I demonstrate to analysts the strangeness of this point by taking it 
from behind, which consists here rather in bringing them back to its front. 
How could the obscure being, who was [etait] forever awaiting me, come to 
be totalized by a line that can only be drawn by dividing this being still more 
clearly from what I can know of it? 

It is not only in theory that the question of double inscription arises, hav- 
ing given rise to a perplexity whereupon my students Laplanche and Leclaire 
could have read its solution in their own split over how to approach the prob- 
lem. The solution is not, in any case, of the Gestaltist type, nor is it to be 
sought on the plate where Napoleon's head is inscribed in a tree. It is quite 
simply to be found in the fact that an inscription does not etch into the same 
side of the parchment when it comes from the printing-plate of truth and 
when it comes from that of knowledge. 

The fact that these inscriptions commingle could have been simply 
accounted for by topology, there being at hand's reach a surface in which 
front and back are situated so as to join up at all points. 

This goes much further than an intuitive schema, for it is in so to speak 
wrapping around the analyst in his being that this topology can grasp him. 

This is why, although the analyst shifts topology to another plane, it can 
only be in a breaking up of a puzzle which must, in any case, be reduced to 
this basis. 

Which is why it is worth restating that in the test of writing / am thinking: 
865 "therefore I am /'with quotes around the second clause, it is legible that thought 

only grounds being by knotting itself in speech where every operation goes 
right to the essence of language. 

While Heidegger gives us the expression "cogito sum" somewhere, serv- 
ing his own purposes, it should be noted that he algebrizes the phrase, and we 
can justifiably highlight its remainder: "cogito ergo"; it is evident therein that 
nothing gets spoken without leaning on the cause. 

Now this cause is what is covered (over) by the "soil Ich, "the "must I" of 
Freud's formulation, which, in inverting its meaning [sens], brings forth the 
paradox of an imperative that presses me to assume [assumer] my own 
causality. 

Yet I am not the cause of myself, though not because I am the creature. 
The case is precisely the same for the Creator. I refer you on this point to 
Augustine and the prologue of his De Trinitate [On the Trinity], 

The Spinozian self-cause can take on the name of God. It is some-Thing 
Else [Autre Chose], But let us leave that to the two words I will only play on 



Science and Truth 7j5 

by stipulating that the Spinozian self-cause is also some-Thing other [Chose 
autre] than the Whole, and that this God, being other in this way, is never- 
theless not the God of pantheism. 

In the ego that Descartes accentuates by virtue of the superfluousness of its 
function in certain of his Latin texts (a subject of exegesis that I leave here to 
the specialists), one must grasp the point at which it continues to be what it 
presents itself as: dependent on the god of religion. A curious scrap of ergo, 
the ego is bound up with this God. Descartes' approach is, singularly, one of 
safeguarding the ego from the deceitful God, and thereby safeguarding the 
ego's partner — going so far as to endow the latter with the exorbitant privi- 
lege of guaranteeing the eternal truths only insofar as he is their creator. 

The lot shared by the ego and God that is emphasized here is the same as 
that rendingly proffered by Descartes' contemporary, Angelus Silesius, in his 
mystical adjurations, upon which he imposes the form of distichs. 

Those who keep up with my work would do well to recall here the use I 
made of the cherubinic wanderer's jaculatory prayers, taking them up within 
the trajectory of the introduction to narcissism I was working on, following 
my own bent, the year of my commentary on President Schreber. 

Now one can be a bit shaky at this junction, that is how beauty walks [c 'est 
lepas de la beaute], but one has to shake it just right \ilfauty boiter juste]. 

And first of all by realizing that the two sides do not fit together there [ne 
sy emboitent pas]. 

This is why I will take the liberty of letting it go a moment, so as to begin 866 

anew with the audacity I adopted at one time, but which I will only repeat 
insofar as I recall it to mind. For otherwise I would be repeating it twice, 
whereupon one could call it bis repetita, in the true sense of this expression, 
which does not mean simple repetition. 

I'm referring to "The Freudian Thing," a talk the text of which is that of a 
second talk, deriving as it does from the occasion upon which I repeated it. It 
was pronounced the first time (may this insistence, in its very triviality, make 
you sense the temporal opposition [contrepied] repetition engenders) in a 
Vienna where my biographer will situate my first encounter with what must 
be called the lowest depths of the psychoanalytic world, and above all with a 
bigwig whose level of culture and responsibility corresponded to that 
required of a body guard 1 — but it did not much matter to me: it was idle chat- 
ter. I had simply wanted it to be in Vienna that my voice be heard in homage 
for the centennial of Freud's birth — not so as to mark the site of a deserted 
locus, but to mark that other site my discourse is now closing in on. 

It is well known that I already took for granted at that time, as others do 
now, that the way opened up by Freud has no other meaning than the one I 



J3<5 Ecrits 

have taken up — namely, that the unconscious is language. Thus did the inspi- 
ration strike me, seeing in Freud's way an allegorical figure strangely come 
alive, and the nudity donned by she who arises from the well quivering with 
a new skin, to lend her a voice — this gesture in a sense playfully echoing 
Saint- Just's challenge whereby he sent forth to heaven an avowal, enshrined 
by the assembled audience, of being no more than that which turns to dust, 
"and which speaks to you," he added. 

"I, truth, speak ..." and the prosopopeia continues. Think about the 
unnamable thing that, by virtue of its ability to pronounce these words, 
would go right to the being of language — if we are to hear them as they must 
be pronounced: in horror. 

But everyone reads into the unveiling what he can. To its credit let us 
867 chalk up the muffled — though no less derisory — dramatism of the tempo at 

the end of this text, which you will find in Evolution Psychiatrique 1 (1956), 
by the title "La Chose Freudienne." 2 

I do not believe I owed the rather cool reception my audience gave me, 
upon the repeated delivery of the talk this text reproduces, to that same hor- 
ror people felt. While willing to acknowledge what they considered to be its 
oblative value, their deafness proved to be quite peculiar. 

It is not that the thing (the "Thing" in the title) shocked them, at any rate 
not as much as it shocked some of my fellow helmsmen back then, piloting 
the raft upon which, through their doing, I patiently bed-fellowed ten long 
years — for the narcissistic sustenance of our shipwrecked companions — 
with Jaspersian understanding and vacuous personalism, working like mad 
to keep us all from being tainted by the liberal heart-to-heart. "Thing is not a 
pretty word," someone told me verbatim; "doesn't it simply ruin our quest 
for the ultimate in psychology's unity where one obviously would not dream 
of 'thingifying' — tush! who can you trust? We thought you were in the 
avant-garde of progress, comrade." 

One does not see oneself as one is, and even less so when one approaches 
oneself wearing philosophical masks. 

But let us leave that aside. To gauge the full extent of the misunderstand- 
ing, as it arose in my audience at that time, over an issue of some conse- 
quence, I will take up a point that came to light at more or less the same 
moment, and that one might find touching because of the enthusiasm it sup- 
poses: "Why," someone set the question rolling, and the concern is still in the 
air, "doesn't he say the truth about truth?" [le vraisur le vrai\. 

This proves just how futile my apologue and its prosopopeia were. 

To lend my voice to support these intolerable words, "I, truth, speak . . . ," 
goes beyond allegory. Which quite simply means everything that can be said 



Science and Truth yjy 

of truth, of the only truth — namely, that there is no such thing as a metalan- 
guage (an assertion made so as to situate all of logical positivism), no language 
being able to say the truth about truth, since truth is grounded in the fact that 868 

truth speaks, and that it has no other means by which to become grounded. 

This is precisely why the unconscious, which tells the truth about truth, is 
structured like a language, and why I, in so teaching, tell the truth about Freud 
who knew how to let the truth — going by the name of the unconscious — speak. 

This lack of truth about truth — necessitating as it does all the traps that 
metalanguage, as sham and logic, falls into — is the rightful place of Urver- 
drangung, that is, of primal repression which draws toward itself all the other 
repressions — not to mention other rhetorical effects that we can recognize 
only by means of the subject of science. 

And this is why we use other means to get to the bottom of it. But it is of 
the utmost importance that these means be unable to release [elargir] this sub- 
ject. They have the advantage of no doubt touching on what is hidden from 
him. But there is no other truth about truth that can cover over this sore point 
than proper names, Freud's or my own, unless one stoops to old wives' tales 
with which to degrade henceforth ineffaceable testimony: a truth whose hor- 
rible face everyone is fated to refuse, or even crush — when it cannot be 
refused, that is, when one is a psychoanalyst — under the millstone that I have 
occasionally used as a metaphor to remind people, via another mouthpiece, 
that stones too know how to scream when need be. 

People will thus perhaps consider me justified in not having found the 
question "Why doesn't he say . . . ?" terribly touching, coming as it did from 
someone whose workaday role in a truth agency's offices made his naivete 
doubtful, and in having henceforth preferred to do without the services he 
provided in mine, which has no need of cantors who dream of sacristy . . . 

Must it be stated that we have to know [connaitre] other bodies of knowl- 
edge [^av^Vs] than that of science when it comes to dealing with the episte- 
mological drive? 

Returning again to what is at issue: Is this to admit that we must give up 
the notion in psychoanalysis that a body of knowledge corresponds to every 
truth? This is the breaking point whereby we depend upon the advent of sci- 
ence. We no longer have anything with which to join knowledge and truth 
together but the subject of science. 

At least this subject allows us to do so, and I will now go further into 869 

how — leaving my Thing to sort things out by itself with noumena, in short 
order I suspect: for a truth that speaks has no-thing much [peu de chose] in 
common with a noumenon that, for as long as pure reason can remember, has 
always kept its mouth shut. 



J38 Ecrits 

This reminder is not irrelevant since the medium that will serve us at this 
point is one I brought up earlier. It is the cause: not the cause as logical cate- 
gory, but as causing the whole effect. Will you psychoanalysts refuse to take 
on the question of truth as cause when your very careers are built upon it? If 
there are any practitioners for whom truth as such is supposed to act, are you 
not them? 

Make no mistake about it, in any case: It is because this point is veiled in 
science that you have kept an astonishingly well-preserved place in what 
plays the role of collective hope in the vagabond conscience that accompa- 
nies revolutions in thought. 

In writing that "Marx's theory is omnipotent because it is true," Lenin 
says nothing of the enormity of the question his speech raises: If one assumes 
the truth of materialism in its two guises — dialectic and history, which are, in 
fact, one and the same — to be mute, how could theorizing this increase its 
power? To answer with proletarian consciousness and the action of Marxist 
politicos seems inadequate to me. 

The separation of powers is at least announced in Marxism, the truth as 
cause being distinguished from knowledge put into operation. 

An economic science inspired by Capital does not necessarily lead to its 
utilization as a revolutionary power, and history seems to require help from 
something other than a predicative dialectic. Aside from this singular point, 
which I shall not elaborate on here, the fact is that science, if one looks at it 
closely, has no memory. Once constituted, it forgets the circuitous path by 
which it came into being; otherwise stated, it forgets a dimension of truth that 
psychoanalysis seriously puts to work. 

I must, however, be more precise. It is widely known that theoretical 
physics and mathematics — after every crisis that is resolved in a form for 
which the term "generalized theory" can in no way be taken to mean "a shift 
to generality" — often maintain what they generalize in its position in the pre- 
870 ceding structure. That is not my point here. My concern is the toll \drame\ 

the subjective toll that each of these crises takes on the learned. The tragedy 
[drame] has its victims, and nothing allows us to say that their destiny can be 
inscribed in the Oedipal myth. Let us say that the subject has not been stud- 
ied to any great extent. J. R. Mayer, Cantor — well I am not going to furnish 
a list of first-rate tragedies, leading at times to the point of madness; the 
names of certain of our contemporaries, in whose cases I consider exemplary 
the tragedy of what is happening in psychoanalysis, would soon have to be 
added to the list. I posit, moreover, that this tragedy cannot itself be brought 
within Oedipus without throwing the latter into question. 



Science and Truth yjg 

You see the program that is being sketched out here. It is not about to be 
realized. I even consider it to be rather blocked. 

I am broaching it prudently, and for today I ask you to see yourselves in 
the reflected light of such an approach. 

Which is to say that we are going to bring this light to bear on other fields 
than psychoanalysis that lay claim to truth. 

It must be said that, to the subject of science, magic and religion — two 
such fields that are distinct from science, so much so that people have situated 
them in relation to science, as a false or lesser science in the case of magic, 
and as going beyond its limits, or even in a truth-conflict with science in the 
case of religion — are mere will-o'-the-wisps, but not to the suffering subject 
with whom we deal. 

Will it be said: "He's coming to it now — what is the suffering subject if 
not the one from whom our privileges stem? And what right do your intel- 
lectualizations give you to him?" 

In response, I will start off with something I came across in the work of a 
philosopher recently awarded full academic honors. According to him, 
"The truth of pain is pain itself." Leaving this matter for today to the realm 
he explores, I will come back to it [later in the year] to explain how phenom- 
enology serves as a pretext for the counter-truth and to explain the latter's 
status. 

I will take it up now only to ask you analysts a question: Does or doesn't 
what you do imply that the truth of neurotic suffering lies in having the truth 
as cause? 

I propose the following: 

Concerning magic, I begin with a viewpoint that allows for no confusion 
as to my scientific allegiance, but is confined to a structuralist definition. 
This viewpoint assumes that signifiers answer as such to signifiers. Signifiers 871 

in nature are called up by incantatory signifiers. They are metaphorically 
mobilized. The Thing, insofar as it speaks, answers our insistent prayers. 

This is why the order of natural classifications I invoked from Levi- 
Strauss's studies permits us, through its structural definition, to glimpse the 
bridge of correspondences by which the effective operation is conceivable, in 
the same way in which the operation was conceived. 

This is, nevertheless, a reduction that neglects the subject here. 

Everyone knows that the readying [mise en etat] of the subject — the 
shamanizing subject — is essential here. Let us observe that the shaman, in the 
flesh, is part of nature, and that the operation's correlative subject must hew 
himself from this corporeal medium. This mode of hewing [recoupement] is 



j 4° Ecrits 

debarred from the subject of science. Only his structural correlatives in the 
operation are situable for him, but they are exactly situable. 

It is in the form of signifiers that what must be mobilized in nature 
appears: thunder and rain, meteors and miracles. 

Everything is organized here in accordance with the antinomic relation- 
ships by which language is structured. 

I must thus investigate the effect of demand in magic, with the idea of 
testing whether the relationship to desire defined by my graph can be 
detected in it. 

Only in this way, to be described later on, using an approach which does 
not involve coarse recourse to analogy, can psychoanalysts consider them- 
selves qualified to say anything about magic. 

Their comment that magic is always sexual has its value here, but does not 
suffice to authorize them to do so. 

I will conclude with two points worthy of your attention: Magic involves 
the truth as cause in its guise as efficient cause. 

Knowledge is characterized in magic not only as remaining veiled for the 
subject of science, but as dissimulating itself as such, as much in the operative 
tradition as in its action. This is one of magic's conditions. 

As for religion, I will simply indicate the same structural approach and, just 
872 as summarily, that this outline is grounded in an opposition between struc- 

tural traits. 

Is it possible to hope that religion will take on a more straightforward sta- 
tus in science? I ask this because for some time now strange philosophers 
have been giving the flimsiest definition of the relations between science and 
religion, primarily taking them to be deployed in the same world, religion 
having the more encompassing position therein. 

On this delicate point, about which certain people would want me to adopt 
analytic neutrality, I promote the principle that befriending everyone is an 
inadequate policy for maintaining intact the position from which one must 
operate. 

In religion, the putting into play of truth as cause by the subject — the reli- 
gious subject, that is — described earlier is taken up in a completely different 
operation. An analysis on the basis of the subject of science necessarily leads 
one to bring out in religion mechanisms that are familiar to us from obsessive 
neurosis. Freud perceived them in a flash that gives them an import surpass- 
ing all traditional criticism. The intent to measure religion against obsessive 
neurosis is in no way incommensurate. 

If one cannot begin with remarks such as this — that the role played by 



Science and Truth J41 

revelation in religion translates as a negation [denegation] of truth as cause, 
that is, revelation negates [denie] what grounds the subject in considering 
himself to be a party to the cause [partie prenante] — then there is little chance 
of giving the so-called history of religions any limits, in other words, any 
rigor. 

Let us say that a religious man leaves responsibility for the cause to God, 
but thereby bars his own access to truth. Thus he is led to place the cause of 
his desire in God's hands, and that is the true object of his sacrifice. His 
demand is subordinated to his presumed desire for a God who must then be 
seduced. The game of love starts in this way. 

Religious people thus confer upon truth the status of guilt. The upshot 
being a distrust of knowledge, most evident in the cases of those Church 
Fathers who proved to be the best reasoners. 

Truth in religion is relegated to so-called "eschatological" ends, which is 
to say that truth appears only as final cause, in the sense that it is deferred to 
an end-of-the-world judgment. 

Hence the obscurantist stench that permeates all scientific uses of finality. 

I have noted in passing how much we have to learn about the structure of 873 

the subject's relationship to truth as cause from the writings of the Church 
Fathers, and even from the first conciliar decisions. The rationalism organiz- 
ing theological thought is in no way a matter of fancy, as the platitude would 
have it. 

If there is fantasy therein, it is in the most rigorous sense of the institution 
of a real that covers (over) the truth. 

The fact that Christian truth had to formulate the untenable notion of a 
Three and One God does not strike me as inaccessible to scientific investiga- 
tion. On this point, ecclesiastical power makes do very well with a certain 
discouragement of thought. 

Before accentuating the impasses of such a mystery, it is worthwhile 
reflecting upon the necessity of this mystery's articulation; thought must be 
measured against this necessity. 

The questions must be broached at the level at which dogma lapses into 
heresy — and the question of the Filioque seems to me to allow of explanation 
in topological terms. 

Structural apprehension must be primary therein; it alone permits an 
accurate assessment of the function of images. De Trinitate here has all the 
marks of a theoretical work and we can take it as a model. 

Were this not the case, I would advise my students to encounter a six- 
teenth century tapestry awaiting them in the foyer of the Mobilier National, 
on display for another month or two, that forces itself upon one 's gaze. 



J4 2 Ecrits 

The Three People, who are all represented identically, perfectly at ease 
talking among themselves on the fresh banks of Creation, are quite simply 
anxiety-provoking. 

And what is hidden by such a well-made machine, when it confronts the 
couple, Adam and Eve, in the flower of their sin, is certainly of the sort to be 
proposed as a mental exercise on human relationships, ordinarily imagined to 
never exceed duality. 

But my audience should first become versed in Augustine . . . 

I seem to have thus only defined characteristics of religions from the Jewish 
tradition. They are obviously designed to show us why the latter is of inter- 
874 est — and I am inconsolable at having had to drop my project of relating the 

function of the Name-of-the-Father to the study of the Bible. 

The key nevertheless lies in a definition of the relation of the subject to 
truth. 

I believe I can say that insofar as Claude Levi-Strauss conceives of Bud- 
dhism as a religion of the generalized subject, that is, as involving an infi- 
nitely variable stopping down of truth as cause, he flatters this Utopia by 
believing that it concords with the universal reign of Marxism in society. 

Which is perhaps to make too little of the exigencies of the subject of sci- 
ence, and to lend too much credence to the emergence in theory of a doctrine 
of the transcendence of matter. 

Ecumenism only seems to have a chance if it is grounded in an appeal to 
the feebleminded. 

As for science, I cannot today say what seems to me to be the structure of its 
relations to the truth as cause, since our progress this year shall contribute to 
an understanding of this point. 

I will broach the topic with the strange remark that our science's prodi- 
gious fecundity must be examined in relation to the fact, sustaining science, 
that science does-not-want-to-know-anything about the truth as cause. 

You may recognize therein my formulation of Verwerfung or "foreclo- 
sure," which forms a closed series here with Verdr&ngung, "repression," and 
Verneinung, "negation," whose function in magic and religion I have indi- 
cated in passing. 

What I have said of the relationship between Verwerfung and psychosis, 
especially as Verwerfung of the Name-of-the-Father, is apparently at odds 
here with this attempt at structural situation. 

If one remarks, however, that a successful paranoia might just as well seem 
to constitute the closure of science — assuming psychoanalysis were called 



Science and Truth J43 

upon to represent this function — and if, moreover, one acknowledges that 
psychoanalysis is essentially what brings the Name-of-the-Father back into 875 

scientific examination, one comes upon the same apparent deadlock; but one 
has the feeling that this very deadlock spurs on progress, and that one can see 
the chiasmus that seemed to create an obstacle therein coming undone. 

The current state of the drama of psychoanalysis' birth, and the ruse that 
hides therein by beguiling writers' conscious ruses, should perhaps be taken 
into account here, for I was not the one who came up with the expression 
"successful paranoia." 

I shall certainly have to indicate that the impact of truth as cause in science 
must be recognized in its guise as formal cause. 

But that will be so as to clarify that psychoanalysis instead emphasizes its guise 
as material cause, a fact that qualifies psychoanalysis' originality in science. 

This material cause is truly the form of impact of the signifier that I define 
therein. 

The signifier is defined by psychoanalysis as acting first of all as if it were 
separate from its signification. Here we see the literal character trait that 
specifies the copulatory signifier, the phallus, when — arising outside of the 
limits of the subject's biological maturation — it is effectively (im)printed; it 
is unable, however, to be the sign representing sex, the partner's sex — that is, 
the partner's biological sign; recall, in this connection, my formulations dif- 
ferentiating the signifier from the sign. 

It suffices to say in passing that in psychoanalysis, history constitutes a 
different dimension than development — and it is an aberration to try to 
reduce it to the latter. History unfolds only in going against the rhythm of 
development — a point from which history as a science should perhaps learn 
a lesson, if it expects to escape the ever-present clutches of a providential 
conception of its course. 

In short, we once again come upon the subject of the signifier as I articu- 
lated it last year. Conveyed by a signifier in its relation to another signifier, 
the subject must be as rigorously distinguished from the biological individual 
as from any psychological evolution subsumable under the subject of under- 
standing. 

In minimal terms, this is the function I grant language in theory. It seems 876 

to me compatible with historical materialism, the latter having left this point 
unaddressed. Perhaps the theory of object a will also find its place therein. 

As we shall see, this theory is necessary to a correct integration of the func- 
tion — from the standpoint of knowledge and the subject — of truth as cause. 

In passing, you might have glimpsed, in the four modes of the cause's 



J44 Ecrits 

refraction just surveyed here, an analogous nominal schema and the same 
number of modes as in Aristotle's physics. 

It is no accident, since his physics is marked by a logicism that still retains 
the savor and sapience of an original grammaticism: 

ToaoaSxa xov apiS^ibv to 5ia xi jtepieiTaicpev. 

Will it seem valid to us that the cause remains exactly as many-sided in 
polymerizing? 

It is not the sole goal of this exploration to afford you an elegant take on 
frameworks that, in and of themselves, fall outside of our jurisdiction: magic, 
religion, and even science itself. 

My primary concern is to remind you that, as subjects of psychoanalytic 
science, you must resist the temptation of each of these relations to truth as 
cause. 

But not in the way in which you are at first likely to understand this. 

Magic tempts you only insofar as you project its characteristics onto the 
subject with which you are dealing — in order to psychologize it, that is, mis- 
recognize it. 

So-called "magical thinking" — always attributed to someone else — is not 
a stigma with which you can label the other. It is just as valid for your fellow 
man as for yourself within the most common limits, being at the root of even 
the slightest of commandment's effects. 

To be more explicit, recourse to magical thinking explains nothing. What 
must be explained is its efficiency. 

As for religion, it should rather serve us as a model not to be followed, 
instituting as it does a social hierarchy in which the tradition of a certain rela- 
tion to truth as cause is preserved. 
877 Simulation of the Catholic Church, reproduced whenever the relation to 

truth as cause reaches the social realm, is particularly grotesque in a certain 
Psychoanalytic International, owing to the condition it imposes upon com- 
munication. 

Need it be said that in science, as opposed to magic and religion, knowl- 
edge is communicated? 

It must be stressed that this is not merely because it is usually done, but 
because the logical form given this knowledge includes a mode of communi- 
cation which sutures the subject it implies. 

Such is the main problem raised by communication in psychoanalysis. 
The first obstacle to its scientific value is that the relation to truth as cause, in 
its material guises, has remained neglected by the circle of its elaborators. 

Shall I conclude by returning to the point with which I began today: the 
division of the subject? This point constitutes a knot. 



Science and Truth 7^5 

Let us recall that Freud unties the knot in his discussion of the lack of the 
mother's penis, where the nature of the phallus is revealed. He tells us that the 
subject divides here regarding reality, seeing an abyss opening up here 
against which he protects himself with a phobia, and which he at the same 
time covers over with a surface upon which he erects a fetish — that is, the 
existence of the penis as maintained albeit displaced. 

Let us, on the one hand, extract the (no) [pas-de] from the (no-penis) 
[pas-de-penis] y to be bracketed out, and transfer it to the no-knowledge [pas- 
de-savoir] that is the hesitation step [pas-hesitation] of neurosis. 

Let us, on the other hand, recognize the subject's efficacy in the gnomon he 
erects, a gnomon that constantly indicates truth's site to him. 

Revealing that the phallus itself is nothing but the site of lack it indicates 
in the subject. 

This is the same index that directs me to the path along which I want to 
proceed this year, that is, the path you yourselves shy away from, as you are 
called forth as analysts in that lack. 

December 1, 1965 



Notes 

1 . Later an executant in the operation of promotion to the rostrum at which I gave the 

destroying my teaching; the outcome, of which present lecture. 

the audience present was aware, is of interest 2. See the last lines of "The Freudian 

to the reader only as concerns the disappear- Thing," Ecrits 1966, 436. 
ance of the journal La Psychanalyse and my 



879 Appendix I: A Spoken Commentary on Freud's 
" Verneinung" by Jean Hyppolite 



To start off with, I must thank Dr. Lacan for insisting that I present this arti- 
cle by Freud to you, because it gave me the opportunity to do a night's work 
and to bring you the child of this labor. 1 I hope that it will prove worthy in 
your eyes. Dr. Lacan was kind enough to send me the German text along 
with the French. It was a wise thing to do, because I don't think I would have 
understood anything in the French text if I hadn't had the German. 2 

I wasn't familiar with this text. It has an absolutely extraordinary struc- 
ture, and deep down it is extremely enigmatic. Its construction is not at all 
like that of a professor. The text's construction is, I don't want to say dialec- 
tical, so as not to overuse the word, but extremely subtle. And it obliged me 
to come up with a real interpretation using both the German text and the 
French text (in which the translation is not very accurate but is, on the whole, 
honest enough when compared with others). This is the interpretation I am 
going to offer you. I think it is valid, but it is not the only possible one and it 
is certainly worth discussing. 

Freud begins by presenting his title, "Die Verneinung." And I realized, 
making the same discovery Dr. Lacan had already made, that it would be bet- 
ter to translate it into French as "La denegation." 

Similarly, further on you will find "etwas im Urteil verneinen," which is 

not "the negation of something in the judgment," but a sort of "revocation of 

880 a judgment" [dejugement]. 3 Throughout the text, I think one must distinguish 



Appendix I 747 

between the negation [negation] within judgment and the attitude of negation 
[negation]; otherwise it does not seem possible to understand it. 

The French text does not bring out the extremely concrete, almost amus- 
ing style of the examples of negation with which Freud begins. Consider the 
first one, which contains a projection whose role you can easily situate given 
the work you've done in this seminar, in which the patient, let us call him the 
psychoanalyzed person [psychanalyse\ says to his analyst: "Now you'll 
think I mean to say something insulting, but really I've no such intention." 
"We realize," Freud says, "that this is a rejection, by projection, of an idea 
that has just come to mind" [SEXIX, 235]. 

"I realized in everyday life that when, as frequently happens, we hear 
someone say 'I certainly don't mean to offend you by saying what I am about 
to say,' we must translate this as 'I mean to offend you.' Such an intention is 
never lacking." 

But this remark leads Freud to a very bold generalization, in which he 
raises the problem of negation insofar as it might be at the very origin of intel- 
ligence. This is how I understand the article, in all its philosophical density. 

Similarly, he gives an example of someone saying: "You ask who this per- 
son in the dream can be. It's not my mother." In which case, the question is 
settled, we can be sure that it is indeed her. 

He goes on to cite a technique which is useful to the psychoanalyst but, in 
addition, we could say, to anyone, for shedding light on what has been 
repressed in a given situation. "What would you consider the most unlikely 
imaginable thing in that situation? What do you think was furthest from your 
mind at that time?" If the patient, or whomever you happen to be talking to at 
a party or over dinner, lets himself fall into your trap and tells you what he con- 
siders to be the most unbelievable thing, then that is what you have to believe. 

Thus we have here an analysis of concrete techniques which is generalized 
until its foundation is encountered in a mode of presenting what one is in the 
mode of not being it. Because that is exactly how it is constituted: "I am going 
to tell you what I am not; pay attention, this is precisely what I am." This is 
how Freud takes up the function of negation and, in order to do so, he uses a 
word which I could not but feel at home with, the word Aufkebung, which, as 
you know, has had a variety of fates; it is not for me to say it . . . 

Dr. Lacan: Indeed, it is. If not you, then whose responsibility would it be? 

Prof. Hyppolite: It is Hegel's dialectical word, which means simultaneously 881 

to deny, to suppress, and to conserve, and fundamentally to lift [soulever]. In 



J4$ Ecrits 

reality, it might be the Aufhebung of a stone, or equally the cancellation of my 
subscription to a newspaper. Freud tells us here: "negation is an Aufhebung of 
the repression, though not, of course, an acceptance of what is repressed" 
[SEXIX, 235-36]. 

Something truly extraordinary begins here in Freud 's analysis; something 
emerges from these anecdotes, which we might well have taken for nothing 
more than anecdotes, that is of prodigious philosophical import and that I 
will attempt to summarize shortly. 

Presenting one 's being in the mode of not being it is truly what is at stake 
in this Aufhebung of the repression, which is not an acceptance of that which 
is repressed. The person who is speaking says, "This is what I am not." 
There would no longer be any repression here, if repression signified uncon- 
sciousness, since it is conscious. But the crux of the repression persists 4 in the 
form of unacceptance. 

Freud now leads us through an argument of extreme philosophical sub- 
tlety. It would be a gross oversight were we to let a remark Freud makes slip 
by, simply on account of its unreflective use in everyday speech: "in this the 
intellectual function is separated from the affective process" [SEXIX, 236]. 

For there is truly a profound discovery in the manner in which he goes on 
to deal with it. 

To present my hypothesis, I will say that, in order to carry out an analysis 
of the intellectual function, he does not show how the intellectual separates 
from the affective, but how the intellectual is that sort of suspension of con- 
tent for which the somewhat barbaric term "sublimation" 5 would not be 
inappropriate. Perhaps what is born here is thought as such, but not before 
the content has been affected by a negation. 

Let me recall to mind a philosophical text (I once again apologize for 
doing so, although Dr. Lacan can guarantee you that it is necessary). At the 
end of one of Hegel's chapters, the point is to substitute true negativity for 
the appetite for destruction that takes hold of desire and that is conceptual- 
ized there in a profoundly mythical rather than a psychological manner — to 
substitute, as I was saying, an ideal negation [negation] for the appetite for 
destruction that takes hold of desire and that is such that, in the final outcome 
of the primordial struggle in which the two combatants face off, there is no 
one left to determine who won and who lost. 
882 The negation that Freud talks about here, insofar as it is different from the 

ideal negation [negation] in which the intellectual is constituted, shows us the 
sort of genesis whose vestiges Freud points to, at the moment of concluding 
his text, in the negativism characteristic of certain psychotics. 6 



Appendix I 749 

And Freud goes on to explain, mythically speaking still, what differenti- 
ates this moment [of ideal negation] from negativity. 

In my view, this is what has to be acknowledged in order to understand 
what is truly being spoken of as "negation" in this article, even though it is 
not immediately obvious. Similarly, a dissymmetry expressed by two differ- 
ent words in Freud's text — which have been translated by the same word in 
French — must be noted between the movement toward affirmation based on 
the unifying tendency of love, and the genesis, based on the destructive ten- 
dency, of the kind of negation whose true function is to engender intelligence 
and the very position of thought. 

But let us proceed more slowly. 

We have seen that Freud posits the intellectual as separate from the affec- 
tive. Even if the desired modification, "the acceptance of what is repressed," 
occurs during the analysis, the repression is not, for all that, eliminated. Let 
us try to conceptualize the situation. 

First stage: here is what I am not. What I am is deduced therefrom. The 
repression still persists in the guise of negation. 

Second stage: the psychoanalyst obliges me to accept intellectually what I 
formerly denied \niais\ and Freud adds, after a dash and without any expla- 
nation — "the repressive process itself is not yet removed (aufgehoben) by 
this" [5^ XIX, 236]. 

This seems very profound to me. If the psychoanalyzed person accepts 
this, he goes back on his negation and yet the repression is still there! I con- 
clude from this that one must give what happens here a philosophical name, 
a name Freud did not pronounce: negation of the negation. Literally, what 
transpires here is intellectual, but only intellectual, affirmation qua negation 
of the negation. These terms are not to be found in Freud's text, but I think 
that all we are doing is extending his thought by formulating it in this way. 
That is what he really means. 

At this point (and let us be vigilant in working with a difficult text!), Freud 
finds himself in a position to be able to show how the intellectual separates 883 

<in action> 7 from the affective, and to give a formulation of a sort of gene- 
sis of judgment, that is, in short, a genesis of thought. 

I apologize to the psychologists here, but I am not very fond of positive 
psychology in itself. One might take this genesis for positive psychology, but 
its import seems more profound to me, being historical and mythical in 
nature. And given the role that Freud has this primordial affectivity play, 
insofar as it gives rise to intelligence, I think that it should be understood in 
the way that Dr. Lacan teaches, which is that the primal form of relation 



j5o Ecrits 

known psychologically as the affective is itself situated within the distinctive 
field of the human situation, and that, while it gives rise to intelligence, it is 
because, from the outset, it already brings with it a fundamental historicity. 
There is no pure affect on the one hand, entirely engaged in the real, and pure 
intellect on the other, which detaches itself from it in order to grasp it anew. 
In the genesis described here, I see a sort of grand myth. And behind the 
appearance of positivity in Freud 's text, there is a grand myth sustaining it. 

What does this mean? What is there behind affirmation 8 ? There is Ver- 
einigung, which is Eros. And what is there behind negation (careful — intel- 
lectual negation will be something more)? The appearance here of a 
fundamental, dissymmetrical symbol. Primordial affirmation is nothing 
more than affirming: but to negate [nier] is more than to wish to destroy. 

The process that leads to this point, which has been translated into French 
as rejet [rejection], even though Freud did not use the term Verwerfung here, is 
still more strongly stressed, since he uses Ausstossung? which means expulsion. 

We have here, in some sense, <the formal couple of> two primary 
forces — the force of attraction 10 and the force of expulsion — both of which 
seem to be under the sway of the pleasure principle, which cannot but strike 
one in this text. 11 

This is, thus, the earliest [premiere] history of judgment. Freud now dis- 
tinguishes between two different types of judgment. 

In accordance with what everyone learns about the elements of philoso- 
phy, there is a judgment of attribution and a judgment of existence: "The 
884 function of judgment . . . affirms or disaffirms the possession by a thing of a 

particular attribute; and it asserts or disputes that a representation [Vorstel- 
lung] has an existence in reality" [\Sis XIX, 236]. 

Freud now shows what lies behind the judgment of attribution and behind 
the judgment of existence. It seems to me that in order to understand his arti- 
cle, one must consider both the negation [negation] of the attributive judg- 
ment and the negation [negation] of the judgment of existence as falling short 
of negation [negation] when it appears in its symbolic function. In the final 
analysis, judgment does not yet exist in this moment of emergence; rather, 
there is an early [premier] myth of the outside and the inside, and that is what 
we have to figure out. 

You can sense the import of this myth of the formation of the outside and 
the inside, for alienation is grounded in these two terms. What is translated 
in their formal opposition becomes, beyond that, alienation and hostility 
between the two. 

What makes these four or five pages so dense is that, as you see, they call 
everything into question, and move from concrete remarks, seemingly so 



Appendix I y5i 

minor and yet so profound in their generality, to something which brings 
with it an entire philosophy, an entire structure of thought. 

What is there behind the judgment of attribution? There is the "I should 
like to take in (to myself) \(m')approprier\ introject" or the "I should like to 
expel." 

At the outset, Freud seems to be saying, but "at the outset" means nothing 
more than in the myth "once upon a time . . ." In this story, once upon a time 
there was an ego \moi\ (by which we should understand here a subject) for 
whom nothing was as yet foreign. 

The distinction between the foreign and himself involves an operation, an 
expulsion. This renders comprehensible a proposition which, appearing 
rather abruptly, seems for a moment to be contradictory: 

"Das Schlechte," what is bad, "das dem Ich Fremde," what is foreign to 
the ego [moi\ y "das Aussenbefindliche," and what is found outside, "ist ihm 
zunachst identisch," are, at first, identical for him. 

Now, just before this, Freud says that one introjects and one expels, and 
that there is therefore an operation which is the operation of expulsion < with- 
out which> the operation of introjection <would have no meaning>. This is 
the primordial operation that is the <basis for> the judgment of attribution. 

But what lies at the origin of the judgment of existence is the relationship 
between representation and perception. It is very difficult here not to miss 
the sense in which Freud deepens this relationship. What is important is 
that, "at the outset," it is indifferent whether one knows if there is [ily a] or 
there is not. There is: the subject reproduces his representation of things 885 

based on the initial perception he had of them. When he says now that this 
exists, the question is <not> 12 whether this representation still has the same 
status in reality but whether he can or cannot refind it. This is the relation- 
ship between the representation and reality that Freud emphasizes <as test- 
ing; he bases this relationship> on the possibility of refinding its object once 
again. Repetition as the emphasized mainspring proves that Freud is operat- 
ing in a more profound dimension than Jung, the latter's dimension being 
more properly that of memory. 13 We must not lose the thread of Freud's 
analysis here. (But it is so difficult and detailed that I am afraid of making 
you lose it.) 

What was at stake in the judgment of attribution was expelling or intro- 
jecting. In the judgment of existence, it is a question of attributing to the ego, 
or rather to the subject (it is more comprehensive), a representation that no 
longer has an object that corresponds to it, although an object had corre- 
sponded to it at an earlier stage. What is at stake here is the genesis "of the 
outside and of the inside." 



j52 Ecrits 

Hence this offers us, as Freud says, "an insight into the birth" of judg- 
ment, "from the interplay of primary drive-impulses." So here there is a sort 
of "continuation, along lines of expediency, of the original process by which 
the ego took things into itself {appropriation au moi] or expelled them from 
itself, according to the pleasure principle" [SiTXIX, 239]. 

"Die Bejahung," affirmation, Freud tells us, "als Ersatz der Vereinigung," 
insofar as it is simply the equivalent of unification, "gehort dem Eros an," is 
due to Eros, which is what lies at the source of affirmation. For example, in 
the judgment of attribution, there is the fact of introjecting, of taking into 
oneself [approprier] instead of expelling outside. 

He doesn't use the word Ersati regarding negation [negation], but rather 
the word Nachfolge. But the French translator renders it by the same word as 
Ersati. The German text gives: affirmation is the Ersati of Vereinigung, and 
negation [negation] is the Nachfolge of expulsion or, more precisely, of the 
destructive drive (Destruktionstrieb). 

This thus becomes entirely mythical. There are two instincts, which are, as 
it were, tangled together in this myth which bears the subject: one instinct of 
unification, the other of destruction. A grand myth, as you see, and one which 
repeats others. But the little nuance — whereby affirmation in some sense 
886 merely substitutes for unification, whereas negation [negation] results (after- 

ward) from expulsion — alone seems to me capable of explaining the sentence 
that follows regarding only negativism and the destructive instinct. For this 
explains how there can be a pleasure in negating [denier], a negativism that results 
straightforwardly from the suppression 14 of the libidinal components; in other 
words, what has disappeared in this pleasure in negating [nier] (disappeared = 
repressed) are the libidinal components. 

Does the destructive instinct also depend consequently upon <the> plea- 
sure <principle>? I think this is very important, crucial for technique. 15 

However, Freud tells us that "the performance of the function of judg- 
ment is only made possible by the creation of the symbol of negation." 16 

Why doesn't Freud say that the functioning of judgment is made possible 
by affirmation? Because negation [negation] has a role to play, not as a ten- 
dency toward destruction, nor within a form of judgment, but insofar as it is 
the fundamental attitude of symbolicity rendered explicit. 

"The creation of the symbol of negation permitted an initial degree of 
independence from repression and its consequences and, thereby, also from 
the compulsion (Zwang) of the pleasure principle" [SE XIX, 239]. 

A sentence whose meaning would not have created any problem for me, if I 
had not first linked the tendency toward destruction to the pleasure principle. 



Appendix I y5s 

Because there is a difficulty here. What does the dissymmetry between 
affirmation and negation [negation] thus signify? It signifies that all of the 
repressed can once again be taken up and reutilized in a sort of suspension, 
and that, in some sense, instead of being dominated by the instincts of attrac- 
tion and expulsion, a margin for thought can be generated, an appearance of 
being so in the guise of not being so, which is generated with negation — that 
is, where the symbol of negation [negation] is linked to the concrete attitude 
of negation. 

For this is how one must understand the text, if one accepts its conclusion, 
which at first struck me as a bit strange: 

"This view of negation fits in very well with the fact that in analysis we 887 

never discover a 'no' in the unconscious . . ." [Si? XIX, 239]. 

But we certainly find destruction there. We must thus clearly distinguish 
between the destructive instinct and the form of destruction, otherwise we 
will not understand what Freud meant. In negation, we must see a concrete 
attitude at the origin of the explicit symbol of negation [negation]; this explicit 
symbol alone makes possible something like the use of the unconscious, all 
the while maintaining the repression. 

This is what seems to me to be the meaning of the end of the concluding 
sentence: "recognition of the unconscious on the part of the ego is expressed 
in a negative formula" [SEXIX, 239]. 

That's it in a nutshell: in analysis there is no "no" to be found in the 
unconscious, but recognition of the unconscious by the ego demonstrates 
that the ego is always misrecognition; even in knowledge [connaissance\ one 
always finds in the ego, in a negative formulation, the hallmark of the possi- 
bility of having the unconscious at one 's disposal even as one refuses it. 

"There is no stronger evidence that we have been successful in our effort 
to uncover the unconscious than when the patient reacts to it with the words 
'I didn't think that,' or 'I didn't (ever) think of that'" [SEXIX, 239]. 

Thus, in these four or five pages of Freud's — and I apologize if I myself 
have demonstrated some difficulty in finding in them what I believe to be 
their thread — there is, on the one hand, an analysis of the sort of concrete 
attitude that emerges from the very observation of negation; on the other 
hand, the possibility of seeing the intellectual dissociate <in action> from 
the affective; finally, and above all, a genesis of everything that leads up to 
the primal level, and consequently the origin of judgment and of thought 
itself (in the form of thought as such, since thought is already there before, 
in the primal [state], but it is not there as thought of), which is grasped by 
means of negation. 



7*4 



Ecrits 
Notes 



1. (Lacan's note:) "Je t'apporte l'enfant 
d'une nuit d'Idumee!" 

2. The French translation of Freud's Vernei- 
nung was published as "La Negation" in the 
official organ of the Societe Psychanalytique de 
Paris, RFPNll, 2 (1934): 174-77. The German 
text first came out in Imago IX in 1925 and has 
since been reproduced in several collections of 
Freud's works. It can be found in GPTXIV, as 
the second article, pages 1 1-15. [In English, see 
"Negation" in SE XIX, 235-39; the newer 
German edition is Studienausga.be III (Frank- 
furt: Fischer Verlag, 1982), 373-77, abbreviated 
here as Stud.] 

3. (Lacan's note:) This is indicated by the 
sentence that follows beginning with 
Verurteilung, that is, the condemnation that it 
designates as equivalent to {Ersat{ [SE XIX, 
236: "substitute for"]) repression, whose very 
"no" must be taken as a hallmark, as a certifi- 
cate of origin comparable to "Made in Ger- 
many"* stamped on an object. 

4. "Bei Fortbestand des Wesentlichen an der 
Verdrangung" (GJTXIV, 12; Stud III, 374). 
["What is essential to the repression persists" 
{SE XIX, 236).] 

5. (Lacan's note in 1955:) I intend some day 
to establish a strict definition of this term in psy- 
choanalysis — something which has not yet 
been done. (Lacan's note in 1966:) A promise 
since kept. 

6. "Die allgemeine Verneinungslust, der 
Negativismus mancher Psychotiker ist 
wahrscheinlich als Anzeichen der Triebent- 
mischung durch Abzug der libidinosen Kom- 
ponenten zu verstehen" (GJFXIV, 15). ["The 
general pleasure in negation, the negativism 
displayed by many psychotics, is probably to 
be understood as a sign of a defusion of drives 
that has taken place through a withdrawal of the 
libidinal components" {Stud III, 376-77; SE 
XIX, 239, translation modified).] 



7. (Lacan's note:) All words in such brack- 
ets* have been added. 

8. Bejahung. 

9. GJFXIV, 15. 

10. Einbe\iehung. 

11. The seminar in which Lacan gave a 
commentary on Beyond the Pleasure Principle 
did not take place until 1954-1955. 

12. (Lacan's note:) Words added by the edi- 
tor in accordance with Freud's text: "Der erste 
und nachste Zweck der Realitatspriifung ist 
also nicht, ein dem Vorgestellten entsprechen- 
des Objekt in der realen Wahrnehmung 
zufinden, sondern es wieder^ufinden, sich zu 
iiberzeugen, dass es noch vorhanden ist" {GW 
XIV, 14). ["The first and immediate aim, there- 
fore, of reality-testing is, not to find an object 
in real perception which corresponds to the one 
presented, but to refind such an object, to con- 
vince oneself that it is still there" {SE XIX, 
237-38, 5W III, 375).] 

13. (Lacan's note:) Is the author referring 
here to Platonic reminiscence? 

14. The German here \sAb\ug\ deduction, 
discount, withholding; "what is withheld in the 
pleasure in negating are the libidinal compo- 
nents." Its possibility is related to the Triebent- 
mischung, which is a sort of return to a pure 
state, a decanting of the drives that is usually, 
and poorly, translated as desintrication des 
instincts ["defusion of instincts" {SE XIX, 
239)]. 

15. (Lacan's note:) The admirable way in 
which Prof. Hyppolite's expose at this point 
closes in on the difficulty seems all the more 
significant to me in that I had not as yet pro- 
duced the theses, which I was to develop the fol- 
lowing year in my commentary on Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle, on the death instinct, which 
is so thoroughly evaded and yet so present in 
this text. 

16. Underlined by Freud. 



Appendix II: Metaphor of the Subject 1 889 

This is the text, rewritten in June 1961, of remarks I made on June 23, 1960, 
in response to a talk by Chaim Perelman, in which he invoked "the idea of 
rationality and the rule of law" before the French Philosophical Society. 

It anticipates, to some degree, as concerns metaphor, what I have since 
been formulating by way of a logic of the unconscious. 

I am indebted to Francois Regnault for having reminded me of this text in 
time to add it to the second edition of this volume. 



Procedures of argumentation interest Mr. Perelman because they are scorned 
[mepris] by the scientific tradition. He is thus led to plead, before a Philo- 
sophical Society, that they have been misunderstood [meprise]. 

He would do better to go beyond defense if he would win us over to his 
side. This is the sense in which the remark that I will bring to his attention is 
intended: it is on the basis of the unconscious' manifestations, which I deal 
with as an analyst, that I have developed a theory of the effects of the signi- 
fier that intersects rhetoric. This is attested to by the fact that my students, in 
reading works of rhetoric, recognize it to be their daily fare at my seminar. 

Thus I shall be led to question him less about what he has argued here, 
perhaps too cautiously, than about a point at which his written work takes us 
right to the crux of thought. 

Metaphor, for example, which I link up, as is well known, with one of the 
two fundamental facets of the play of the unconscious. 

It cannot be said that I disagree with the way Perelman deals with 
metaphor, detecting therein a four-term operation, or even with the fact that 
he defends his decisively separating it from images on such grounds. 

I do not, however, believe that he is justified in thinking he has reduced it 
to the function of analogy. 2 

If we take it for granted that, in the case of analogy, the specific effect of 
the relations A/B and D/C is sustained by the very heterogeneity by which 890 

they divide up into theme and phoros, this formalism is no longer valid for 



y56 Ecrits 

metaphor, and the best proof thereof is that the formalism becomes confused 
in the very illustrations Perelman provides of it. 

There are, as it were, four terms in metaphor, but their heterogeneity 
involves a dividing line — three against one — and is tantamount to the divid- 
ing line between the signifier and the signified. 

To expand on a formula I gave for metaphor in my article entitled "The 
Instance of the Letter in the Unconscious," 3 1 will rewrite it as follows: 

s A_ s (± 



s', 



X \s 



Metaphor is, quite radically speaking, the effect of the substitution of one 
signifier for another in a chain, nothing natural predestining the signifier for 
this function of phoros apart from the fact that two signifiers are involved, 
which can, as such, be reduced to a phonemic opposition. 

To demonstrate this using one of Perelman's own examples, the one he has 
judiciously chosen from Berkeley's third dialogue, 4 "An ocean of false sci- 
ence" will be written as follows (since it is better to restore what the French 
translation already tends to "make dormant" [endormir], to do justice, along 
with Perelman, to a metaphor so felicitously found by rhetoricians): 

an ocean false / 1 

of ► an ocean I — 

learning x \ ? 

Learning — enseignement — indeed, is not science, and one senses even 
more clearly in the former that the term has no more to do with the ocean 
than a fish with a bicycle. 

The sunken cathedral of what had been previously taught [enseigne] con- 
cerning this matter is still likely to ring fruitfully in our ears when it is 
reduced to the alternation of a muffled and sonorous bell by which the phrase 
penetrates us — lear-ning, lear-ning — not from the depths of a liquid layer, 
but due to the fallacy of its own arguments. 

The ocean is one of those arguments and nothing else. I mean literature, 
which must be understood in its historical context, by which it bears the 
meaning that the cosmos can, at its outermost bounds, become a locus of 
deception. A signified thus, you may retort, with which the metaphor begins. 
Perhaps, but within the range of its effect it goes beyond mere recurrence, 
891 being based on the nonmeaning of what is just one term among others of the 

same learning. 

What is produced, however, at the place of the question mark in the sec- 



Appendix II y5y 

ond part of my formula is a new species in signification: a falseness that dis- 
putation cannot fathom, for it is unsoundable — the wave and depth of the 
imaginary 's aiteipoc; in which any vessel is swallowed up should it seek to 
draw forth something. 

By being "awakened" in its freshness, this metaphor, like every other, 
shows its true colors in the work of the surrealists. 

The radical nature of metaphor is seen in the fit of rage, related by Freud, 
that his Rat Man flew into as a child, when he had yet to be armed with foul lan- 
guage, before becoming a full-fledged obsessive neurotic. Upon being 
thwarted by his father, the boy yelled at him, "Du Lampe, du Handtuch, du 
Teller" usw ("You lamp! You towel! You plate!" and so on), his father being 
unsure whether to consider this criminal or genius on his son's part [5^X, 205]. 

I myself intend not to lose sight here of the dimension of insult [injure] in 
which metaphor originates — insult that is more serious than we imagine 
when we reduce it to wartime invective. For the injustice that is gratuitously 
done to every subject by use of an attribute with which any other subject is 
inclined to take a dig at him stems from such insults. "The cat goes bow-wow, 
the dog goes meow, meow." This is how the child spells out the powers of 
discourse and inaugurates thought. 

One might be surprised that I feel the need to take things so far concern- 
ing metaphor. But Perelman will grant me that in invoking, to satisfy his ana- 
logical theory, the coupled terms swimmer and scholar, and then terra firma 
and truth, and in admitting that one can thus multiply them ad infinitum, 
what he formulates evidently manifests that they are all equally irrelevant 
and come down to what I say: no extant signification has anything to do with 
the question. 

Of course, speaking of the constitutive disorganization of every enuncia- 
tion does not say it all, and the example Perelman revives from Aristotle, 5 
"the evening of life" to speak of old age, is quite telling in that it does not 
even point out the repression of the most unpleasant facet of the 
metaphorized term in order to bring out a sense of peacefulness that old age 
in no way implies in real life [le reel]. 

For if we question the peacefulness of the evening [la paix du soir\ we 
realize that it involves no other dimension than the muting of vocal exercises: 
whether the jabbering of harvesters or the chirping of birds. 

Considering which, we might remember that while language is essentially 892 

blah blah blah, it is nevertheless from language that having and being derive. 

This is what the metaphor I chose in the abovementioned article 6 — 
namely, Victor Hugo's "His sheaf was neither miserly nor spiteful," from 
"Booz Sleeping" (Booi endormi) — plays on, and it does not idly evoke the 



y58 Ecrits 

link that, in rich people, unites the position of having with the refusal 
inscribed in their being. For this is the impasse of love. And its very negation 
would do no more here, as we know, than posit it, if the metaphor introduced 
by the substitution of "his sheaf " for the subject did not bring forth the only 
object the having of which necessitates the failure to be it — the phallus — 
around which the whole poem revolves right down to its last twist. 

This means that the most serious reality, and even the sole serious reality 
for man, if one considers its role in sustaining the metonymy of his desire, 
can only be retained in metaphor. 

What am I trying to get at, if not to convince you that what the uncon- 
scious brings back to our attention is the law by which enunciation can never 
be reduced to what is enunciated in any discourse? 

Let us not say that I choose my terms in it, regardless of what I have to 
say — although it is not pointless to recall here that the discourse of science, 
insofar as it commends itself by its objectivity, neutrality, and dreariness, 
even of the Sulpician variety, is just as dishonest and ill-intentioned as any 
other rhetoric. 

What must be said is that the I of this choice is born somewhere other than 
in the place where the discourse is enunciated — namely, in the person who 
listens to it. 

Doesn't this provide the status of rhetorical effects, in showing that they 
extend to all signification? Let people object that they stop at mathematical 
discourse — I will agree all the more in that I place the highest value on that 
discourse precisely because it signifies nothing. 

The only absolute statement was made by the competent authority — 
namely, that no roll of the dice in the signifier will ever abolish chance. This 
is so because chance exists only within a linguistic determination, no matter 
how we consider it, whether in combination with automatism or encounter. 
