     ----------------------------------------------------------------
     Otherness

     Tamise Van Pelt
     Idaho State University
     vantamis@isu.edu

     © 2000 Tamise Van Pelt.
     All rights reserved.
     ----------------------------------------------------------------

  1. As half of a signifying binary, the "Other" is a term with a
     rich and lengthy philosophical history dating at least from
     Plato's Sophist, in which the Stranger participates in a
     dialogue on the ontological problems of being and non-being, of
     the One and the Other.[1] In the twentieth century, this
     Platonic mix of ontology with alterity informs the work of
     Emmanuel Levinas, who is countered by Simone de Beauvoir, who
     influences feminist philosophers, who influence theorists of
     political, racial, and sexual identity--forming a great chain of
     inquiry into being.[2] Additional philosophical perspectives on
     Otherness abound, and Hegel (via Kojève), Heidegger, and Sartre
     all present important statements on alterity. In this century,
     Jacques Lacan's place in the history of alterity is unique,
     however, because Lacan insists on a decentering of Otherness
     that parallels his much-discussed decentering of the Subject.
     Specifically, Lacan explores an intrapsychic Otherness different
     from the Other of interpersonal theories of identity and
     distinct from the philosophical problem of Other Minds--a
     problem grounded in solipsism rather than narcissism.

  2. Unlike his contemporaries, Lacan postulates a gap between an
     Other and an other that echoes a gap between the Subject and the
     ego. These twin decenterings imply Lacan's symbolic and
     imaginary registers, since the "decentering of the Subject" is
     another way of saying that the Subject and the ego inhabit
     disjunct registers. Likewise, the disjunction between the
     symbolic linguistic Other and the imaginary mirroring other
     signifies a decentering of the former from the latter. Taken
     together, these two decenterings articulate a post-humanist
     subjectivity at odds with contemporary constructions of the
     "Other" as a person, particularly a person who is marginal or
     subversive in some way. This conceptual disjunction between
     theories of a humanized Other and Lacan's radically alterior
     Otherness suggests a gap between the two approaches. Ironically,
     though, discussions that humanize the Other frequently cite
     Lacan, so it seems valuable to ask why.

  3. Lacan's rhetoric in and of itself invites his readers to
     overlook his decentering of the Other. Sometimes Lacan refers to
     the symbolic Other as the big Other and the imaginary other as
     the little other, but for the most part Lacan simply uses
     capitalization to distinguish the Other from the other. Though
     no reader would misread "Subject" for "ego," the much subtler
     rhetorical distinction between "Other" and "other" can easily be
     missed--especially if readers don't supplement the explicit
     discourse of alterity with the implicit discourse of the
     registers. Since Lacan discusses the Other topically without any
     explicit reference to the registers, his readers are often
     called upon to supply the implicit theoretical context. Envision
     the fate of the casual reader of Lacan who, interested in
     British literature, picks up Seminar VII on ethics to read
     "Courtly Love as Anamorphosis." This reader sees: "In many
     cases, it seems that a function like that of a blessing or
     salutation is for the courtly lover the supreme gift, the sign
     of the Other as such, and nothing more" (152). Lacking the
     implied but unspecified discursive context of the registers,
     this reader can easily take Lacan's "sign of the Other" to be a
     token received from an "Other" person. Only familiarity with
     Lacan's theory of the registers allows his reader to grasp the
     intrapsychic "sign of the Other" as a decentering connection
     with the signifier in the unconscious that the courtly lover
     mis/takes for transcendence. Similarly, when Lacan writes in
     Seminar II that "the obsessional is always an other" he is
     talking about the obsessional's ego-involvement, not the
     obsessional's loss of identity. Again, Lacan's point assumes the
     registers, allying the obsessional with the rhetorically
     explicit "other" and alienating the obsessional from the
     discursively implicit "Other." Lacking the framework of the
     theory of the registers, a reader would be hard pressed to
     unravel either of these Lacanian invocations of alterity.

  4. The currency of the idea of the Other in theory generally makes
     the reading of the decentered Other in Lacan even more
     difficult. The contemporary idea of the Other rooted in area
     studies inscribes itself in theories of race, class, and gender
     and reinscribes itself in post-colonial theories of national
     identities, both placed and displaced. Consequently, a plethora
     of critical discourses use the term "Other" to signify quite
     differently than Lacan. In identity politics, the decentering of
     the Subject can lead to an equal and opposite reaction: a
     centering--an entification--of the Other as object, an "it"
     denied the status of a "Thou." Thus, readers familiar with
     theoretical discourses defining Otherness as race or class or
     gender or nationality see Otherness as attribute rather than
     alterity.

  5. Since alterity is crucial to an understanding of Lacanian
     Otherness, and since the Other of contemporary theory means many
     things to many discourses, it will be useful first to
     distinguish the Other of identity theories from the decentered
     Other of Lacanian analysis. With this Lacanian decentering of
     the Other in mind, I then want to explore the way two theorists
     of identity deploy Lacanian Otherness: Abdul R. JanMohamed uses
     the registers that distinguish otherness from Otherness in his
     reading of colonialist novels; Judith Butler disputes the
     validity of the distinction between the registers on which
     Lacan's decentering of the Other is based. In dialogue with
     theories of identity, Lacanian theory insists on the radicality
     of Otherness, an alterity that has frequently been obscured by
     the residual humanism implicit in the construction of the
     Subject as a political entity. Finally, this overview of
     Otherness will examine the relationship between the decentering
     of the Other and phallic discourse to argue the value of a
     politics that listens for the Other rather than speaking on its
     behalf.

     The Other in Theories of Identity

  6. Many contemporary theories of identity use the Other as half of
     a Self/Other dichotomy distinguishing one person from another.
     For instance, pointing out an oppositional racial distinction,
     Terry Goldie's "The Representation of the Indigene" states: "At
     least since Fanon's Black Skin, White Masks (1952) it has been a
     commonplace to use 'Other' and 'not-self' for the white view of
     blacks and for the resulting black view of themselves" (233).[3]
     Racial selves rather than subjects are at issue here in Goldie's
     distinction between white people and black people. The same
     interpersonal dichotomy of race appears in Abdul R. JanMohamed's
     "The Economy of Manichean Allegory":

          Troubled by the nagging contradiction between the
          theoretical justification of exploitation and the barbarity
          of its actual practice, [colonialist fiction] also attempts
          to mask the contradiction by obsessively portraying the
          supposed inferiority and barbarity of the racial Other,
          thereby insisting on the profound moral difference between
          self and Other. (23)

     Here, an implicit humanism enters the anti-humanist discourse on
     race, imported by the idea of the racial "self." Similarly,
     Goldie discusses the racial distinctions between the Self and
     the Other in terms of specific attributes, saying that
     "[p]resumably the first instance in which one human perceived
     another as Other in racial terms came when the first recognized
     the second as different in colour, facial features, language"
     (235). Now Goldie makes the previously implicit humanism
     explicit, but not without reason. In critiques that explore
     inhumanity, humanizing the Other makes a political statement.
     This statement, in turn, reminds us that the discourse of
     political rights and the discourse of humanism are twin
     intellectual legacies, two branches of the tree of Enlightenment
     knowledge.

  7. Discourses of gendered selves parallel discourses of racial
     identity in the tendency to humanize the Other. Thus, a parallel
     distinction appears in feminist discourses discussing woman as
     Other, particularly those discourses opposing patriarchy. Where
     political rights are at issue, discourses refer both to woman as
     an Other human being and to the Subject as a political entity, a
     theoretical move that unifies the "Subject" as a person
     subjected to the law of the land. For instance, adopting the
     language of oppositional feminism, Raman Selden[4] generalizes
     about feminist theory: "In many different societies, women, like
     colonised subjects, have been relegated to the position of
     'other', 'colonised' by various forms of patriarchal domination"
     (249). Simone de Beauvoir's The Second Sex emphasizes the
     humanism that is at stake in the Self/Other dichotomy, writing
     of the Biblical Genesis: "... humanity is male and man defines
     woman not in herself but as relative to him... He is the
     Subject, he is the Absolute--she is the Other" (xxii); this
     "expression of a duality... of the Self and the Other" is
     socially and historically pervasive, de Beauvoir points out
     (xxii). Of de Beauvoir's and Virginia Woolf's feminisms, Selden
     continues: "Being dispersed among men, women have no separate
     history, no natural solidarity; nor have they combined as other
     oppressed groups have. Woman is riveted into a lop-sided
     relationship with man: he is the 'One', she the 'Other'... and,
     à la Virginia Woolf's 'looking glass', the assumption of woman
     as 'Other' is further internalised by women themselves" (210).
     Here, Selden's analysis of the woman's internalization of her
     attributes parallels Goldie's analysis of black identification
     above, and both invoke a discourse on Otherness that has
     Platonic rather than psychoanalytic roots.

  8. National identity, too, presents itself in terms of Selves and
     Others, adopting the plural construction characteristic of
     discourses about identity. Here, Homi Bhabha discusses the
     post-colonial condition: "[The Derridean entre] makes it
     possible to begin envisaging national, anti-nationalist,
     histories of the 'people'. It is in this space that we will find
     those words with which we can speak of Ourselves and Others"
     ("Cultural Diversity" 209). Similarly, Xiaomei Chen concludes a
     discussion of "Occidentalism as Counterdiscourse" with the
     following analysis that treats East and West as implicit human
     agents:

          ... it seems imperative that we at least attempt to find a
          reasonable balance between Self and Other, between East and
          West, so that no culture is fundamentally privileged over
          its Others. Perhaps the realities of history cannot allow
          such a balance to be fully realized. Indeed, it is even
          necessary to affirm that these master tropes are
          necessarily veiled by the fictional. What must be stressed
          here is then even imagining such a balance--surely one of
          the first requirements of a new order of things--can never
          be possible without each Self being confronted by an Other,
          or by the Other being approached from the point of view of
          the Self in its own specific historical and cultural
          conditions. (89)

     The idea here, that Otherness is both agentic and a matter of
     point of view, is taken up by Judith Butler in a discussion of
     sexual identity when she writes in Bodies that Matter that "gay
     and lesbian identity positions... constitute themselves through
     the production and repudiation of a heterosexual Other" (112).
     As Butler's analysis shows, Otherness can be relative, making
     the interpersonal dichotomy of Self and Other endlessly
     reversible.

  9. Judith Butler's critique of the "exclusionary logic" of the
     Other as it signifies in the Self/Other binary of identity
     points toward the limited usefulness of oppositional
     constructions. Lacanian logic, moreover, demonstrates the
     intrapsychic resistance that manifests when just such signifying
     binaries as white/black, West/East, or heterosexual/homosexual
     merge with a fixed, imaginary ego identity. Like intrapsychic
     resistance, political resistance has a use, particularly where
     brute survival is at issue. However, resistance denies the
     epistemological fact that in order to replicate the Self/Other
     signifying difference--in order to shape a foundational symbolic
     distinction--both terms necessarily implicate each other. In
     many of the discussions above, Chen's "fundamental privilege" is
     less the issue than foundational, epistemological privilege.
     Civilized, superior Western white male heterosexual colonizers
     are foundationally privileged; we know in advance and without
     appeal to specific circumstance or historical context that this
     is so. Foundational difference makes a truth claim about the
     world; foundational difference prescribes positions, inscribes
     hierarchy, proscribes recombination. In and of themselves, such
     differences are descriptive at best, their insistent fixity
     rendering them insufficient for the analysis of dynamic
     problems, whether the problems are intrapsychic, social, or
     political. Discourses that align the Other with the marginal or
     with the subversive avoid a confrontation with complexity, just
     as JanMohamed's exemplary redistribution of the attribute of
     "barbarity" from colonizer to colonized, above, stops short of
     an inquiry into ego identification as a transitive process.
     Allied binaries and binary realignments only build a thicker
     epistemological foundation.

 10. Thick epistemology is vulnerable epistemology. As JanMohamed's
     portable barbarity points out above, multiple binaries align and
     realign, attributes can be assigned and reassigned. Infelicitous
     combinatories undermine foundational privilege, whether the
     claim of privilege operates as an entitlement or an accusation.
     So long as there is an investment in the foundational signifying
     difference, the emergence of the combinatory's undesirable
     elements will arouse resistance. For instance, Melville Chater's
     paean to the new South African Union in a 1931 edition of The
     National Geographic sets up and reinforces a typical colonialist
     foundational distinction between hard-working, intelligent
     whites entitled to the prosperity they enjoy and lazy,
     superstitious blacks (who presumably have what they have
     "earned" as well). When Chater's foray over the veldt discovers
     a "forlorn scene" of "dismal shacks, where some frowzy men and
     women and a plethora of dull-faced children [lounge] in the
     sunshine," he rescues his foundations: "Yet they [are] whites,
     or, rather, 'poor white,' representing a South African aspect of
     that retrogressive type which is found in many lands" (441).
     When this relativizing of whiteness seems inadequate to explain
     "so formidable a number as 120,000 to 150,000" poor whites,
     Chater attributes the deterioration of the poor whites to "that
     too-easeful existence, based on slave help and game aplenty"
     (441). Having inadvertently tainted the white superiority he has
     constructed as the outcome of white hard work by the insertion
     of slavery into his discourse, Chater reasserts his foundation:
     in a stunning attempt to purify white superiority, he
     redistributes a poor white squatter to the black half of his
     equation by comparing the squatter's language to that of "the
     American 'black-face' comedian"(441). Chater's inadvertent
     denaturalizing of blackness has stumbled upon a blackness
     constructed by whites for white entertainment. He has entered
     the territory of the combinatory of combinatories, the Lacanian
     unconscious--the Lacanian Other.

 11. A more contemporary and purposeful recuperation of race from the
     stasis of foundational difference is effected by Honduran
     comedian Carlos Mencia, who jokes that Los Angelinos meeting
     someone from Honduras or El Salvador or Guatemala inevitably ask
     "Now, what part of Mexico is that?" Mencia exposes the
     exclusionary work of the foundational binary that identifies
     race in Black/White terms with a logic that reintroduces the
     combinatory: If you're white, you're white in L.A. Go to Miami
     and you're still white. If you're black in L.A., go to New York
     and you're still black. Referring to himself, Mencia points out
     that in L.A. he's a Mexican. "If I go to Miami, I'm a Cuban. And
     if I go to New York, I'm..." He gestures to the audience who
     respond "Puerto Rican." "See," he concludes, "You know what I'm
     talking about." Shunted off to the racial unconscious by a
     foundational Black/White race-ism, Mencia's own race must be
     articulated by indirection. Thus, the unary signifier "Hispanic"
     remains in the linguistic Otherness and only enters the joke
     obliquely, as a signifier for another
     signifier--[Hispanic]/Mexican, [Hispanic]/Cuban,
     [Hispanic]/Puerto Rican. Mencia's comedic tactic parallels the
     strategy Benita Parry praises in Bhabha's post-colonial theory:
     Bhabha "show[s] the wide range of stereotypes and the shifting
     subject positions assigned to the colonized in the colonialist
     text" in order to liberate "an autonomous native 'difference'"
     from the binary European/Other (41).[4] Similarly, Judith
     Butler's Bodies that Matter works with the exclusionary logics
     of both male/female and heterosexual/homosexual to open up the
     combinatory expressions of sexual orientation these foundational
     binaries preclude. Since these latter examples of linguistic
     identity have ventured into the territory of complex Otherness
     evocative of Lacan's theory of the registers, this is a good
     point at which to distinguish clearly the doubling of alterity
     in the symbolic and the imaginary.

     There is no Other of the Other:
     (but there is an other of the Other)

 12. The journey that eventually leads Lacan to the aphoristic
     insistence that "there is no Other of the Other" (there is no
     meta-language beyond language) begins with a denaturalization of
     paranoid psychosis. The ideas Lacan forms during his medical
     training lead him to counter the prevailing psychiatric view of
     psychosis as a biologically-based personality trait by positing
     a developmental phenomenology he only later finds in Freud.
     Interested in folies à deux, and especially as such madness
     manifests in women's "inspired" speech and writings, Lacan is
     very much a man attuned to the surrealist 1930s.[5] What he
     writes for medical journals he revises for surrealist journals,
     but his interest is consistently in the otherness of the
     other--an interest that culminates in mirror stage theory. The
     interpersonal here seems undeniable. Lacan writes about the
     crime of the two Papin sisters. He writes his thesis on the
     psychotic Aimée's attack on a famous French actress. Moreover,
     Lacan's many references to Hegel's struggle for recognition
     between the Master and the Slave certainly imply an agon between
     people rather than a contest within. Lacan's mirror stage essay
     points out that a pigeon matures via an encounter with another
     of its own kind. Even the mirroring moment can be read as
     involving the infant and the mother. All in all, early on, Lacan
     seems deeply involved with the interpersonal, the social, even
     the cultural.

 13. Read against the retrospect of his later interests, mirror stage
     theory appears to be Lacan's failed attempt to explain the
     dynamics of an intrapsychic alterity in interpersonal terms. Not
     until his theory of the registers does Lacan achieve the
     post-humanist position he seeks. The dominance of a formative
     phenomenology in the earlier essay gives "The Mirror Stage" its
     interpersonal slant. In the theory of the registers, by
     contrast, the phenomenal is folded within the structure of
     language and intrapsychic structure is irremediably fissured
     with the gaps between the imaginary, the symbolic, and the real.
     Since none of the registers is confluent with the others, Lacan
     avoids the problem of a seamless solipsism. He avoids a tabula
     rasa subjectivity passively constructed from without as well.
     So, it is not experience but experience's imagistic residue that
     figures in the imaginary register. It is not the many instances
     of communication with other people but language as a whole that
     signifies in the symbolic. Nor is the model without constraint
     since the real is always there as an unimaginable, unsignifiable
     limit on what would otherwise constitute a psychic en abîme of
     mirroring or signification without end.

 14. Models of the psyche necessarily inform analytic praxis, and
     Lacan's theory of the registers is his attempt to come to grips
     with the theory/practice gap. While Schema L as the sketch on
     Lacan's chalkboard is not the model on the analyst's couch,
     there is an intriguing and ambiguous family relationship between
     the two. Though the terms may be the same, the contexts differ,
     and working across the contextual divide can make Lacan's theory
     appear to contradict itself, rendering straightforward
     terminology paradoxical. The problem of discussing alterity is
     made all the more difficult for Lacan because he continually
     engages the divide between the interpersonal situation of
     analysis in practice and the intrapsychic dynamics that
     underwrite whatever interventions analytic practice makes.
     Practice motivates the transition from mirror stage theory to
     register theory as the latter is announced in Lacan's manifesto
     on the function of speech and language in the Freudian field.
     His paper takes issue with non-Lacanian forms of analysis that
     he finds therapeutically inadequate precisely because of their
     emphases on the interpersonal. Increasingly, Lacan insists that
     analysis must be a process in which the analyst creates a
     therapeutic context where the analysand's intrapsychic processes
     are the only processes in play. The cadaverous, "dead" position
     of the Lacanian analyst is meant to deconstruct analysis as
     humanistic interaction. Thus, Lacan's discussion of Otherness
     must be read with special attention to context for three
     reasons: because Otherness is a term that Lacan himself doubles
     in his structural theory of the registers and in his dynamic
     theory of desire, because it is a term that defines an
     intrapsychic process and determines an interpersonal practice,
     and because it is a signifier shared by the discourse of
     analysis and by everyday language.

 15. Since the idea of otherness is a term whose name--"the
     other"--remains the same but whose implications change, Lacan
     provides many interpretations of otherness. Some of the examples
     contrast the other with the Other and emphasize the distinction
     between the registers. In his second seminar, for instance, he
     compares the "radical Other" as one "pole of the subjective
     relation," with the "other which isn't an other at all, since it
     is essentially coupled with the ego, in a relation which is
     always reflexive, interchangeable" (321). Bearing in mind that
     Lacan is discussing a subjective rather than an intersubjective
     relation, and that the reflexive coupling of other with ego is
     an intrapsychic phenomenon for which another person is, at best,
     a prop or a pretext, consider this elaboration of the analyst's
     alterity: the analyst "partakes of the radical nature of the
     Other, in so far as he is what is most inaccessible" to the
     extent that the analyst's own ego is "effaced" and the analyst's
     resistance is not aroused (324). The analyst's refusal to play
     along with the game dictated by the ego of the analysand throws
     the analysand back into a confrontation with the intrapsychic
     gap between the other and the Other, since expecting to confirm
     the former the analysand encounters the latter. So, "what leaves
     the imaginary of the ego of the subject is in accordance not
     with this other to which he is accustomed, and who is just his
     partner, the person who is made so as to enter into his game,
     but precisely with this radical Other which is hidden from him"
     (324). Without another person to play along with the habitual
     imaginary game, the subject looks to the intrapsychic Other. If
     the analysis is successful, the Other will yield to the subject
     its Truth.

 16. Appropriately, one of Lacan's exemplary readings of radical
     alterity occurs in his Seminar III on psychosis, where he
     presents an analytic case study exploring the speech of a
     paranoid young woman. In this reworking of his analytic roots,
     Lacan presents a clear decentering of the imaginary other from
     the symbolic Other. The disjunction is evident in Lacan's
     redefinition of psychotic projection--which might seem to be
     classically imaginary--as a mechanism that has been "placed
     outside the general symbolization structuring the subject" and
     returns "from without" (47). Lacan's patient is a "girl" who
     tells him about her "run-in in the hallway with an ill-mannered
     sort of chap," a married man who was also the illicit lover of
     her neighbor. While passing her in the hall, the man had
     devalued her by saying a dirty word to her. But she herself had
     spoken to him first, saying "I've just been to the butcher's"
     [the charcutier, who specializes in pork]. He had responded:
     "Sow!" In his analysis, Lacan's own response to the girl is a
     mistake, he admits. He interprets. He shows his analysand that
     he understands her comment "I've just been to the butcher's" as
     a reference to pork, and by doing so he "enter[s] into the
     patient's game... collaborat[ing] in [her] resistance" (48).
     Though he does not explicitly articulate his failure in terms of
     the registers, the distinction is clear. Lacan, through his
     display of "understanding," has reinforced the patient's
     imaginary at the expense of asking, symbolically, why there is
     something in the patient's speech to be understood. The analytic
     question is: "Why did she say, I've just been to the butcher's
     and not Pig?" (48-49).

 17. Lacan goes on to insist that the interaction between the girl
     who might have said "Pig!" and the man who calls her "Sow!" is
     not an instance of his maxim that in speech the subject receives
     her message in an inverted form. In other words, here, the
     message should not be constructed as a symbolic exchange since
     the message at issue "is not identical with speech, far from it"
     (Sem III 49). The girl herself is enmeshed in the desire of her
     neighbor and the neighbor's lover, a desire of which she is
     censorious to the point of wondering whether it is possible
     "through taking legal action, to get them into hospital" (49).
     She had been friends with the neighbor until the love affair
     interrupted the friendship; afterwards she intruded on the
     couple while they were dining or reading or "at their toilet"
     until they threw her out. So Lacan rereads the conversation's
     intrapsychic implications: "Sow, what is that? It is effectively
     her message, but is it not rather her message to herself?" (49).
     The analysand's ego has met her alter ego in the hallway; the
     moment is a mirror.

 18. Lacan connects this case study to his schema of subjectivity:

          ... Is it the reality of objects that is at issue? Who
          normally speaks in reality, for us? Is it reality, exactly,
          when someone speaks to us? The point of the remarks I made
          to you last time on the other and the Other, the other with
          a small o and the Other with a big O, was to get you to
          notice that when the Other with a big O speaks it is not
          purely and simply the reality in front of you, namely the
          individual who is holding forth. The Other is beyond that
          reality.

          In true speech the Other is that before which you make
          yourself recognized. But you can make yourself recognized
          by it only because it is recognized first. (50-51)

     Having thus clarified the impersonal nature of the big Other,
     Lacan notes that in the paranoid insult, the Other is not in
     question since the patient doesn't recognize the Other "behind
     him who is speaking. She receives her own speech from him, but
     not inverted, her own speech is in the other who is herself, the
     little other, her reflection in the mirror, her counterpart"
     (51). Though she seems to look at another person, the girl sees
     only herself.

 19. The distinction Lacan makes here between the Other and the
     other, between the symbolic and the imaginary, involves the pact
     of language. Part of the process of recognition for the Subject
     as a subject involves the risky business of addressing the
     absolute Other beyond all that is known. Addressed to another
     person, the very Otherness of speech puts that person in a
     position to be recognized by the speaker and to recognize the
     speaker in return because both speakers share a symbolic
     commitment of which neither speaker is the origin. Committed
     speech is discourse, which for Lacan "includes acts, steps, the
     contortions of puppets, yourselves included, caught up in the
     game... An utterance commits you to maintaining it through your
     discourse, or to repudiating it, or to objecting to it, or to
     conforming to it, to refuting it, but, even more, to complying
     with many things that are within the rules of the game" (51).
     With these relationships between the registers, alterity,
     discourse, and the pact in mind, I want to return to two
     discourses on identity and Otherness that address Lacan's
     register theory directly--one by invoking it, another by
     repudiating it--in order to explore the link between discourse
     and symptom.

     Discourse, Symptom, and Otherness:
     "The unconscious is the discourse of the Other."

 20. The following two examples of the discourse of identity
     theory--Abdul R. JanMohamed's "The Economy of Manichean
     Allegory" and Judith Butler's "The Lesbian Phallus and the
     Morphological Imaginary"--offer critiques engaging Lacanian
     Otherness. As critiques, these essays are discourses about
     discourses, meta-discourses in which Otherness signifies.
     Because meta-discourses offer levels of complexity, symptoms
     appear in such discourses as deflections of the discursive flow
     as such. Briefly, the Lacanian symptom, like the letter in the
     "Purloined Letter," is "a fourth element, which can serve... as
     signum" (Sem I 280). The symptom operates to link the imaginary
     and the symbolic into signs which figure against the real of
     "the organism as ground" (280). Slavoj Zizek points to the
     element of repetition involved in the Lacanian symptom,
     identifying the symptom as "a particular signifying formation
     which confers on the subject its very ontological consistency...
     if the symptom is dissolved, the subject itself loses the ground
     under his feet, disintegrates" (155). This element of
     consistency conferred by the symptom is characteristic of what
     Lacan calls the "narcissistic Bildung" of the ego and relates to
     the repetitious character of empty speech. Since theoretical
     terms easily empty themselves of meaning (as theory's opponents
     tirelessly point out), the "Other" may mark a symptom in a
     discourse of identity.

 21. In this first encounter between identity theory and Lacanian
     analysis, Abdul R. JanMohamed uses the Lacanian registers to
     make a distinction between forms of colonial discourse. A useful
     error--possibly a symptom--occurs in JanMohamed's essay at the
     point where the discourse of post-colonialism disrupts the
     discourse on the registers forcing an either/or choice between
     irreconcilable constructions of Otherness. This error provides a
     helpful comparison to a similar error in Butler's chapter, an
     error productive of a symptom at every level of Butler's
     discourse, from the literal, to the paradigmatic, to the
     interpretive. Since from the analytic point of view both the
     error and the symptom locate discursive truth, both JanMohamed
     and Butler tell the truth about the encounter between theories
     of identity and the Lacanian registers.

 22. The registers appear as unified and unifying descriptive
     categories when Abdul R. JanMohamed writes "I would argue that
     colonialist literature is divisible into two broad categories:
     the 'imaginary' and the 'symbolic'" (19). Next, JanMohamed goes
     on to transcend the categorical in a sophisticated contrast
     between the work that aggressivity does in the 'imaginary' text
     and the work that mediation and problematization do in the
     'symbolic' text. Having employed a Lacanian discourse to frame
     his discussion of the colonialist novel, however, JanMohamed
     writes that some "symbolic" novels are "conceived in the
     'symbolic' realm of intersubjectivity, heterogeneity, and
     particularity but are seduced by the specularity of 'imaginary'
     Otherness" (19-20). This sudden collapsing of the distinction
     between the registers in the error "'imaginary' Otherness" is
     jarring to any reader familiar with Lacan. Abdul R. JanMohamed
     has broken the law!

 23. Since JanMohamed's essay provides exemplary instances both of
     discursive creativity and of discursive failure as they impact
     the relation between the writer and his reader, I want to review
     the sequence above in two ways. First, I will look at the
     interpersonal symbolic law of discourse that, once invoked,
     binds writer to reader in an intrasubjective and impersonal
     pact. The writer's thesis invokes Lacan's discourse of the
     registers and asks the reader to be bound by the pact that this
     discourse constitutes. This is a symbolic pact par excellence
     since neither the writer nor the reader originate the discourse
     but both agree to be bound by its rules in order to allow the
     possibility of a meaningful exchange, in order to agree on the
     terms by which they will produce meanings together. Since the
     writer has selected a Lacanian discourse, 'imaginary' and
     'symbolic' cease to be overdetermined signifiers in the
     linguistic unconscious. 'Imaginary' and 'symbolic' now invoke a
     set of relations defined by Lacan's discourse, a discourse in
     which these terms signify in quite specific ways. Because and
     only because he has involved his reader in this pact of the
     registers, JanMohamed is free to explore the implications of the
     encounter between Lacanian theory and the colonialist novel. As
     the writer elaborates the particulars of the work of the
     imaginary in the colonialist novel, the reader can appreciate
     JanMohamed's insight because the reader sees the colonialist
     novel in fresh and interesting ways and because the fruitful
     encounter between the Lacanian imaginary and colonialist fiction
     reveals new and unforeseen implications of the imaginary
     register itself. Creativity thus requires the law; creativity is
     paradoxically both bound to the law and unbound by it.

 24. The moment JanMohamed writes "'imaginary' Otherness," he breaks
     the law of Lacanian discourse and cancels his pact with the
     reader. Until the violation occurs, the reader is bound by the
     pact called "Lacanian discourse"; "imaginary," "symbolic," and
     "Otherness" hold out the possibility of meaning-making (though
     they do not guarantee it). At the breaking of the pact, the
     terms cease to be terms within a discourse; released from the
     pact they are signifiers only. Lacking their discursive support,
     "imaginary" and "Otherness" thus signify randomly. Because he
     has broken his Lacanian pact with the reader, the reader has no
     possible way to grasp what JanMohamed might be trying to signify
     by "'imaginary' Otherness." No context can stabilize what
     fractured discursive syntax has set free. Since signification
     outside the pact is idiosyncratic, the effect of the broken pact
     is to change "imaginary" and "Otherness" into random markers
     that preclude creativity in both the writing and the reading.
     The markers come and go--in and out of the linguistic
     unconscious--for reasons that may or may not be related to the
     colonialist novel, the stated project at hand. Once the pact has
     been broken by the writer, the reader can always declare the
     discursive failure an accident and continue as if the pact were
     still in place--but the reader is now on alert and any
     additional error will render the text indecipherable in terms of
     its stated project.[6]

 25. Besides the rupture of interpersonal give and take between
     writer and reader, the collapse of this fruitful contact between
     the discourse of the colonial novel and Lacan's discourse of the
     registers in JanMohamed's essay signifies intrapsychically as
     the deformation of one discourse by another. If repeated,
     "'imaginary' Otherness" becomes a symptom rather than an error,
     and the essay manifests a subjective encounter with Otherness
     far beyond its post-colonial critique. Consequently, the
     discursive symptom provides a profitable alternative to the
     sterile fusion of Lacanian theory with the discourse of
     post-colonialism. Because Lacan's distinction between the
     registers implies a decentering of Otherness that JanMohamed
     cannot maintain while simultaneously committed to a
     post-colonial construction of Self and Other, the reader is
     moved to ask why there is a symptom in the discourse at this
     point. It seems that the entified Other appears here as the
     symptom of a post-colonial commitment that runs deeper than the
     Lacanian discourse to which the writer is ostensibly committed.
     Since the Other of humanism cannot signify save by suturing the
     gap between the imaginary other and the symbolic Other, this is
     precisely what JanMohamed does. The repressed post-colonial
     humanism returns in the symptomatic fusion of "'imaginary'
     Otherness."

 26. The discursive symptom manifest in Abdul R. JanMohamed's essay
     signifies psychoanalytically because he intends to use the
     Lacanian registers to frame his exploration of the colonial
     novel. A very different discursive symptom arises in Judith
     Butler's influential critique of Lacanian analysis, Bodies that
     Matter, a critique in which she doubts that the registers
     signify at all. Here, a fusion of Lacanian registers pervades
     Butler's discussion of "The Lesbian Phallus and the
     Morphological Imaginary." While both Butler and JanMohamed
     effect symptomatic erasures of the Lacanian other, the
     symptomatic erasure in Butler manifests distinctively--as an
     inability to accurately quote Lacan's own text in spite of her
     extraordinary scholarly rigor.[7] The misquotations enter her
     discussion from the moment Butler denies the distinction between
     the registers, but the symptom is prefigured by her insertion of
     Lacan's structural theory of the registers into his essay on the
     mirror stage.

 27. Butler's chapter conflates psychoanalytic models that are
     theoretically and historically distinct--both Freudian models
     and Lacanian ones, and this conflation lays the theoretical
     groundwork from which the symptomatic misquotations arise. Thus,
     Butler reads "On Narcissism" against The Ego and the Id, though
     the former belongs to a mid-Freudian model that differs
     significantly from the last "entified" model of a psyche
     composed of Id-Ego-Superego. Similarly, Butler uses Lacan's
     mirror stage essay to argue for the imaginary nature of the
     phallus in "The Signification of the Phallus"--even though the
     former essay provides a coda to Lacan's early phenomenal and
     developmental model of the psyche while the latter condenses a
     portion of the seminar on desire, a seminar reflecting Lacan's
     structural theorizing at its strongest. As we have earlier seen,
     though mirror stage theory and register theory do share
     signifiers, their variant theoretical models constellate variant
     signifieds; if the terms remain the same, their meanings have
     structurally altered. However, the alteration fails to make its
     way into Butler's critical assimilation of the latter model to
     its predecessor.

 28. Butler's most overtly symptomatic collapsing of the Lacanian
     registers reveals itself in her persistent error in directly
     quoting the text of Lacan's early seminars. Like JanMohamed,
     Butler substitutes the symbolic Other for the mirroring other.
     It is as if, having merged mirror stage theory with register
     theory, Butler is literally unable to see a significatory
     difference between the two. As a result, Butler continually
     fails to distinguish the imaginary other from the symbolic
     Other, a collapse of terminological distinction equivalent to
     suggesting there is no difference between the Subject and the
     ego. Since the distinction within alterity is so central to
     Lacanian theory generally and to his model of the Subject of the
     unconscious specifically, other and Other are definitional.
     Moreover, the other and the Other draw a precise and consistent
     distinction between the mirroring imaginary and the symbolic
     treasury of signifiers. By continually effacing the imaginary
     other with the symbolic Other, Butler indeed does what she
     explicitly states as her essay's goal: she "rewrit[es] the
     morphological imaginary" (72) though the rewriting is far more
     literal than her subheading implies.

 29. Where Lacan speaks of the body finding its unity "in the image
     of the other" with a small o (Sem II 54), Butler rewrites "in
     the image of the Other" with a capital (75), and where Lacan
     writes "the imaginary structuration of the ego forms around the
     specular image of the body itself, of the image of the other,"
     small o, imaginary other (Sem II 94), Butler again revises to
     "the image of the Other" with a capital O (76), collapsing
     Lacan's straightforward structural distinction and begging the
     issue of structural difference. Butler perpetuates the error in
     her own discussion, commenting that "the specular image of the
     body itself is in some sense the image of the Other" (76) and
     that the "extrapolating function" of narcissism is the
     "principle by which any other object or Other is known" (77).
     There is no small irony in Butler's symptomatic misquotation of
     Lacan given her rigorous inclusion of parallel phrases from both
     French and English texts, and carefully documented citations
     from both the French and English seminars.[8] But as Lacan
     points out, the unconscious is always visible, right there,
     literally spelled out in the symptom in the text--and Butler's
     text proves no exception to this Lacanian rule.

 30. The symptomatic disappearance of the imaginary other in Butler's
     thoroughgoing critique of the mirror stage essay parallels the
     conflation of the registers in JanMohamed's essay. In
     JanMohamed's criticism, the symptom arises at the moment of
     discursive incompatibility between the post-colonial paradigm of
     Self and Other and the Lacanian distinction between an other and
     the Other as the unconscious locus of language. Is there a
     similar discursive rupture in Butler's argument? Looking more
     closely at Butler's actual text may be helpful here. The
     substitutions begin in citations in which Lacan specifically
     mentions the body in connection with the registers--so Butler's
     central concern in Bodies that Matter and her theory of
     performativity are both at stake when the misquotations begin.
     Her page-long explication of Lacan's mirror stage theory in
     which five symptomatic substitutions of the symbolic Other for
     the imaginary other occur also addresses the body, specifically
     the "organs [that] are caught up in the narcissistic relation"
     (76-77). The following page of text, on which the symptomatic
     substitution occurs three more times, argues that the previously
     generic "organs" may be "the male genitals" (77), and if so,
     Lacan's mirror stage theory grounds itself on a specifically
     masculine narcissism. Butler concludes that the narcissistically
     engaged masculine organs now condition and structure every
     object and Other, and as a result, the "extrapolating function"
     of narcissism raised to an epistemological principle becomes
     phallogocentric. In short, a phallic imaginary is masculine and
     any explanatory function such an imaginary might serve is
     inherently phallogocentric. Therefore, it is from Lacan's
     phallogocentrism that Butler's lesbian phallus liberates us,
     providing a subversive substitute for the hetero/sexist Phallic
     Signifier that she herself has taken great pains to introduce
     into the Lacanian imaginary register.

 31. Here, more explicitly, is the problem. Lacan theorizes that
     there is a privileged signifier in the symbolic register and
     that this privileged symbolic signifier is the phallus. Butler
     wants to argue against the real of the body, wants to argue that
     the body is "a process whereby regulatory norms materialize
     'sex' and achieve this materialization through a forcible
     reiteration of those norms" (2). Thus, Butler's theory of
     materialization stops short of the radical constructionist claim
     that the body is only a symbolic construct. She finds an
     appealing alternative to constructionism in Lacan's early theory
     where the imagined, alienated body appears in the mirror. This
     Lacanian mirroring replication supports Butler's theory of
     materialization. But Lacan did not stop with his mirror stage
     theory, and though he once situated the body helpfully in the
     imaginary, he later positioned the phallus in the symbolic
     register--where Butler very much needs it not to be if her
     argument for a projective materialization of a phantasmatic
     phallus is to succeed. Consequently, a collapsing of Lacanian
     paradigms and issues ensues.

 32. After arguing for the imaginary nature of the penis, Butler goes
     on to suggest that Lacan has simply renamed the penis the
     phallus (80); further, that the penis is the "privileged
     referent" to be symbolized by the phallus (84); and finally,
     that the relationship between penis and phallus (and by
     implication between imaginary and symbolic) is the relationship
     of signified to signifier (90). But issues of significatory
     slippage are not issues of reference, nor are they issues of
     meaning, and this series of conflations simply reiterates the
     earlier fusion of psychoanalytic models, creating a theoretical
     pastiche against which Butler then argues with great
     sophistication and subtlety.[9] Given the persistent insertion
     of the symbolic into the imaginary, and the assimilation of the
     symbolic construct phallus to the image of the penis, it is not
     surprising to hear Butler conclude that "if the phallus is an
     imaginary effect, a wishful transfiguration, then it is not
     merely the symbolic status of the phallus that is called into
     question, but the very distinction between the symbolic and the
     imaginary" (79). But just whose wishful transfiguration does
     Butler's text demonstrate, we may want to ask, since the
     symptom, Freud tells us, marks the location of the wish and it
     has clearly been Butler's wish to do away with the distinction
     between the registers all along. Since Butler's critique merges
     Lacan's phallic discourse of desire with his theory of the
     registers, I next distinguish betweeen these two in "The
     significantion of the phallus," Lacan's most controversial
     essay. Returning the phallic signifier to the symbolic register,
     in turn, shows how the signifying phallus generates a
     post-humanist Otherness.

     "Man's [sic] desire is the desire of the Other"

 33. Lacan's hypothesis of the phallic signifier offers a
     many-layered theory of unconscious Otherness at odds with any
     conscious marking of any human being as an "Other." While the
     Lacanian unconscious locates power in Otherness, the phallic
     signifier, by contrast, locates power in subjectivity. Unlike
     the unity of the imaginary imago, which provides a simple
     referential image of an other, the symbolic phallic signifier
     constrains Otherness by buttoning a signifier, an
     identification, and a discourse together into one neat package.
     In the wildly overdetermined signifying multiplicity of the
     symbolic register, the phallus provides a determined and
     determining force. It is precisely the phallic propensity for
     self-replication that inseminates the reproduction--the
     reiteration as Butler calls it--of the Subject. What is at issue
     in Lacan's polemic "The Signification of the Phallus" is the
     predominant role of this phallic signifier as the Aufhebung of
     signifying difference per se. Since this is a far more complex
     idea than either the decentering of the Subject or the gap
     within alterity, we will proceed slowly. Lacan insists that
     seven years of seminars have brought him to the conclusion that
     he must "promulgate as necessary to any articulation of analytic
     phenomena the notion of the signifier, as opposed to that of the
     signified" (284); he must insist on the priority of the marker
     over its meanings. Freud's discovery, which predates Saussure's
     retroactive linguistic explication of it, "gives to the
     signifier/signified opposition the full extent of its
     implications: namely that the signifier has an active function
     in determining certain effects in which the signifiable appears
     as submitting to its mark" (284). Thus, the active, agentic
     function of language resides in mark-making, and signifying is
     an active rather than a reflective process.

 34. That a subject is the product of a linguistic unconscious should
     not be taken as evidence of this subject's "cultural"
     construction (284), nor should a subject be seen as the product
     of an "ideological psycho-genesis" (285). Lacan sees Horney's
     feminist social-psychological analysis as the latter and
     dismisses all such "question-begging appeal to the concrete"
     (285). Appeal to the concrete is beside the Freudian point. The
     only laws that interest Lacan are the laws that govern the other
     scene of the unconscious, the laws of combination and
     substitution--of metaphor and metonymy--by which signifiers
     generate the "determining effects for the institution of the
     subject" (285). Lacan goes on to define the Other as that by
     which he "designate[es]... the very locus evoked by the recourse
     to speech in any relation in which the Other intervenes" (285).
     The logic of the signifier is thus anterior to the production of
     meaning, the "awakening of the signified" (285)--suggesting that
     meaning is discovered rather than made wherever the unconscious
     is in play.

 35. Lacan next invokes his theory of the registers to reiterate his
     argument for the symbolic character of the phallus as a
     privileged signifier. The phallus of Freudian doctrine cannot be
     assigned to the imaginary register because it "is not a
     phantasy" (285). Nor is it constrained by the biological real of
     "the organ, penis or clitoris, that it symbolizes" (285). "For
     the phallus is a signifier," Lacan concludes, having made his
     case for the location of the signifying phallus in the symbolic
     register. But it is a signifier with a difference from other
     signifiers. The phallus is a signifier that can "designate as a
     whole the effects of the signified" (285). We can tell that a
     phallic signifier is present by its effects. And what are these
     effects? The linguistic fate of the speaking being is to be
     unable to articulate need save as a demand that empowers the
     Other as a repository of love. The residue of inarticulable need
     returns from this Otherness as desire.

 36. Need/demand/desire. Lacan reiterates the relationship between
     the three: "desire is neither the appetite for satisfaction, nor
     the demand for love, but the difference that results from the
     subtraction of the first from the second" (287). Thus, while
     real needs can be satisfied, imaginary demands may
     persist--opening a gap generative of desire. This intrapsychic
     formula for desire leads Lacan to think relationally, and so he
     goes on to rework the role of the Other in terms of the sexual
     relation. Now, the sexual relation is rendered enigmatic because
     it is "doubly 'signifying'" and ambiguous because of "the Other
     in question." The ambiguity arises here from the fact that the
     Other has a place in both the discourse of the registers and the
     discourse of desire. Here, moreover, the intrapsychic and the
     interpersonal seem utterly and ambiguously mixed. Thus, "for
     both partners in the relation, both the subject and the Other,
     it is not enough to be subjects of need, or objects of love,
     but... they must stand for the cause of desire" (287).
     Subject/object/Other meet Subject/object/Other Lacan seems to be
     saying--weaving a double discourse of the intrapsychic with the
     interactive.

 37. Since the sexual relation seems to involve the signifying
     phallus irretrievably in the interpersonal beyond of
     signification, I want to review the intrapsychic dynamics of
     this crucial Lacanian concept. First, Lacan has repeatedly told
     us that the signifier is binary--and he has exemplified this
     binary signifier in paired relations such as day/night, and red
     cards/black cards. The sexed (reproductive) relation is binary
     as well, feminine/masculine. Next, however, Lacan tells us that
     the phallus is a "privileged signifier," a signifier of the
     sexual relation that we are to take in the "literal
     (typographical) sense of the term" (287). And how is this
     literal phallic pictogram of "the sexual relation" written? F
     Thus, Lacan concludes, the phallus is "equivalent... to the
     (logical) copula" (287). In the larger context of Lacan's
     discussion of the binary symbolic signifier, the phallus is the
     foundation signifying as such. The phallic signifier, the
     foundational difference in and of itself, is rendered latent by
     the emergence of the signifying binary terms. "The phallus is
     the signifier of this Aufhebung itself, which it inaugurates
     (initiates) by its disappearance" (288); thus "reproduction"
     disappears leaving behind the signifying difference
     "female"/"male" or "race" disappears from the foundational
     distinction "black"/"white." Where has the phallus gone now that
     the paired terms appear? It is retained as the bar separating
     the terms, a signifier rendered inarticulable by the terms it
     leaves behind, yet simultaneously a signifier imperative to
     their signifying difference.

 38. To those who feel this reading of "The Signification of the
     Phallus" constitutes a recuperation of an irreparably
     phallogocentric discourse, I can only say that Lacan's logic of
     the phallus captures the foundation in foundational thinking
     vividly. As a result, this phallogicentrism provides an
     extraordinarily valuable analytic tool. For me, the
     phallogicentrism of the essay is a discourse separable from the
     essay's 1950s-style cultural discourse on the role of the man
     and the role of the woman in the comedy of intercourse. When
     Lacan begins to read the cultural "relation between the sexes"
     (289) in the essay's concluding polemic against Melanie Klein,
     he lapses into a heteronormative construction of sexed Love that
     ends with an apparent affirmation of Freud's intuition that
     there is "only one libido" and it is masculine. On first
     reading, years ago now, this section of the essay struck me as
     irrecuperably sexist and heterosexist--though it is imperative
     here to point out that the Freudian libido has nothing (no
     thing?) in common with the Lacanian imaginary. I can only note
     with some amusement that I found penciled in my margin of this
     concluding section "time for a lesbian deconstruction." On this
     account, Judith Butler has read my desire. Now, since Butler has
     returned, I want to bring back theories of identity for one last
     encounter with Lacanian Otherness.

     "The unconscious is the discourse [emphasis mine] of the Other"

 39. The widespread insistence that Lacan's brief écrit on the
     phallus is about dominance (and only dominance) rather than
     difference exemplifies the kind of foundationalism Lacan
     indicates by the phrase "having the phallus." Moreover, folding
     this foundation back into an imaginary identification--presuming
     that one is oneself the "Other" of a Self/Other binary--is an
     instance of "being the phallus." Gayatri Spivak notes just such
     a phallic politics of identification in "the fierce turf battles
     in radical cultural studies in multiracial cultures as well as
     on the geo-graphed globe, where the only possible politics seems
     sometimes to be the politics of identity in the name of being
     the Other" (159). Preferring the symbolic to the imaginary (as
     Lacan himself does), Spivak applauds those who stand up for the
     rights of groups with whom they are not primarily identified.
     Playing the F card (whether the phallic investment is in sex,
     race, class, or nation) may well be the solution to putting
     one's own identity concerns on the table--both for Lacan and for
     his critics--but in terms of the registers, this solution
     refuses the encounter with the unconscious as the discourse of
     the Other. Instead, the primarily identified analyst understands
     rather than listens; knows in advance rather than finds out.
     Consequently, phallic foundationalism is a tactic with which
     Lacan does not agree, though it is a tactic to which he is not
     himself perpetually immune, especially when he is caught up in
     polemics over the practice of psychoanalysis.

 40. In matters of politics more generally, Lacan remains skeptical,
     feeling that those who oppose oppression today will, once
     empowered, commit the very oppression they accuse. He compares
     the idealistic reformer to Hegel's belle âme. The beautiful soul
     lives "(in every sense, even the economic sense of making a
     living) precisely on the disorder that it denounces" (Écrits
     126), enabling us to "understand how the constitution of the
     object is subordinated to the realization of the subject" (80).
     More briefly and cynically put, the entified "Other" may be no
     more than a pretext for the subject's speech, or tenure. By
     contrast, analysis shows the way in which "identity is realized
     as disjunctive of the subject" (80). It is precisely because the
     subject is not the same as the ego identity that interpersonal
     misapprehension can trigger the anxiety of intrapsychic
     Otherness. Since the gesture of disowning Otherness is so very
     protective of identity, it seems counterintuitive to own
     alienation when it appears. At the moment of alienation the
     subject has not merely reached its boundaries, it has exceeded
     them. Grasping onto fixed identity as an anchor with which to
     master the impending decentering is only logical--yet mastery is
     ineffectual, and "analysts have to deal with slaves who think
     they are masters, and who find in a language whose mission is
     universal the support of their servitude, and the bonds of its
     ambiguity" (Écrits 81).

 41. Since Lacanian analysis supports neither the discourse of
     categorical identity nor the rhetoric of blame that so
     frequently accompanies it, it might appear that Lacan has little
     to offer political analysis, especially where issues of identity
     are foremost. However, I believe that neither the otherness of
     hostile objectification nor the Otherness productive of
     alienation alone offers the resource for political critique that
     examining the disjunction between the two affords. Carlos
     Mencia's joke points to the alternative, to the location of
     politicized difference in another scene that addresses the
     phallic investment itself rather than the terms by which that
     investment is veiled. Analysis can indeed locate the political
     in another scene that is both a decentering of the subject and
     an exposé of the epistemology of a fixed or fixable Otherness.
     If ego identity is the certainty from which the subject is
     decentered, then "the art of the analyst must be to suspend the
     subject's certainties until their last mirages have been
     consumed" (Écrits 43). If "psychoanalysis... reveals both the
     one and the other [the individual and the collective] to be no
     more than mirages" (80), then analysis seems at odds with the
     Platonic emphasis on a Self/Other binary though not with
     identity politics as a whole. Where identity is at issue, Lacan
     insists that "it is not a question of knowing whether I speak of
     myself in a way that conforms to what I am, but rather of
     knowing whether I am the same as that of which I speak" (165).
     Regarding alterity, Lacan's register theory would have us
     withhold our demands and acknowledge our desires as our own so
     that we can better listen for the discourse of the Other--if the
     Other's Truth is what we genuinely desire to hear. And what is
     Truth? "Truth is nothing other than that which knowledge can
     apprehend as knowledge only by setting ignorance to work a real
     crisis in which the imaginary is resolved, thus engendering a
     new symbolic form" (296).

 42. Since the engendering of a new symbolic form was very much at
     issue in the Macy Conferences on Cybernetics, I draw one final
     example of the political use of decentered Otherness from N.
     Katherine Hayles's critique of the Conference proceedings in her
     recent book How We Became Posthuman (50-83). The Other's Truth
     emerges through Hayles's analysis, even though her argument for
     the dangerous supplementarity of embodiment to information
     theory is, at least in part, a rejection of Lacan. The role of
     Otherness here is all the more compelling because the discussion
     illustrative of alterity is not an application of Lacanian terms
     to cultural texts. Rather, Hayles's reading of the substitution
     of one signifier for another recovers a woman held under erasure
     by the same mark-effacing mechanism at work in Mencia's comic
     replications of ethnicity.

 43. The woman in question appears in a photograph taken at the 1952
     Macy Conference, the meeting at which psychoanalyst Lawrence
     Kubie made his last ditch attempt to insert subjectivity into
     the debates defining information as universally portable,
     disembodied data. Unlike Kubie, Gregory Bateson, Margaret Mead,
     and the other intellectual luminaries, the woman sits with her
     back to the photographer. The position of her hands and body
     suggest that she is typing. Though the picture's notation
     identifies her as Janet Freud, Katherine Hayles points out that
     she is in all probability Janet Freed, who appears throughout
     the Macy transcripts as "assistant to the conference program"
     (81). In the substitution of a famous man for an anonymous woman
     Hayles has all she needs to propound a feminist reading of the
     photograph as evidence of woman as "Other," marshalling the
     remaining conference materials in support of this gendered
     difference. But such a reading would betray a phallic investment
     in gender, and Hayles does not yield to the temptation to play
     phallic politics with Freud. Instead, she turns her attention to
     another error: a handwritten note dating the photo of the 1952
     Conference as "1953."

 44. By holding the 1952 meeting under erasure, attendees distanced
     themselves from the hostilities erupting in its wake. At that
     conference, the dueling paradigms of homeostasis and reflexivity
     met head to head over the issue of scientific objectivity. The
     dominant group of intellectuals, including the neurophysiologist
     Warren McCulloch (credited as one of the fathers of the neural
     net), propounded an idea of information founded on assumptions
     of a detached observer safely distanced from the observed.
     Arguing against McCulloch was the hard-line Freudian analyst
     Lawrence Kubie, who insisted on the implication of the observer
     in the observation. The stand-off between the two paradigms and
     their champions exceeded the conference. A subsequent exchange
     of demands testified to the otherness of theory as a mirror of
     the ego identity of the theorist: McCulloch offered a fiery
     denunciation of psychoanalysis; in response, Kubie set fellow
     psychoanalysts the task of secretly observing McCulloch out of
     "concern" for the scientist's emotional health. Though the
     vehemence of this exchange suggests an irreconcilable face off,
     both sides of the debate revolved around a single axis of
     argument informed by a series of signifying oppositions:
     objective/subjective, dispassionate/affective,
     empirical/reflexive, rational consciousness/ unconscious
     motivation--the thick epistemology of the 1950s.

 45. These are the oppositions across whose boundary conference
     organizer Frank Fremont-Smith could not effect rapproachment,
     perhaps because Kubie had angered the other participants by
     seeing their positions as "resistance" to his own (Hayles
     70-73). The aggressive emotional charge attached to
     psychoanalysis could account for the phonemic association that
     replaced the name of Fremont-Smith's assistant Janet /Fr/eed by
     that of the trouble-making /Fr/eud. The double displacements of
     name and of conference date bequeath their textual challenge to
     Katherine Hayles in her search for the Truth of the Other of
     information articulated by Janet Freed's return from the
     repressed. Here is Hayles's analysis:

          "Take a letter, Miss Freed," he says... A woman comes in,
          marks are inscribed onto paper, letters appear, conferences
          are arranged, books are published. Taken out of context,
          his words fly, by themselves, into books. The full burden
          of the labor that makes these things happen is for him only
          an abstraction, a resource diverted from other possible
          uses, because he is not the one performing the labor...
          Miss Freed has no such illusions. Embedded in context, she
          knows that words never make things happen by themselves...
          On a level beyond words, beyond theories and equations, in
          her body and her arms and her fingers and her aching back,
          Janet Freed knows that information is never disembodied...
          (82-83)

     Having refused the easy politics of labeling Freed the Other,
     Hayles discovers in Janet Freed the Truth of embodiment, at the
     same time evoking a powerful feminist statement from the paradox
     of Freed's visible invisibility. In the rich multivocality of
     Otherness, Hayles hears Janet Freed speak for a class of labor
     as well as for her gender: Freed's erasure by the proponents of
     abstracted information suggests that free-floating information
     feels intuitively true only to men of a certain class who are
     "in a position to command the labors of others" (82). Finally,
     in allowing Janet Freed's Truth to call into question the very
     desire for decontextualized information itself, Hayles uncovers
     a paradigmatic politics informing the 1952 Macy Conference on
     Cybernetics.

 46. In all, N. Katherine Hayles's analysis demonstrates the
     multi-discursivity of the Other's Truth; when asked to speak,
     the Other has a lot to say. As a result, Hayles practices a
     Lacanian politics of close listening. What she hears in the
     Truth of the decentered Other is the encounter between the
     discourse of desire and the discourse of the registers; thus,
     Janet Freed appears in disappearing beneath the waves of
     conferees' affect, beneath the sediment of their theoretical
     language. Because Janet Freed speaks, because Hayles listens, we
     find in their analytic encounter one final Lacanian Other. Janet
     Freed returns as the authentic subject of interpersonal
     exchange, the Other of whom the analyst must be perpetually
     innocent. Lacan speaks of this "authentic Other" as another
     subject to be appreciated for its alterity, its capacity to
     surprise. This authentic Other is available to any subject who
     is willing, like the Lacanian analyst, to annul the resistance
     of her intrapsychic other and to accept the anxiety aroused
     within her intrapsychic Otherness. Then the vital encounter
     between two authentic subjects can aim "at the passage of true
     speech, joining the subject to an other subject, on the other
     side of the wall of language. That is the final relation of the
     subject to a genuine Other, to the Other who gives the answer
     one doesn't expect, which defines the terminal point in
     analysis" (Sem II 246).

 47. And the terminal point in this discussion...

                                 Department of English and Philosophy
                                               Idaho State University
                                                    vantamis@isu.edu

     ----------------------------------------------------------------

     COPYRIGHT (c) 2000 BY TAMISE VAN PELT, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. THIS
     TEXT MAY BE USED AND SHARED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FAIR-USE
     PROVISIONS OF U.S. COPYRIGHT LAW. ANY USE OF THIS TEXT ON OTHER
     TERMS, IN ANY MEDIUM, REQUIRES THE CONSENT OF THE AUTHOR AND THE
     PUBLISHER, THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS.

     THIS ARTICLE AND OTHER CONTENTS OF THIS ISSUE ARE AVAILABLE FREE
     OF CHARGE UNTIL RELEASE OF THE NEXT ISSUE. A TEXT-ONLY ARCHIVE
     OF THE JOURNAL IS ALSO AVAILABLE FREE OF CHARGE. FOR FULL
     HYPERTEXT ACCESS TO BACK ISSUES, SEARCH UTILITIES, AND OTHER
     VALUABLE FEATURES, YOU OR YOUR INSTITUTION MAY SUBSCRIBE TO
     PROJECT MUSE, THE ON-LINE JOURNALS PROJECT OF THE JOHNS HOPKINS
     UNIVERSITY PRESS.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------

                                  Notes

     1. For a discussion of otherness in Plato's Sophist see
     "Non-Being" in Stanley Rosen's Plato's Sophist: The Drama of
     Original and Image, 269-290.

     2. See de Beauvoir's note on Levinas in the introduction to The
     Second Sex (New York: Vintage, 1989) xxii. The note is
     interesting because de Beauvoir contains Levinas's discussion of
     radical alterity as absolute contrariety by insisting it is
     written from a masculine point of view that disregards "the
     reciprocity of subject and object." However, for Levinas, as for
     Lacan, subject and object are decidedly non-reciprocal--the
     point Lacan expresses by distinguishing the imaginary register
     of the image from the symbolic register of the radical Other.
     Levinas reconsiders the idea of alterity in Outside the Subject
     (Stanford: Stanford UP, 1994), trans. Michael B. Smith. See,
     particularly, the concluding essay by that name.

     3. Fanon himself does not hypothesize the term Other in Black
     Skin, White Masks, but rather draws upon and critiques a number
     of analysts and philosophers who do including Jean Veneuse,
     Sartre, and Lacan.

     4. See also Homi K. Bhabha's detailed study of post-colonialism
     and alterity in "The other question: Stereotype, discrimination
     and the discourse of colonialism," chapter three in his
     collection The Location of Culture.

     5. An entertaining account of Lacan's early interests and of his
     overwhelming reliance on case studies involving women can be
     found in Catherine Clément's "The Ladies' Way" in The Lives and
     Legends of Jacques Lacan, 53-101.

     6. It might seem that a reader innocent of Lacanian discourse
     might be a "better" reader of JanMohamed's essay, since the
     naïve reader would not discern the discursive impossibility of
     the "'imaginary' Otherness." But in discourse as elsewhere,
     ignorance of the law is no excuse. Since the naïve reader has no
     discursive pact with the writer, what passes for reading is an
     extra-symbolic exercise in idiosyncrasy. Lacking the pact,
     "reading" would be a species of parasitic narcissism held
     together--if it is held together at all--by the reader's
     imaginary identification with the writer, a mirroring instance
     of "reading" as "writing."

     7. Butler is an astute critic of psychoanalysis and has,
     throughout her career, raised significant issues about
     psychoanalytic theory. Her article "Gender Trouble, Feminist
     Theory, and Psychoanalytic Discourse" offers Butler's
     characteristically precise analysis of psychoanalysis' and
     feminist theory's implications for each other. See
     Feminism/Postmodernism 324-40.

     8. The irony of Butler's reading and its notable omission of the
     imaginary other is emphasized by her apt focus on Lacan's most
     emphatically structural of the early seminars, The Seminar of
     Jacques Lacan, Book II, The Ego in Freud's Theory and in the
     Technique of Psychoanalysis.

     9. Reducing Lacanian theory to a unified field as Judith Butler
     does supports binary notions of subject and symbolic Other,
     turning Lacan's intrapsychic model into an interpersonal model
     and rewriting Lacan in the terms of theories of identity more
     discursively assimilable to a paradigm of performativity. This
     interpersonal model is clearly politicizable and compatible with
     the kinds of Foucauldian and deconstructive political impulses
     that characterize Butler's own theory of "performance as
     citation and gender as iteration" (Whitford, cover).
     Politically, then, Butler needs to situate the point of infinite
     substitution within a dualistic imaginary to accomplish her own
     theoretical goals. Thus, the imaginary, in Butler's analysis, is
     regarded as a field that functions in a structurally
     unproblematic way.

                               Works Cited

     Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin, eds. The
     Post-Colonial Studies Reader. London: Routledge, 1995.

     Bhabha, Homi K. "The other question: Stereotype, discrimination
     and the discourse of colonialism." The Location of Culture.
     London: Routledge, 1994.

     ---. "Cultural Diversity and Cultural Differences." The
     Post-Colonial Studies Reader. Ed. Bill Ashcroft, Gareth
     Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin. London: Routledge, 1995. 206-209.

     Brenkman, John. "The Other and the One: Psychoanalysis, Reading,
     The Symposium." Literature and Psychoanalysis: The Question of
     Reading: Otherwise. Ed. Shoshana Felman. Baltimore: Johns
     Hopkins UP, 1982. 396-456.

     Butler, Judith. Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of
     "Sex." New York: Routledge, 1993.

     ---. Subjects of Desire: Hegelian Reflections in
     Twentieth-Century France. New York: Columbia UP, 1987.

     ---. "Gender Trouble, Feminist Theory, and Psychoanalytic
     Discourse." Feminism/Postmodernism. Ed. Linda J. Nicholson. New
     York: Routledge, 1990. 324-340.

     Chater, Melville. "Under the South African Union." The National
     Geographic Magazine 59.4 (April 1931): 391-512.

     Chen, Xiaomei. "Occidentalism as Counterdiscourse." In
     Identities. Ed. Kwame Anthony Appiah and Henry Louis Gates, Jr.
     Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1995. 63-89.

     Clément, Catherine. The Lives and Legends of Jacques Lacan.
     Trans. Arthur Goldhammer. New York: Columbia UP, 1983.

     de Beauvoir, Simone. The Second Sex. New York: Vintage, 1989.

     Fanon, Franz. Black Skin, White Masks. New York: Grove, 1967.

     Feldstein, Richard, Bruce Fink, and Maire Jaanus, eds. Reading
     Seminars I and II: Lacan's Return to Freud. Albany: SUNY Press,
     1996.

     Fink, Bruce. "The Subject and the Other's Desire." In Reading
     Seminars I and II. Ed. Feldstein, Fink, and Jaanus. Albany: SUNY
     Press, 1996. 76-97.

     Freud, Sigmund. The Standard Edition of the Complete
     Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. Trans. and ed. James
     Strachey. London: Hogarth Press and the Institute of
     Psycho-Analysis; New York: Norton, 1953-73.

     ---. "On Narcissism: An Introduction." SE XIV. 73-102.

     Goldie, Terry. "The Representation of the Indigene." The
     Post-Colonial Studies Reader. Ed. Bill Ashcroft, Gareth
     Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin. London: Routledge, 1995. 232-236.

     Greimas, A.J. On Meaning: Selected Writings in Semiotic Theory.
     Trans. Paul J. Perron and Frank H.Collins. Minneapolis: U of
     Minnesota P, 1987.

     Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in
     Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics. Chicago: U of Chicago
     P, 1999.

     Jameson, Fredric. "Imaginary and Symbolic in Lacan: Marxism,
     Psychoanalytic Criticism, and the Problem of the Subject." In
     Literature and Psychoanalysis: the Question of Reading:
     Otherwise. Ed. Shoshana Felman. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP,
     1982. 338-396.

     ---. Foreword. On Meaning: Selected Writings in Semiotic Theory
     by A. J. Greimas. xvi.

     JanMohamed, Abdul R. "The Economy of Manichean Allegory." The
     Post-Colonial Studies Reader. Ed. Bill Ashcroft, Gareth
     Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin. London: Routledge, 1995. 18-23.

     Lacan, Jacques. De la Psychose Paranoïaque dans ses Rapports
     avec la Personnalité. Thèse de Doctorat en Médecine de Paris.
     Paris: Le François, 1932.

     ---. "Discourse of Rome" or, more formally, "The function and
     field of speech and language in psychoanalysis." Écrits, A
     Selection. 30-113.

     ---. Écrits, A Selection. Trans. Alan Sheridan. Ed.
     Jacques-Alain Miller. New York: Norton, 1977.

     ---, with Henri Claude and P. Migault. "Folies simultanées."
     Société médico-psychologique, 21 May 1931. Annales médico
     psychologique 1 (1931): 483-90.

     ---. "Il n'y a pas d'Autre de l'Autre." Ornicar? 26/27 (1983):
     26-36.

     ---. Introduction. Écrits. 44-54.

     ---. "The Mirror Stage as Formative of the Function of the I as
     Revealed in Psychoanalytic Experience." Écrits, A Selection.
     1-7.

     ---. "Motifs du crime paranoïaque: le crime des soeurs Papin."
     Le minotaure 3/4 (1933): 25-28.

     ---. The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book I, Freud's Papers on
     Technique, 1953-1954. Trans. John Forrester. Ed. Jacques-Alain
     Miller. New York: Norton, 1991.

     ---. The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book II, The Ego in Freud's
     Theory and in the Technique of Psychoanalysis. Trans. Sylvana
     Tomaselli. Ed. Jacques-Alain Miller. New York: Norton, 1991.

     ---. The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book III, The Psychoses,
     1955-1956. Trans. Russell Grigg. Ed. Jacques-Alain Miller. New
     York: Norton, 1993.

     ---. "Seminar on 'The Purloined Letter.'" The Purloined Poe:
     Lacan, Derrida, and Psychoanalytic Reading. Eds. John P. Muller
     and William J. Richardson. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1988.
     28-54.

     ---. "Seminar VI: Le désir et son interpretation (1958-59)." Ed.
     Jacques-Alain Miller. Ornicar? 24 (1981): 7-31; 25 (1982):
     13-36; and 26/27 (1983): 7-44.

     ---. Speech and Language in Psychoanalysis. Trans. Anthony
     Wilden. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1989.

     Laplanche, J. and J.-B. Pontalis. The Language of
     Psycho-Analysis. Trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith. New York:
     Norton, 1973.

     Levinas, Emmanuel. Outside the Subject. Trans. Michael B. Smith.
     Stanford: Stanford UP, 1994.

     Mencia, Carlos. The Tonight Show, NBC, August 8, 1997.
     <http://www.nbc.com/tonightshow/tsw/tstswss080897.html>

     Parry, Benita. "Problems in Current Theories of Colonial
     Discourse." The Post-Colonial Studies Reader. Ed. Bill Ashcroft,
     Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin. London: Routledge, 1995.
     36-44.

     Plato. Sophist. Plato: Collected Dialogues. Bollingen Series
     LXXI. Trans. F.M. Cornford. Eds. Edith Hamilton and Huntington
     Cairns. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1961.

     Rosen, Stanley. Plato's Sophist: The Drama of Original and
     Image. New Haven: Yale UP, 1983.

     Sartre, Jean-Paul. Being and Nothingness: An Essay on
     Phenomenological Ontology. Trans. Hazel E. Barnes. New York:
     Philosophical Library, 1956.

     Selden, Raman. A Reader's Guide to Contemporary Literary Theory,
     Third Edition. Lexington, KY: UP of Kentucky, 1993.

     Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. "Acting Bits/Identity Talk."
     Identities. Eds. Kwame Anthony Appiah and Henry Louis Gates, Jr.
     Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1995. 147-180.

     Zizek, Slavoj. Enjoy Your Symptom!: Jacques Lacan in Hollywood
     and Out. New York: Routledge, 1992.

