     ----------------------------------------------------------------
     The Real Happens

     Jason B. Jones
     Emory University
     jbjones@emory.edu

     © 2000 Jason B. Jones.
     All rights reserved.
     ----------------------------------------------------------------

     Review of:
     Alenka Zupancic, Ethics of the Real: Kant, Lacan. New York:
     Verso, 2000.

          The point of Lacan's identification of the Real with the
          impossible is not simply that the Real is some Thing that
          is impossible to happen. On the contrary, the whole point
          of the Lacanian concept of the Real is that the impossible
          happens. This is what is so traumatic, disturbing,
          shattering--or funny--about the Real. The Real happens
          precisely as the impossible. ("Signs")

  1. Though they appear nowhere in her splendid first book, Ethics of
     the Real, these sentences neatly telescope the rigor, clarity,
     and good humor characteristic of Alenka Zupancic's work.[1]
     These traits will not surprise attentive readers of Slavoj
     Zizek's collection, Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About
     Lacan, But Were Afraid to Ask Hitchcock, or the two volumes in
     the SIC series from Duke University Press, Gaze and Voice as
     Love Objects and Cogito and the Unconscious, all of which
     feature significant contributions by Zupancic. Beyond the
     obvious attraction for admirers of the particular Ljubljanian
     conjunction of philosophy, Lacanian psychoanalysis, and pop
     culture, Ethics of the Real merits the serious attention of
     anyone interested in one of the great ethical crises of our
     time: Why is nothing but fundamentalism deemed worth dying for
     any longer?

  2. Ethics of the Real satisfies three quite disparate interests.
     First, it offers a fascinating Lacanian account of causality and
     freedom in the ethical domain. In this sense, it belongs in the
     tradition of works such as Joan Copjec's Read My Desire and
     Charles Shepherdson's Vital Signs. Second, Zupancic advances
     stimulating and novel readings of Laclos's Les liaisons
     dangereuses, Molière's Don Juan, Sophocles's Oedipus the King
     and Oedipus at Colonus, and Claudel's The Hostage. Zupancic's
     reading of The Hostage is insightful in its own right; it should
     have the additional merit of attracting the attention of
     American scholars to Lacan's extensive discussion of Claudel's
     play in Seminar VIII: Le transfert. Finally, Ethics of the Real
     is also useful as a guide to two recent trends in Lacanian
     theory and scholarship: first, the argument that politics and
     ethics can be understood as a mode of traversing the (social)
     fantasy; and second, the increased attention to Alain Badiou's
     philosophical and political thought.[2] In this review, I
     concentrate on Zupancic's interrogation of causation and her
     readings of tragedy.

  3. Zupancic begins by quickly mapping the terrain laid out by Lacan
     in both Seminar VII: The Ethics of Psychoanalysis and "Kant with
     Sade." For Lacan, psychoanalytic praxis must refuse any idea of
     "the good." Analysis cannot center on the analyst's conception
     of the good, because then it would turn into a gratification of
     the analyst's narcissism, measuring progress in the treatment by
     the extent to which the analysand slavishly imitates the
     analyst's ego. Then again, the analysis clearly cannot focus on
     the analysand's idea of the good, either, because the suffering
     that drives the analysand to analysis in the first place
     indicates a disconnect between the analysand's desire or drive
     and his or her idea of "the good"--an idea that is bound up with
     the ego. Finally, the analysis also cannot appeal to cultural
     ideals of "the good" without turning psychoanalysis into a
     strictly normative endeavor. Instead, by the end of the Ethics
     seminar, Lacan proposes that "the only thing one can be guilty
     of is giving ground relative to one's desire [cédé sur son
     désir]" (321; see Dean 33n14 for a discussion of the stakes
     involved in this translation). This formulation has caused
     considerable controversy when applied to Antigone, the figure
     under discussion in the last section of the seminar. Are we to
     take Antigone as an ethical hero? Moreover, shortly after this
     seminar, Lacan begins increasingly to emphasize the drive,
     instead of desire, as the endpoint of analysis. In the later
     view, desire is understood as a defense against the satisfaction
     of drive. How can we reconcile these two arguments in a
     discussion of ethics? Zupancic shows with great clarity that the
     drive should be understood as the farthest point of desire, as
     it were, and not as strictly opposed to it. That is, one can
     only reach the drive by going through desire.

  4. Fine, but where is Kant in all of this? The crucial Kantian
     point, for Zupancic, is that "ethics demands not only that an
     action conform with duty, but also that this conformity be the
     only 'content' or 'motive' of that action" (14). This is the
     only way the subject can free herself of pathological
     contaminants of her will.[3] However, as Zupancic points out,
     this is thoroughly paradoxical: "how can something which is not
     in itself pathological (i.e., which has nothing to do with the
     representation of pleasure or pain, the 'usual' mode of
     subjective causality) nevertheless become the cause or drive of
     a subject's actions?" (15). Or, more simply, "how can something
     which, in the subject's universe, does not qualify as a cause,
     suddenly become a cause?" (15).

  5. What is the difference in outcome of an act done according to
     one's duty and one done exclusively for that duty's sake?
     Nothing. There is a perceptible difference however, at the level
     of form. Zupancic points out that this introduces a pure form: a
     "form which is no longer the form of anything, of some content
     or other, yet it is not so much an empty form as a form
     'outside' content, a form that provides form only for itself"
     (17). The form itself is "pure" insofar as it is exclusively a
     surplus. Zupancic connects Kant's surplus with that famous
     Lacanian surplusage, the objet a. Although pure form and objet a
     would appear to be antagonistic (a form vs. an object), Zupancic
     suggests that such a reading is too hasty. For Kant, the proper
     drive of the will is "defined precisely in terms of pure form as
     an absence of any Triebfeder [drive]" (18). Similarly, for
     Lacan, "desire can be defined precisely as the pure form of
     demand, as that which remains of demand when all the particular
     objects (or 'contents') that may come to satisfy it are removed.
     Hence the objet petit a can be understood as a void that has
     acquired a form" (18). For both Kant and Lacan, there is thus a
     form of deferred action at work (Zupancic calls it a "temporal
     'in-between'" [19]). In Kant, the absence of motive itself must
     acquire motive force. For Lacan, likewise, the objet a marks the
     "that's not it" coextensive with any object one might attain; it
     thus becomes the motive for desire to slide to the next
     potential object.

  6. To understand this temporal ambiguity, Zupancic embarks on a
     closely-argued investigation of causality, freedom, and
     determinism. Kant places humans entirely under the laws of
     causality. It will not do to affirm "psychological" freedom
     against "biological" or "material" determinism, because one
     could always adduce psychological causes for one's actions. Here
     Zupancic takes, as it were, a left turn: Rather than grounding
     her discussion of freedom on "Of the Deduction of the Principles
     of Pure Practical Reason," she focuses on the "Critical
     Elucidation of the Analytic of Pure Practical Reason." In that
     chapter, she finds a theme dear to any
     psychoanalytically-inclined reader's heart: guilt. Guilt, in
     Zupancic's reading of Kant, is the very foundation of freedom.

  7. We must be very clear about this "guilt," however. The essential
     point is the "fact that we can feel guilty even if we know that
     in committing a certain deed we were, as Kant puts it, 'carried
     along by the stream of natural necessity.' We can feel guilty
     even for something which we knew to be 'beyond our control'"
     (26). The point here is not that we "really" or "deep-down"
     wanted to commit the deed that we inescapably committed, nor
     that we are mistaken about the extent to which events were
     beyond our control. Instead, the guilt registers our freedom.
     According to Zupancic:

          Where the subject believes herself autonomous, Kant insists
          on the irreducibility of the Other, a causal order beyond
          her control. But where the subject becomes aware of her
          dependence on the Other (such and such laws, inclinations,
          hidden motive... ) and is ready to give up,... Kant
          indicates a "crack" in the Other, a crack in which he
          situates the autonomy and freedom of the subject. (28)

     For Zupancic, this is therefore another meeting ground between
     Kant and Lacan: Kant is, in effect, claiming that "There is no
     Other of the Other." Freedom comes because "there is in causal
     determination a 'stumbling block' in the relation between cause
     and effect" (29). This does not mean of course that we can clap
     our hands together, rejoice in the gap between cause and effect,
     and revel in our freedom. Freedom is not characterized by "the
     arbitrary, or the random as opposed to the lawlike" (33).
     Instead, freedom is the "point where the subject itself plays an
     (active) part in lawful, causal necessity" (33, emphasis in
     original). Zupancic's argument clarifies the Lacanian
     proposition that psychoanalysis is neither a mode of determinism
     nor of performative voluntarism, and that those aren't even the
     most interesting or politically efficacious models of
     subjectivity available.

  8. An excellent example of this "freedom" is, as Zupancic points
     out, the psychoanalytic idea of the "choice of neurosis" (35).
     Consider, for example, this description from Freud's "The
     Dynamics of Transference" (1912):

          It must be understood that each individual, through the
          combined operation of his innate disposition and the
          influences brought to bear on him during his early years,
          has acquired a specific method of his own in his conduct of
          his erotic life--that is, in the preconditions to falling
          in love which he lays down, in the instincts he satisfies
          and the aims he sets himself in the course of it. This
          produces what might be described as a stereotype plate (or
          several such), which is constantly repeated--constantly
          reprinted afresh--in the course of the person's life.
          (99-100)

     On the one hand, nothing strips the subject of autonomy more
     than this "stereotype plate." On the other hand, though, even
     grammatically Freud indicates that the subject has something at
     stake here: it is the subject who lays down the preconditions
     for falling in love, and so forth. Zupancic claims, following
     Lacan, that this "choice" is in fact "the very condition of
     possibility of psychoanalysis"--the end of analysis occurs when
     the subject can take up a new position vis-à-vis her
     determinants; when she can, in other words, choose a different
     neurosis (35). Zupancic summarizes the dilemma of freedom
     nicely:

          The subject is forced to confront herself as mere object of
          the will of the Other, as an instrument in the hands of
          mechanical or psychological causality. At this point Kant
          intervenes with his second gesture, which concerns the
          choice of the Gesinnung [disposition]. This gesture opens
          the dimension of the subject of freedom. The subject of
          freedom is indeed the effect of the Other, but not in the
          sense of being an effect of some cause that exists in the
          Other. Instead, the subject is the effect of the fact that
          there is a cause which will never be discovered in the
          Other; she is the effect of the absence of this cause, the
          effect of the lack in the Other. (40-41)

  9. I cannot do justice to the complexities of Zupancic's argument
     here, but I hope that this brief account demonstrates the
     advantages of engaging closely with her work. Ethics of the Real
     is more than a gloss on the canonical Lacanian references to
     Kant; it so forcefully connects the two thinkers that we are
     left wondering how, precisely, we got along without Kant in
     psychoanalysis. Moreover, Zupancic's argument usefully clarifies
     the dynamics by which the Lacanian category of the Real can
     achieve genuine political and social purchase. Even though we
     "know that 'God is dead' (that the Other does not exist)" and
     "He knows it too" (255), an ethics of the Real could gesture
     towards a realization of the infinite.

 10. To make these claims clearer, I want briefly to sketch
     Zupancic's novel argument about Oedipus. She advances the
     startling proposition that Oedipus is not guilty of anything,
     and therein lies his tragedy. Her reading begins with Oedipus's
     self-blinding. Oedipus blinds himself after learning that he
     has, after all his precautions, fulfilled the prophecy that said
     he would murder his father and marry his mother. The traditional
     interpretation of Oedipus's self-inflicted wound is that he
     thereby acknowledges his guilt and takes up his foretold
     destiny. However, Sophocles shows us something slightly
     different when Oedipus appears before the Chorus. Oedipus wails,
     "A curse upon the shepherd who released me from the cruel
     fetters of my feet, and saved me from death, and preserved me,
     doing me no kindness! For if I had died then, I would not have
     been so great a grief to my friends or to myself" (467). The
     Chorus extends this argument: "I do not know how I can say that
     you were well advised; you would have been better dead than
     living but blind" (467). This sentence refers both to Oedipus's
     self-punishment--suicide would clearly be the nobler way out of
     this situation--and to his past--better to have died as an
     infant than to live under the misconception as to his parentage.
     Oedipus rebukes the Chorus, however, crying "Do not try to show
     me that what has been done was not done for the best" (469).

 11. Zupancic argues that rather than internalizing his guilt,
     Oedipus identifies with his symptom: "Oedipus does not identify
     with his destiny, he identifies--and this is not the same
     thing--with that thing in him which made possible the
     realization of this destiny: he identifies with his blindness"
     (179). Oedipus the King thus ends somewhat like an analysis:
     with the traversal of fantasy, in which the analysand becomes,
     not the subject of desire, but the subject of the drive. This
     process is more of an "objectification" than a
     "subjectification"; that is, the analysand identifies with his
     or her enjoyment rather than with his or her desire. As Renata
     Salecl puts it, the logic of the drive is "'I do not want to do
     this, but I am nonetheless doing it'"; she further explains that
     this logic of the drive is opposed to the logic of desire "since
     the subject does not desire to do something, but nonetheless
     enjoys doing exactly that" (106). At the end of analysis, the
     subject comes to identify with the enjoyment that he or she has
     disavowed for so long. Similarly, Oedipus literalizes his
     blindness as a way to continue being blind, even after he is
     confronted with knowledge.

 12. However, it is not enough to say that Oedipus is self-deceiving.
     Zupancic insists that when Oedipus says "it's not my fault," we
     are convinced (181). She asserts that "guilt, in the sense of
     symbolic debt, arises when the subject knows that the Other
     knows" (182-83). This refers not simply to a knowledge of one's
     actions. Instead, it is a sort of "'surplus-knowledge,' a
     knowledge to which the desire of the subject is attached. This
     'surplus-knowledge'... is related to the place from which
     knowledge (of parricide and incest, for example), is enunciated"
     (185-86). Oedipus's problem is that his knowledge has been
     displaced from the beginning. This "rob[s] him of his desire
     (which alone could have rendered him guilty). In exchange he is
     given over to someone else, to the 'social order' (to the
     throne) and to Jocasta" (186). He cannot recognize his father.
     Oedipus's complaint is thus:

          If only I were guilty! If these words suggest a complaint
          about injustice..., they also suggest something perhaps
          even more radical. If only I were guilty--but you took from
          me even that honour, that place in the symbolic (open to me
          by right)! After all the suffering I have undergone, I am
          not even guilty (this emphasizes the non-sense of his
          destiny, not its Sense or Meaning). (195)

     To the extent that Oedipus's destiny is meaningful, it will not
     be due to the oracle's prophecy.

 13. While in this argument Oedipus is not guilty of desiring to
     marry his mother and murder his father, it does not follow that
     he is not responsible for his destiny. Zupancic also draws
     attention to Oedipus's confrontation with the Sphinx, following
     Lacan's argument from Seminar XVII: L'envers de la psychanalyse.
     In this argument, the crucial thing about Oedipus's solving the
     riddle isn't that he somehow divined an unknowable truth, but
     rather, in answering it "the subject actually gives
     something--he must give or offer his words; thus he can be taken
     at his word" (Zupancic 203). The subject's answer thus produces
     an irrevocable truth that was in no way determined in advance.
     The result is the curious psychoanalytic perspective on ethics
     and freedom: "Meaning is never determined in advance; in order
     to find its determination and be 'fixed,' an act of the subject
     is required" (210); or, to put it another way, Oedipus "installs
     the Other (the symbolic order) while simultaneously
     demonstrating that the Other 'doesn't exist'" (211).

 14. Ethics of the Real is an arresting book, one that amply repays
     the attention it exacts. As a guide to Lacanian arguments about
     ethics, Zupancic's book serves the dual purposes of explication
     and polemic, while sacrificing neither. Her readings, both of
     Kant and Lacan on the one hand, and of literary works on the
     other, are provocative and insightful. The result is a book
     about the "ethics of the real" that takes both ethics and the
     real seriously.

                                               Department of English
                                                    Emory University
                                                   jbjones@emory.edu

     ----------------------------------------------------------------

     COPYRIGHT (c) 2000 JASON B. JONES. READERS MAY USE PORTIONS OF
     THIS WORK IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FAIR USE PROVISIONS OF U.S.
     COPYRIGHT LAW. IN ADDITION, SUBSCRIBERS AND MEMBERS OF
     SUBSCRIBED INSTITUTIONS MAY USE THE ENTIRE WORK FOR ANY INTERNAL
     NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE BUT, OTHER THAN ONE COPY SENT BY EMAIL,
     PRINT, OR FAX TO ONE PERSON AT ANOTHER LOCATION FOR THAT
     INDIVIDUAL'S PERSONAL USE, DISTRIBUTION OF THIS ARTICLE OUTSIDE
     OF A SUBSCRIBED INSTITUTION WITHOUT EXPRESS WRITTEN PERMISSION
     FROM EITHER THE AUTHOR OR THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS IS
     EXPRESSLY FORBIDDEN.

     THIS ARTICLE AND OTHER CONTENTS OF THIS ISSUE ARE AVAILABLE FREE
     OF CHARGE UNTIL RELEASE OF THE NEXT ISSUE. A TEXT-ONLY ARCHIVE
     OF THE JOURNAL IS ALSO AVAILABLE FREE OF CHARGE. FOR FULL
     HYPERTEXT ACCESS TO BACK ISSUES, SEARCH UTILITIES, AND OTHER
     VALUABLE FEATURES, YOU OR YOUR INSTITUTION MAY SUBSCRIBE TO
     PROJECT MUSE, THE ON-LINE JOURNALS PROJECT OF THE JOHNS HOPKINS
     UNIVERSITY PRESS.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------

                                  Notes

     1. The quoted passage is from "Signs and Lovers," Zupancic's
     presentation at the Affiliated Psychoanalytic Workgroups
     Conference at Emory in May. The paper is forthcoming in ERR, the
     journal of APW.

     2. The argument that politics should amount to a sort of
     traversing of the fantasy has been most ably articulated by
     Zizek in many places, most recently in The Ticklish Subject
     247-399. On Badiou, also see Ticklish 128-67; additionally, the
     Umbr(a) issue featuring Badiou is an excellent introduction to
     his work (in addition to the four essays by Badiou, see
     Gillespie "Subtractive" and "Hegel"; Fink).

     3. Keeping in mind here the Kantian, and not psychoanalytic,
     definition of pathological: the pathological is anything that
     compels our actions. It is thus the field of normality itself,
     and not opposed to the normal.

                               Works Cited

     Dean, Tim. Beyond Sexuality. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2000.

     Fink, Bruce. "Alain Badiou." Umbr(a) 1 (1996): 11-12.

     Freud, Sigmund. "The Dynamics of Transference." 1912. The
     Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund
     Freud. Ed. and trans. James Strachey. Vol. 12. London: Hogarth,
     1953-74. 97-108. 24 vols.

     Gillespie, Sam. "Hegel Unsutured: An Addendum to Badiou."
     Umbr(a) 1 (1996): 57-70.

     ---. "Subtractive." Umbr(a) 1 (1996): 7-10.

     Lacan, Jacques. The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book VII: The
     Ethics of Psychoanalysis, 1959-1960. Ed. Jacques-Alain Miller.
     Trans. Dennis Porter. New York: Norton, 1992.

     Salecl, Renata. "The Satisfaction of Drives." Umbr(a) 1 (1997):
     105-110.

     Sophocles. "Oedipus Tyrranus." In Sophocles I: Ajax, Electra,
     Oedipus Tyrranus. Ed. and trans. Hugh Lloyd-Jones. Cambridge,
     MA: Harvard UP, 1994. 323-483.

     Zizek, Slavoj. The Ticklish Subject: The Absent Centre of
     Political Ontology. New York: Verso, 1999.

     Zupancic, Alenka. Ethics of the Real: Kant, Lacan. New York:
     Verso, 2000.

     ---. "Signs and Lovers." ERR 3 (Forthcoming): manuscript. Paper
     delivered at "Reading: The Second Annual Conference of
     Affiliated Psychoanalytic Workgroups." Emory University,
     Atlanta, GA. 19-21 May 2000.

