I would have preferred to forget that: but one does not forget 
what the public constantly reminds you of. 

So one must take account of the analyst in psycho-analytic 
treatment. He would have no social standing, I imagine, if 
Freud had not opened up the way for him — Freud, I say, to 
call him by his name. For no one can call anyone an analyst 
and Freud did not do so. Handing out rings to initiates is not 
to call by a name. Hence my proposition that the analyst 
hystorizes only from himself: a patent fact. Even if he is con- 
firmed in doing so by a hierarchy. 

What hierarchy could confirm him as an analyst, give him the 
rubber-stamp ? A certificate tells me that I was born. I repudiate 
this certificate: I am not a poet, but a poem. A poem that is 
being written, even if it looks like a subject. 

There remains the question of what could drive anyone, 
especially after an analysis, to hystorize from himself. 

It cannot come from himself, for he knows something about 
the analyst, now that he has liquidated, as they say, his positive 
transference. How could he contemplate taking up the same 
function? 

In other words, are there cases in which you are impelled by 
some other reason than the wish to set yourself up, that is, to 
earn money, to keep those who are in your care, above all your- 
self, according to Jewish morality (to which Freud remained 
attached in this respect). 

One must admit that the question (the question of another 
reason) is necessary to support the status of a profession newly 
amvecHnhystory. A hystory that I do not call eternal, because 
its aetas is serious only in relation to real number, that is to say, 
to the serial oifimit. 

Why, then, should we not put this profession to the test of 
that truth of which the so-called unconscious function dreams, 
with which it dabbles? The mirage of truth, from which only 
lies can be expected (this is what, in polite language, we call 
'resistance'), has no other term than the satisfaction that marks 
the end of the analysis. 

viii 



PREFACE 

Since the main aim of analysis is to give this urgently needed 
satisfaction, let us ask ourselves how someone can devote him- 
self to satisfying these urgent cases. 

This is an odd aspect of that love of one's neighbour upheld by 
the Judaic tradition. But to interpret it in Christian terms, that 
is to say, as Hellenic jean-f..trerie, what is presented to the 
analyst is something other than the neighbour: it is the un- 
sorted material of a demand that has nothing to do with the 
meeting (of a person from Samaria fit to dictate Christie duty). 
The offer is prior to an urgent request that one is not sure of 
satisfying, unless one has weighed it. 

I have therefore designated as a 'pass' that putting of the 
hystorization of the analysis to the test, while refraining from 
imposing this pass on all, because it is not a question, as it 
happens, of all, but of scattered, ill-assorted individuals. I have 
left it at the disposal of those who are prepared to run the risk 
of attesting at best to the lying truth. 

I have done so by virtue of having produced the only con- 
ceivable idea of the object, that of the object as cause of desire, 
of that which is lacking. 

The lack of the lack makes the real, which emerges only there, 
as a cork. This cork is supported by the term of the impossible 
— and the little we know about the real shows its antinomy to 
all verisimilitude. 

I shall speak of Joyce, who has preoccupied me much this 
year, only to say that he is the simplest consequence of a refusal 
— such a mental refusal! — of a psycho-analysis, which, as a re- 
sult, his work illustrates. But I have done no more than touch 
on this, in view of my embarrassment where art — an element 
in which Freud did not bathe without mishap — is concerned. 

I would-mention that, as always, I was entangled in urgent 
cases as I wrote this. 

I write, however, in so far as I feel I must, in order to be on 
a level («« pair) with these cases, to make a pair with them. 

My intention here was to be as unobtrusive as possible and to 
obtain from Jacques Lacan's spoken work an authentic version 
that would stand, in the future, for the original, which does not 
exist. 

For the short-hand transcription, riddled as it is with in- 
accuracies, and lacking the speaker's gesture and intonation, 
cannot be regarded as the original. Nevertheless, it is the version 
sine qua turn, which I have examined, word by word, and, where 
necessary, rectified — the expunged material amounting to less 
than three pages. 

The most difficult matter is the invention of a system of 
punctuation, since all punctuation — comma, full-stop, dash, 
paragraph — determines meaning. But this was the price to be 
paid if a readable text was to be produced, and the texts of all 
the seminars will follow the same principles. 

In this series of lectures, which I have been invited to give by 
the ficole pratique des Hautes Etudes, I shall be talking to you 
about the fundamentals of psycho-analysis. 

Today I should like simply to point out to you the meaning 
I intend to give to this title and the way I hope to justify it. 

And yet, I must first introduce myself to you — despite the 
fact that most, though not all of you, know me already — be- 
cause the circumstances are such that before dealing with this 
subject it might be appropriate to ask a preliminary question, 
namely: am I qualified to do so? 

My qualification for speaking to you on this subject amounts 
to this : for ten years, I held what was called a seminar, addressed 
to psycho-analysts. As some of you may know, I withdrew from 
this role (to which I had in fact devoted my life) as a result 
of events occurring within what is called a psycho-analytic 
association, and, more specifically, within the association that 
had conferred this role upon me. 

It might be said that my qualification to undertake the same 
role elsewhere is not, by that token, impugned as such. However 
that may be, I consider the problem deferred for the time being. 
And if today I am in a position to be able, let us simply say, to 
further this teaching of mine, I feel it incumbent upon me, before 
embarking on what for me is a new phase, to express my thanks 
to M. Fernand Braudel, the chairman of the section of the 
Hautes Etudes that appointed me to appear before you here. 
M. Braudel has informed me of his regret at being unable to be 
present: I would like to pay tribute to what I can only call 
his nobility in providing me with a means of continuing my 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

teaching, whose style and reputation alone were known to him. 
Nobility is surely the right word for his welcome to someone in 
my position — that of a refugee otherwise reduced to silence. 
M. Braudel extended this welcome to me as soon as he had 
been alerted by the vigilance of my friend Claude Levi- 
Strauss, whom I am delighted to see here today and who knows 
how precious for me this evidence of his interest in my work 
is — in work that has developed in parallel with his own. 

I wish also to thank all those who on this occasion demon- 
strated their sympathy to such effect that M. Robert Flaceliere, 
Director of the Ecole Normale Superieure, was generous enough 
to put this auditorium at the disposal of the Ecole des Hautes 
Etudes — and without which I should have been at a loss to 
welcome you in such numbers — for which I wish to express my 
most heartfelt thanks. 

All this concerns the base, in the topographical and even the 
military sense of the word — the base for my teaching. I shall 
now turn to what it is about — the fundamentals of psycho- 
analysis. 



As far as the fundamentals of psycho-analysis are concerned, 
my seminar was, from the beginning, implicated, so to speak. It 
was an element of those fundamentals, because it was a con- 
tribution, in concrete, to them — because it was an internal part 
of psycho-analytic praxis itself — because it was aimed at what 
is an essential of that praxis, namely, the training of psycho- 
analysts. 

There was a time when, ironically — temporarily, perhaps, 
and for lack of anything better in the situation I was in — I was 
led to define a criterion of what psycho-analysis is, namely, the 
treatment handed out by psycho-analysts. Henry Ey, who is 
here today, will remember the article in question as it was pub- 
lished in a volume of the encyclopaedia he edits. And, since he 
is present, it is all the easier for me to recall the fury that the 
article aroused and the pressure exerted to get the said article 
withdrawn from the said encyclopaedia. As a result, M. Ey, 
whose sympathy for my cause is well known, was powerless to 
resist an operation masterminded by an editorial committee 
on which there were, precisely, some psycho-analysts. The 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

article concerned will be included in a collection of a number 
of my essays that I am trying to put together, and you will, I 
think, be able to judge for yourselves whether it has lost any of 
its relevance. For me, this seems all the less likely given that the 
questions I raise in it are the very same as those that I shall be 
grappling with here, and which are resuscitated by the fact 
that here I am, in the present circumstances, still asking that 
very same question — what is psycho-analysis? 

No doubt there are certain ambiguities in all this, and the 
question — as I pointed out in the article — still has a certain 
bat-like quality. To examine it in broad daylight is what I 
proposed to do then and, whatever position I am in, it is what 
I propose to do today. 

The position I refer to has changed, in fact; it is not wholly 
inside, but whether it is outside is not known. 

In reminding you of all this, I am not indulging in personal 
reminiscence. I think you will agree that I am having recourse 
neither to gossip nor to any kind of polemic if I point out here 
what is simply a fact, namely, that my teaching — specifically 
designated as such — has been the object of censure by a body 
calling itself the Executive Committee of an organization calling 
itself the International Psycho-analytical Association. Such 
censorship is of no ordinary kind, since what it amounts to is no 
less than a ban on this teaching — which is to be regarded as 
mil and void as far as any qualification to the title of psycho- 
analyst is concerned. And the acceptance of this ban is to be a 
condition of the international affiliation of the Psycho-analytical 
Association to which I belong. 

But this is not all. It is expressly spelt out that this affiliation 
is to be accepted only if a guarantee is given that my teaching 
may never again be sanctioned by the Association as far as the 
training of analysts is concerned. 

So, what it amounts to is something strictly comparable to 
what is elsewhere called major excommunication — although 
there the term is never pronounced without any possibility of 
repeal. The latter exists only in a religious community de- 
signated by the significant symbolic term synagogue, and it was 
precisely that which Spinoza was condemned to. On 27 July 
1656 — a singular bi-centenary, for it corresponds to that of 
Freud — Spinoza was made the object of the kherem, an 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

excommunication that corresponds to major excommunication, 
since he had to wait some time before becoming the object of 
the chammata, which consists of appending the clause of no 
return. 

Please do not imagine that here — any more than elsewhere 
— I am indulging in some metaphorical game — that would 
be too puerile in view of the long and, God knows, serious 
enough terrain we have to cover. I believe — you will be able 
to judge for yourselves — that not only by virtue of the echoes 
it evokes, but by the structure it implies, this fact introduces 
something that is essential to our investigation of psycho- 
analytic praxis. 

I am not saying — though it would not be inconceivable 
— that the psycho-analytic community is a Church. Yet the 
question indubitably does arise — what is it in that community 
that is so reminiscent of religious practice ? Nor would I have 
stressed this point — though it is sufficiently significant to carry 
the musty odour of scandal — were it not that like everything 
I have to say today, it will be useful in what follows. 

I do not mean that I am indifferent to what happens to me 
in such circumstances. Do not imagine that for me — any more, 
I suppose, than for the intercessor whose precedent I have not 
hesitated to evoke — this is material for comedy. It is no laugh- 
ing matter. Nevertheless, I should like to let you know en 
passant that something of the order of a vast comic dimension 
in all this has not wholly escaped me. What I am referring to 
here is not at the level of what I have called excommunication. 
It has to do with the situation I was in for two years, that of 
knowing that I was — at the hands of precisely those who, in 
relation to me, were colleagues or even pupils — the object of 
what is called a deal. 

For what was at stake was the extent to which the con- 
cessions made with respect to the validity of my teaching could 
be traded off with the other side of the deal, namely, the in- 
ternational affiliation of the Association. I do not wish to 
forgo this opportunity — we shall return to it later — of in- 
dicating that the situation can be experienced at the level of 
the comic dimension proper. 

This can be fully appreciated, I think, only by a psycho- 
analyst. 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

No doubt, being the object of a deal is not a rare situation 
for an individual — contrary to all the verbiage about human 
dignity, not to mention the Rights of Man. Each of us at any 
moment and at any level may be traded off— without the notion 
of exchange we can have no serious insight into the social 
structure. The kind of exchange involved here is the exchange 
of individuals, that is, of those social supports which, in a 
different context, are known as 'subjects', with all their sup- 
posed sacred rights to autonomy. It is a well known fact that 
politics is a matter of trading — wholesale, in lots, in this con- 
text — the same subjects, who are now called citizens, in hun- 
dreds of thousands. There was nothing particularly exceptional, 
then, about my situation, except that being traded by those 
whom I referred to just now as colleagues, and even pupils, is 
sometimes, if seen from the outside, called by a different name. 

But if the truth of the subject, even when he is in the position 
of master, does not reside in himself, but, as analysis shows, in 
an object that is, of its nature, concealed, to bring this object 
out into the light of day is really and truly the essence of 
comedy. 

This dimension of the situation is worth pointing out, I 
think, especially in the position from which I can testify to it, 
because, after all, on such an occasion, it might be treated, 
with undue restraint, a sort of false modesty, as someone who 
had experienced it from the outside might do. From the inside, 
I can tell you that this dimension is quite legitimate, that it 
may be experienced from the analytic point of view, and even, 
from the moment it is perceived, in a way that overcomes it 
— namely, from the point of view of humour, which, here, is 
simply the recognition of the comic. 

This remark is not without relevance to my subject — the 
fundamentals of psycho-analysis — for jundanuntum has more 
than one meaning, and I do not need to remind you that in the 
ICabbala it designates one of the modes of divine manifestation, 
which, in this register, is strictly identified with the pudendum. 
All the same, it would be extraordinary if, in an analytic dis- 
course, we were to stop at the pudendum. In this context, no 
doubt, the fundamentals would take the form of the bottom 
parts, were it not that those parts were already to some extent 
exposed. 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

Some people, on the outside, may be surprised that certain 
of my analysands, some of whom were still under analysis, 
should have taken part, a very active part, in this deal. And 
they may ask themselves how such a thing is possible were it 
not that, at the level of the relation between your analysands 
and yourselves, there is some discord that puts in question the 
very value of analysis. Well, it is precisely by setting out from 
something that may provide grounds for scandal that we will 
be able to grasp in a more precise way what is called the 
training analysis — that praxis, or that stage of praxis, which has 
been completely ignored in all published work on psycho- 
analysis — and throw some light on its aims, its limits and its 
effects. 

This is no longer a question of pudendum. It is a question of 
knowing what may, what must, be expected of psycho-analysis, 
and the extent to which it may prove a hindrance, or even a 
failure. 

That is why I thought I was under an obligation to spare 
you no details, but to present you with a fact, as an object, 
whose outlines, and whose possible manipulation, I hope you 
will see more clearly, to present it at the very outset of what I 
now have to say when, before you, I ask the question — What 
are the fundamentals, in the broad sense of the term, of psycho- 
analysis? Which amounts to saying — What grounds it as 
praxis? 



What is a praxis? I doubt whether this term may be regarded 
as inappropriate to psycho-analysis. It is the broadest term to 
designate a concerted human action, whatever it may be, 
which places man in a position to treat the real by the symbolic. 
The fact that in doing so he encounters the imaginary to a 
greater or lesser degree is only of secondary importance here. 

This definition of praxis, then, is very extensive. We are not 
going to set out in search of our psycho-analysis, like Diogenes 
in search of man, in the various, very diversified fields of praxis. 
Rather we shall take our psycho-analysis with us, and it will 
direct us at once towards some fairly well located, specifiable 
points of praxis. 

Without even introducing by any kind of transition the two 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

terms between which I wish to hold the question — and not at 
all in an ironic way — I posit first that, if I am here, in such a 
large auditorium, in such a place, and with such an audience, 
it is to ask myself whether psycho-analysis is a science, and to 
examine the question with you. 

The other reference, the religious one, I already mentioned 
a little while ago, specifying that I am speaking of religion in 
the true sense of the term — not of a desiccated, methodologized 
religion, pushed back into the distant past of a primitive form 
of thought, but of religion as we see it practised in a still living, 
very vital way. Psycho-analysis, whether or not it is worthy of 
being included in one of these two registers, may even en- 
lighten us as to what we should understand by science, and 
even by religion. 

I would like at once to avoid a misunderstanding. In any 
case, someone will say, psycho-analysis is a form of research. 
Well, allow me to say quite clearly — in particular to the 
public authorities for whom this search has seemed, for some 
time now, to serve as a shibboleth for any number of things 
— that I am a bit suspicious of this term research. Personally, 
I have never regarded myself as a researcher. As Picasso once 
said, to the shocked surprise of those around him — 1 do not 
seek, I find. 

Indeed, there are in the field of so-called scientific research 
two domains that can quite easily be recognized, that in which 
one seeks, and that in which one finds. 

Curiously enough, this corresponds to a fairly well defined 
frontier between what may and may not qualify as science. 
Furthermore, there is no doubt some affinity between the 
research that seeks and the religious register. In the religious 
register, the phrase is often used — You would not seek me if you 
had not already found me. The already found is already behind, but 
stricken by something like oblivion. Is it not, then, a com- 
plaisant, endless search that is then opened up? 

If the search concerns us here, it is by virtue of those elements 
of this debate that are established at the level of what we now- 
adays call the human sciences. Indeed, in these human sciences, 
one sees emerging, as it were, beneath the feet of whoever 
finds, what I will call the hermeneutic demand, which is precisely 
that which seeks — which seeks the ever new and the never 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

exhausted signification, but one threatened with being trampled 
under foot by him who finds. 

Now, we analysts are interested in this hermeneutics, be- 
cause the way of developing signification offered by her- 
meneutics is confused, in many minds, with what analysis calls 
interpretation. It so happens that, although this interpretation 
cannot in any way be conceived in the same way as the afore- 
mentioned hermeneutics, hermeneutics, on the other hand, 
makes ready use of interpretation. In this respect, we see, at 
least, a corridor of communication between psycho-analysis and 
the religious register. We shall come back to this in due course. 

Before allowing psycho-analysis to call itself a science, there- 
fore, we shall require a little more. 

What specifies a science is having an object. It is possible to 
maintain that a science is specified by a definite object, at least 
by a certain reproducible level of operation known as experi- 
ment. But we must be very prudent, because this object changes, 
and in a very strange way, as a science develops. We cannot 
say that the object of modern physics is the same now as at its 
birth, which I would date in the seventeenth century. And is 
the object of modern chemistry the same as at the moment of 
its birth, which I would date from the time of Lavoisier? 

It is possible that these remarks will force us into an at least 
tactical retreat, and to start again from the praxis, to ask our- 
selves, knowing that praxis delimits a field, whether it is at the 
level of this field that the modern scientist, who is not a man 
who knows a lot about everything, is to be specified. 

I do not accept Duhem's demand that every science should 
refer to a unitary, or world, system — a reference that is always 
in fact more or less idealist, since it is a reference to the need of 
identification. I would even go so far as to say that we can dis- 
pense with the implicit transcendent element in the position of 
the positivist, which always refers to some ultimate unity of all 
the fields. 

We will extricate ourselves from it all the more easily in view 
of the fact that, after all, it is disputable, and may even be 
regarded as false. It is in no way necessary that the tree of science 
should have a single trunk. I do not think that there are many 
of them. There are perhaps, as in the first chapter of Genesis, 
two different trunks — not that I attach in any way an ex- 

8 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

ceptional importance to this myth, which is tinged to a greater 
or lesser degree with obscurantism, but why shouldn't we 
expect psycho-analysis to throw some light on it? 

If we hold to the notion of experience, in the sense of the 
field of a praxis, we see very well that it is not enough to define 
a science. Indeed, this definition might be applied very well, 
for example, to the mystical experience. It is even by this door 
that it is regarded once again as scientific, and that we almost 
arrive at the stage of thinking that we can have a scientific 
apprehension of this experience. There is a sort of ambiguity 
here — to subject ah experience to a scientific examination 
always implies that the experience has of itself a scientific sub- 
sistance. But it is obvious that we cannot re-introduce the 
mystical experience into science. 

One further remark. Might this definition of science, based 
on the field determined by a praxis, be applied to alchemy to 
give it the status of a science ? I was recently rereading a little 
book that is not even included in Diderot's Complete Works, but 
which certainly seems to be by him. Although chemistry was 
born with Lavoisier, Diderot speaks throughout this little book, 
with all the subtlety of mind we expect of him, notof chemistry, 
but of alchemy. What is it that makes us say at once that, 
despite the dazzling character of the stories he recounts from 
ages past, alchemy, when all is said and done, is not a science ? 
Something, in my view, is decisive, namely, that the purity of 
soul of the operator was, as such, and in a specific way, an 
essential element in the matter. 

This remark is not beside the point, as you may realize, since 
we may be about to raise something similar concerning the 
presence of the analyst in the analytic Great Work, and to 
maintain that it is perhaps what our training analysis seeks. I 
may even seem to have been saying the same thing myself in my 
teaching recently, when I point straight out, all veils torn aside, 
and in a quite overt way, towards that central point that I put 
in question, namely — what is the analyst's desire? 

^ 3 

What must there be in the analyst's desire for it to operate 
in a correct way? Can this question be left outside the limits of 
our field, as it is in effect in the sciences — the modern sciences 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

of the most assured type — where no one questions himself as 
to what there must be in the desire, for example, of the phy- 
sicist? 

There really must be a series of crises for an Oppenheimer to 
question us all as to what there is in the desire that lies at the 
basis of modern physics. No one pays any attention to him 
anyway. It is thought to be a political incident. Is this desire 
something of the same order as that which is required of the 
adept of alchemy? 

In any case, the analyst's desire can in no way be left outside 
our question, for the simple reason that the problem of the 
training of the analyst poses it. And the training analysis has 
no other purpose than to bring the analyst to the point I 
designate in my algebra as the analyst's desire. 

Here, again, I must for the moment leave the question open. 
You may feel that I am leading you, little by little, to some 
such question as — Is agriculture a science? Some people will 
say yes, some people no. I offer this example only to suggest to 
you that you should make some distinction between agriculture 
defined by an object and agriculture defined, if you'll forgive 
me, by a field — between agriculture and agronomy. This en- 
ables me to bring out one definite dimension — we are at the abc 
stage, but, after all, we can't help it — that of formula making. 

Is that enough to define the conditions of a science? I don't 
think so. A false science, just like a true science, may be ex- 
pressed in formulae. The question is not so simple, then, when 
psycho-analysis, as a supposed science, appears to have such 
problematic features. 

What are the formulae in psycho-analysis concerned with? 
What motivates and modulates this 'sliding-away' (glissement) 
of the object? Are there psycho-analytic concepts that we are 
now in possession of? How are we to understand the almost 
religious maintenance of the terms proposed by Freud to 
structure the analytic experience? Was Freud really the first, 
and did he really remain the only theoretician of this supposed 
science to have introduced fundamental concepts? Were this 
so, it would be very unusual in the history of the sciences. 
Without this trunk, this mast, this pile, where can our practice 
be moored? Can we even say that what we are dealing with 
are concepts in the strict sense ? Are they concepts in the process 

10 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

of formation ? Are they concepts in the process of development, 
in movement, to be revised at a later date ? 

I think this is a question in which we can maintain that some 
progress has already been made, in a direction that can only be 
one of work, of conquest, with a view to resolving the question 
as to whether psycho-analysis is a science. In fact, the maintenance 
of Freud's concepts at the centre of all theoretical discussion 
in that dull, tedious, forbidding chain — which is read by no- 
body but psycho-analysts — known as the psycho-analytic 
literature, does not alter the fact that analysts in general have 
not yet caught up with these concepts, that in this literature 
most of the concepts are distorted, debased, fragmented, and 
that those that are too difficult are quite simply ignored — that, 
for example, everything that has been developed around the 
concept of frustration is, in relation to Freud's concepts, from 
which it derives, clearly retrograde and pre-conceptual. 

Similarly, no one is any longer concerned, with certain rare 
exceptions to be found among my pupils, with the ternary 
structure of the Oedipus complex or with the castration com- 
plex. 

It is certainly no contribution to the theoretical status of 
psycho-analysis for a writer like Fenichel to reduce, by an 
enumeration of the 'main sewer' type, the accumulated material 
of the psycho-analytic experience to the level of platitude. Of 
course, a certain quantity of facts have been gathered together, 
and there is some point in seeing them grouped into a few 
chapters, but one cannot avoid the impression that, in a whole 
field, everything is explained in advance. Analysis is not a 
matter of discovering in a particular case the differential 
feature of the theory, and in doing so believe that one is ex- 
plaining why your daughter is silent — for the point at issue is 
to get her to speak, and this effect proceeds from a type of inter- 
vention that has nothing to do with a differential feature. 

Analysis consists precisely in getting her to speak. It might 
be said, therefore, that in the last resort, it amounts to over- 
coming the barrier of silence, and this is what, at one time, was 
called the analysis of the resistances. 

The symptom is first of all the silence in the supposed speak- 
ing subject. If he speaks, he is cured of his silence, obviously. 
But this does not tell us anything about why he began to speak. 

ii 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

It merely designates for us a differential feature which, in the 
case of the silent girl, is, as was only to be expected, that of the 
hysteric. 

Now, the differential feature of the hysteric is precisely this 
— it is in the very movement of speaking that the hysteric 
constitutes her desire. So it is hardly surprising that it should 
be through this door that Freud entered what was, in reality, 
the relations of desire to language and discovered the mechan- 
isms of the unconscious. 

That this relation of desire to language as such did not 
remain concealed from him is a feature of his genius, but this 
is not to say that the relation was fully elucidated — far from 
it — by the massive notion of the transference. 

The fact that, in order to cure the hysteric of all her symptoms, 
the best way is to satisfy her hysteric's desire — which is for 
her to posit her desire in relation to us as an unsatisfied desire 
— leaves entirely to one side the specific question of why she 
can sustain her desire only as an unsatisfied desire. So hysteria 
places us, I would say, on the track of some kind of original sin 
in analysis. There has to be one. The truth is perhaps simply 
one thing, namely, the desire of Freud himself, the fact that 
something, in Freud, was never analysed. 

I had reached precisely this point when, by a strange coin- 
cidence, I was put into the position of having to give up my 
seminar. 

What I had to say on the Names-of-the-Father had no other 
purpose, in fact, than to put in question the origin, to discover 
by what privilege Freud's desire was able to find the entrance 
into the field of experience he designates as the unconscious. 

It is absolutely essential that we should go back to this 
origin if we wish to put analysis on its feet. 

In any case, such a mode of questioning the field of experi- 
ence will be guided, in our next meeting, by the following 
reference — what conceptual status must we give to four of the 
terms introduced by Freud as fundamental concepts, namely, 
the unconscious, repetition, the transference and the drivel 

We will reach our next step, at our next meeting, by con- 
sidering the way in which, in my past teaching, I have situated 
these concepts in relation to the more general function that 
embraces them, and which makes it possible to show their 

12 



EXCOMMUNICATION 

operational value in this field, namely, the subjacent, implicit 
function of the signifier as such. 

This year, I promised myself to break off at twenty-past two, 
so as to leave time for those who do not have to go on at once 
to other pursuits to ask questions arising from my lecture. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

M. Tort: When you relate Psycho-analysis to Freud's desire and 
to the desire of the hysteric, might you not be accused of psychologism? 

Lac an : The reference to Freud's desire is not a psychological 
reference — and reference to the hysteric's desire is not a 
psychological reference. 

I posed the following question: the functioning of 'Primitive 
Thinking' (la Pensie sauvage), which Levi-Strauss places at the 
basis of the statutes of society, is one unconscious, but is it 
enough to accommodate the unconscious as such? And if it is 
able to do so, does it accommodate the Freudian unconscious? 

It was through the hysterics that Freud learnt the way of the 
strictly Freudian unconscious. It was here that I brought the 
desire of the hysteric into play, while indicating at the same 
time that Freud did not stop there. 

Freud's desire, however, I have placed at a higher level. I 
have said that the Freudian field of analytic practice remained 
dependent on a certain original desire, which always plays an 
ambiguous, but dominant role in the transmission of psycho- 
analysis. The problem of this desire is not psychological, any 
more than is the unsolved problem of Socrates' desire. There 
is an entire thematic area concerning the status of the subject 
when Socrates declares that he does not place desire in a 
position of original subjectivity, but in the position of an 
object. Well! Freud, too, is concerned with desire as an object. 

15 January 1964 



»3 



This page intentionally left blank. 



The Unconscious and Repetition 



This page intentionally left blank. 



THE FREUDIAN UNCONSCIOUS 
AND OURS 

Pensee sauvage • There is cause only in something that doesn't work • 
Gap, obstacle, discovery, loss • Discontinuity • Signorelli 

Because I am beginning on time today, I will start by reading a 
poem which, in actual fact, has no relation to what I am about 
to say, but which is related to what I said last year, in my 
seminar, about the mysterious object, the most concealed object, 
that of the scopic drive. 

It is a short poem to be found on page 73 of Fou d'Elsa, which 
Aragon entitles 'Contre-chant' . 

Vainement ton image arrive a ma rencontre 
Et ne m'entre oiije suis qui seulement la montre 
Toi te toumant vers moi tu ne saurais trouver 
Au mur de man regard que ton ombre rlvie 

Je suis ce malheureux comparable aux miroirs 
Qui peuvent rijlichir mais ne peuvent pas voir 
Comme eux mon mil est vide et comme eux habite 
De I' absence de toi qui fait sa ciciti 

In vain your image comes to meet me 

And does not enter me where I am who only shows it 

Turning towards me you can find 

On the wall of my gaze only your dreamt-of shadow. 

I am that wretch comparable with mirrors 
That can reflect but cannot see 
Like them my eye is empty and like them inhabited 
By your absence which makes them blind. 

I dedicate this poem to the nostalgia that some of you may 
feel for that interrupted seminar in which I developed the 
theme of anxiety and the function of the objet petit a. 

17 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

They will appreciate, I think, those who* were with me last 
year — I apologize for being so allusive — they will appreciate 
the fact that Aragon — in this admirable work in which I am 
proud to find an echo of the tastes of our generation, so much 
so that I am forced to turn to friends of my own age if I am to 
make myself understood about this poem — follows his poem 
with this enigmatic line — Thus said An-Nadjt once, as he was 
invited to a circumcision. 

This is the point at which those who heard my seminar last 
year will find a correspondence between the various forms of 
the objet a and the central symbolic function of the minus-phi 
[( — *W] — evokedhere by the strange reference, which is certainly 
no accident, that Aragon confers on the historical connotation, 
if I may put it this way, of the propagation by his character, 
the mad poet, of this 'counter-song'. 



There are some of you here, I know, who are being introduced 
to my teaching for the first time. They are being introduced to 
it through writings that are already dated. I would like them 
to know that one of the indispensable co-ordinates in appre- 
ciating the meaning of this first teaching must be found in the 
fact that they cannot, from their present position, imagine to 
what degree of contempt for, or simply meconnaissance of, the 
instrument of their work the practitioners of psycho-analysis 
can attain. They should know that for some years all my effort 
has been required in a struggle to bring to the attention of 
these practitioners the true value of this instrument, speech 
— to give it back its dignity, so that it does not always repre- 
sent for them those words, devalued in advance, that force 
them to fix their gaze elsewhere, in order to find their guarantor. 

Thus, for a time at least, I was thought to be obsessed with 
some kind of philosophy of language, even a Heideggerian one, 
whereas only a propaedeutic reference was involved. The fact 
that I am speaking here will not make me speak more philos- 
ophically. 

But let me turn to something else, which indeed I will find 
easier to specify here. I am referring to something that I can 
only call the refusal of the concept. That is why, as I announced 
at the end of my first seminar, I will try to introduce you today 

18 



THE FREUDIAN UNCONSCIOUS AND OURS 

to the major Freudian concepts — I have isolated four that 
seem to come within this category. 

The few words on the blackboard under the heading Freudian 
concepts are the first two — the unconscious and repetition. 
The transference — I hope to approach it next time — will in- 
troduce us directly to the algorithms that I thought necessary 
to set out in practice, especially with a view to the imple- 
mentation of the analytic technique as such. Lastly, the drive is 
still so difficult to approach — so neglected, one should say 
— that I do not think I can do more this year than touch upon 
it after we have dealt with the transference. 

We shall see, therefore, only the essence of analysis — especi- 
ally that which is profoundly problematic, though at the same 
time crucial, about it, namely, the function of the training 
analysis. It is only by going through this exposition that we 
may, at the end of the year — without wishing myself in any 
way to minimize the shifting, not to say scabrous, side of the 
approach to this concept — begin our examination of the drive. 
In this respect, our approach will provide a contrast with those 
who boldly venture into this terrain with incomplete and 
flimsy references. 

The two small arrows that you see indicated on the black- 
board after The unconscious and Repetition point towards the 
question-mark that follows. This question-mark indicates that 
our conception of the concept implies that the concept is always 
established in sin approach that is not unrelated to that which 
is imposed onr us, as a form, by infinitesimal calculus. Indeed, 
if the concept is modelled on an approach to the reality that 
the concept has been created to apprehend, it is only by a leap, 
a passage to the limit, that it manages to realize itself. We are 
then required to say in what respect — under what form of 
finite quantity, I would say — the conceptual elaboration 
known as the unconscious may be carried out. The same goes 
for repetition. 

It is in relation to the other two terms written on the black- 
board at the end of the line, The subject and The real that we will 
be led to give form to the question posed last time — can psycho- 
analysis, with all its paradoxical, odd, aporic qualities, be re- 
garded, among us, as constituting a science, a potential science? 

I shall take first the concept of the unconscious. 

'9 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 



Most of you will have some idea of what I mean when I say 
— the unconscious is structured like a language. This statement refers 
to a field that is much more accessible to us today than at the 
time of Freud. I will illustrate it by something that is materi- 
alized, at what is certainly a scientific level, by the field that is 
explored, structured, elaborated by Claude Llvi-Strauss, and 
which he has pinpointed in the title of his book, La Pensie 
Sauvage. 

Before any experience, before any individual deduction, 
even before those collective experiences that may be related 
only to social needs are inscribed in it, something organizes 
this field, inscribes its initial fines offeree. This is the function 
that Claude Levi-Strauss shows us to be the truth of the 
totemic function, and which reduces its appearance — the 
primary classificatory function. 

Before strictly human relations are established, certain 
relations have already been determined. They are taken from 
whatever nature may offer as supports, supports that are 
arranged in themes of opposition. Nature provides — I must 
use the word — signifiers, and these signifiers organize human 
relations in a creative way, providing them with structures and 
shaping them. 

The important thing, for us, is that we are seeking here 
— before any formation of the subject, of a subject who thinks, 
who situates himself in it — the level at which there is counting, 
things are counted, and in this counting he who counts is al- 
ready included. It is only later that the subject has to recognize 
himself as such, recognize himself as he who counts. Remember 
the naive failure of the simpleton's delighted attempt to grasp 
the little fellow who declares — / have three brothers, Paul, Ernest 
and me. But it is quite natural — first the three brothers, Paul, 
Ernest and I are counted, and then there is I at the level at 
which I am to reflect the first I, that is to say, the I who counts. 

In our time, in the historical period that has seen the for- 
mation of a science that may be termed human, but which 
must be distinguished from any kind of psycho-sociology, 
namely, linguistics, whose model is the combinatory operation, 
functioning spontaneously, of itself, in a presubjective way 

20 



THE FREUDIAN UNCONSCIOUS AND OURS 

— it is this linguistic structure that gives its status to the un- 
conscious. It is this structure, in any case, that assures us that 
there is, beneath the term unconscious, something definable, 
accessible and objectifiable. But when I urge psycho-analysts v5 
not to ignore this field, which provides them with a solid sup- ^^4n 
port for their labours, does this mean that I hope to include the \"^ z ^ 
concepts introduced historically by Freud under the term un- 
conscious ? No, I don't think so. The unconscious, the Freudian 
concept, is something different, which I would like to try to get 
you to grasp today. 

It is certainly not enough to say that the unconscious is a 
dynamic concept, since this would be to substitute the most / , 
common kind of mystery for a particular mystery — in general, o*^* 

forc eis used to designate a locus of opacity. It is to the function 
of cause that I will refer today. - r 

I am well aware that I am entering here on a terrain which, 
from the point of view of philosophical criticism, suggests a 
whole world of references, so many, in fact, as to make me 
hesitate among them — but let's take our pick. Some of you at 
least will remain unsatisfied if I simply point out that, in his 
An attempt tointroduce the concept of negative quantities into philosophy f ~, 
we can see now closely Kant comes to understanding the/gap/ 
that the function of cause has always presented to any con- 
ceptual apprehension. In that essay, it is more or less stated 
that cause is aVoncept that, in the last resort, is unanalysable 
— impossible to understand by reason — if indeed the rule of 
reason, the Vemunftsregel, is always some Vergleickung, or 
equivalent — and that there remains essentially in the function 
of cause a certain gap, a term used by Kant in the Prolegomena. 

I will not go so far as to remark that the problem of cause has 
always been an embarrassment to philosophers, and that it is 
not as simple as might be thought when, in Aristotle, one sees 
the four causes balancing one another — for I am not philo- 
sophizing here, and would not claim to carry out so heavy an 
undertaking with so few references. However, these references 
are enough to bring out the meaning of what I am insisting on. 
For me, cause — any modality, even if Kant inscribes it in the 
categories of pure reason — to be more precise, he inscribes it in 
the table of relations, between inherence and community 
— cause is not any the more rationalized for this. 

21 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

Cause is to be distinguished from that which is determinate 
in a chain, in other words the law. By way of example, think of 
what is pictured in the law of action and reaction. There is 
here, one might say, a single principle. One does not go without 
the other. The mass of a body that is crushed on the ground is 
not the cause of that which it receives in return for its vital 
force — its mass is integrated in this force that comes back to it 
in order to dissolve its coherence by a return effect. There is no 
gap here, except perhaps at the end. 

Whenever we speak of cause, on the other hand, there is 
always something anti-conceptual, something indefinite. The 
phases of the moon are the cause of tides — we know this from 
experience, we know that the word cause is correctly used here. 
Or again, miasmas are the cause of fever — that doesn't mean 
anything either, there is a hole, and something that oscillates 
in the interval. In short, there is cause only in something that 
doesn't work. 

Well ! It is at this point that I am trying to make you see by 
approximation that the Freudian unconscious is situated at that 
point, where, between cause and that which it affects, there is 
always something wrong. The important thing is not that the 
unconscious determines neurosis — of that one Freud can quite 
happily, like Pontius Pilot, wash his hands. Sooner or later, 
something would have been found, humoral determinates, for 
example — for Freud, it would be quite immaterial. For what 
the unconscious does is to show us the gap through which 
neurosis recreates a harmony with a real — a real that may 
well not be determined. 

In this gap, something happens. Once this gap has been 
filled, is the neurosis cured? After all, the question remains 
open. But the neurosis becomes something else, sometimes a 
mere illness, a scar, as Freud said — the scar, not of the neurosis, 
but of the unconscious. I am not handling this topology very 
skilfully, because I do not have time — I have simply jumped 
into the deep end — but I think you will be able to feel guided 
by the terms that I have introduced when you come to read 
Freud's own works. Observe the point from which he sets out 
— The Aetiology of the Neuroses — and what does he find in the 
hole, in the split, in the gap so characteristic of cause ? Some- 
thing of the order of the non-realized. 

22 



THE FREUDIAN UNCONSCIOUS AND OURS 

One uses the term refusal. This is rather hasty — indeed, for 
some time now, one has no longer been sure what the term 
refusal means. At first, the unconscious is manifested to us as 
something that holds itself in suspense in the area, I would say, 
of the unborn. That repression should discharge something into 
this area is not surprising. It is the abortionist's relation to 
Umbo. 

Certainly, this dimension should be evoked in a register that 
has nothing unreal, or dereistic, about it, but is rather un- 
realized. It is always dangerous to disturb anything in that zone 
of shades, and perhaps it is part of the analyst's role, if the 
analyst is performing it properly, to be besieged — I mean 
really — by those in whom he has invoked this world of shades, 
without always being able to bring them up to the light of day. 
One can never be sure that what one says on this matter will 
have no harmful effect — even what I have been able to say 
about it over the last ten years owes some of its impact to this 
fact. It is not without effect that, even in a public speech, one 
directs one's attention at subjects, touching them at what Freud 
calls the navel — the navel of the dreams, he writes, to designate 
their ultimately unknown centre — which is simply, like the 
same anatomical navel that represents it, that gap of which I 
have already spoken. \ 

There is a danger in public discourse, precisely in so far as it 
is addressed to those nearest — Nietzsche knew this, a certain 
type of discourse can be addressed only to those furthest away. 

In actual fact, this dimension of &ie unconscious that I am 
evoking had been forgotten, as Freud had quite clearly foreseen. 
The unconscious had closed itself up against his message thanks 
to those active practitioners of orthopaedics that the analysts 
of the second and third generation became, busying themselves, 
by psychologizing analytic theory, in stitching up this gap. 

Believe me, I myself never re-open it without great care. 

3 
Now, of course, at this stage in my life, I am in a position to 
introduce into the domain of cause the law of the signifier, in 
the locus in which this gap is produced. Nevertheless, we must, 
if we are to understand what it means in psycho-analysis, go 
back and trace the concept of the unconscious through the 

23 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

various stages of the process in which Freud elaborated it 
— since we can complete that process only by carrying it to 
its limits. 

The Freudian unconscious has nothing to do with the so- 
called forms of the unconscious that preceded it, not to say 
accompanied it, and which still surround it today. To under- 
stand what I mean, open the Lalande dictionary. Or read the 
delightful list provided by Dwelshauvers in a book published 
some forty years ago. In it he lists ten or so forms of the uncon- 
scious that will tell nobody anything that he did not already 
know, and which simply designate the non-conscious, the more 
or less conscious, etc. — in the ever-expanding field of psy- 
chology, one finds hundreds of additional varieties. 

Freud's unconscious is not at all the romantic unconscious 
of imaginative creation. It is not the locus of the divinities of 
night. This locus is no doubt not entirely unrelated to the locus 
towards which Freud turns his gaze — but the fact that Jung, 
who provides a link with the terms of the romantic unconscious, 
should have been repudiated by Freud, is sufficient indication 
that psycho-analysis is introducing something other. Similarly, 
we can say that the hold-all, heteroclite unconscious that 
Edward von Hartmann spent his life elaborating is not Freud's 
unconscious, but we should not be over-hasty, for Freud, in the 
seventh chapter of The Interpretation of Dreams, himself referred 
to it in a footnote — that is to say, we must look more closely at 
it if we are to discover in what way Freud's unconscious is to be 
distinguished from it. 

To all these forms of unconscious, ever more or less linked to 
some obscure will regarded as primordial, to something pre- 
conscious, what Freud opposes is the revelation that at the level 
of the unconscious there is something at all points homologous 
with what occurs at the level of the subject — this thing speaks 
and functions in a way quite as elaborate as at the level of the 
conscious, which thus loses what seemed to be its privilege. I 
am well aware of the resistances that this simple remark can 
still provoke, though it is evident in everything that Freud 
wrote. Read, for example, the paragraph of that seventh 
chapter of The Interpretation of Dreams, called 'Forgetting in 
Dreams', concerning which Freud merely refers to the play of 
the signifier. 

24 



THE FREUDIAN UNCONSCIOUS AND OURS 

I will not content myself with this portentous reference. I 
have spelt out to you point by point the functioning of what 
was first produced for us by Freud as the phenomenon of the 
unconscious. In the dream, in parapraxis, in the flash of wit 
— what is it that strikes one first? It is the sense of impediment 
to be found in all of them. 

Impediment, failure, split. In a spoken or written sentence *"\ 
something stumbles. Freud is attracted by these phenomena, 
and it is there that he seeks the unconscious. There, something 
other demands to be realized — which appears as intentional, 
of course, but of a strange temporality. What occurs, what is 
produced, in this gap, is presented as the discovery. It is in this way 
that the Freudian exploration first encounters what occurs in , 
the unconscious. 

This discovery is, at the same time, a solution — not neces- 
sarily a complete one, but, however incomplete it may be, it has 
"glSt lnaennaole something that touches us, that peculiar accent 
that Theodor Reik has brought out so admirably — only 
brought out, for Freud certainly noted it before him — namely, 
surprise, that by which the subject feels himself overcome, by 
which he finds both more and less than he expected — but, in any 
case, it is, in relation to what he expected, of exceptional value. 

Now, as soon as it is presented, this discovery becomes a 
rediscovery and, furthermo re, it is always re ady to steal 'away \ 
again, thus establishing the^menaon_ofl^. 

To resort to a metaphor, drawn from mythology, we have, in 
Eurydice twice lost, the most potent image we can find of the 
relation between Orpheus the analyst and the unconscious. 

In this respect, if you will allow me to add a touch of irony, 
the unconscious finds itself, strictly speaking, on the opposite 
side to love, which, as everyone knows, is always unique; the 
expression 'one lost, ten to be found again' finds its best appli- 
cation here. 

Discontinuity, then, is the essential form in which the un- 
conscious first appears to us as a phenomenon — discontinuity, 
in which something is manifested as a vacillation. Now, if this 
discontinuity has this absolute, inaugural character, in the 
development of Freud's discovery, must we place it — as was 
later the tendency with analysts — against the background of 
a totality? 

25 



^ 



N<, 



s 



\<i- 



e- 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

Is the(ow>nterior to discontinuity? I do not think so, and 
everything that I have taught in recent years has tended to 
exclude this need for a closed one — a mirage to which is attached 
the reference to the enveloping psyche, a sort of double of the 
organism in which this false unity is thought to reside. You will 
i grant me that the one that is introduced by the experience of 
1 the unconscious is the one of the split, of the stroke, of rupture. 
At this p^nt,~thefe~sprTngs up a misunderstood form of the 
un, the Un of the Unbewusste. Let us say that the limit of the 
Unbewusste-»4h& Unbegriff — not the non-concept, but the con- 
cept of lack^ ^-^ 
v°J5 Whereis the background? Is it absent ? } No. Rupture, (spjit, 
.^-N^"* the stroke of the opening makes absence emerge — just as the 
"if u/ cry does not stand out against a background of silence, but on 
the contrary makes the silence emerge as silence. 
If you keep hold of this imtiaf structure, you will avoid 
t, giving yourself up to some partial aspect of the question of 
o^V^jf^'the unconscious — ,as, for example, that it is the subject, qua 
^"V^ # . alienated in his history, at the level at which the syncope of 
* > C- &V y\ ■ e discourse is joined with his desire. You will see that, more 
o J s r ^tt radically, it is in the dimension of a synchrony that you must 
T** ,xT situate the unconscious — at the level of a being, but in the 
^ sense that it can spread over everything, that is to say, at the 
V level of the subject of the enunciation, in so far as, according to 
y?*' the sentences, according to the modes, «* ln««»c jt«»1f p« murh a« 
(^^ it finds itself again , and in the sense that, in an interjection, in 
*~V <tt an imperative, in an invocation, even in a hesitation, it is al- 
"^^ ways the unconscious that presents you with its (€nigi^a, and 
°, tf\. speaks — in short, at the level at which everything that blossoms 
jtf* • in the unconscious spreads, like mycelium, as Freud says about 
-^ V ^ the dream, around a central point. It is always a question of 
^ y the subject qua inde terminate . 

"i^ Oblivium is te*Twith the long e — smooth. Oblivium is that 

which effaces — effaces what? The signifier as such. Here we 
find again the basic structure that makes it possible, in an 
operatory way, for something to take on the function of barring, 

1 Lacan is playing on the French un (one) and the German negative 
prefix un, moving from 'oneness' to 'negation'. The Unbewusste is Freud's 
'unconscious'. Lacan's gloss, on Unbegriff shifts the notion of 'negation' into 
one of 'lack' [Translator's note]. 

26 



THE FREUDIAN UNCONSCIOUS AND OURS 

striking out another thing. This is a more primordial level, 
structurally speaking, than repression, of which we shall 
speak later. Well, this operatory element of effacement is what 
Freud designates, from the outset, in the function of the 
censor. 

It is the censorship by scissors, the Russian censorship, or 
again the German censorship, see Heinrich Heine, at the be- 
ginning of the Book of Germany. Herr and Frau Such-and-such have 
pleasure in announcing the birth of a child as beautiful as liberty — and 
Dr Hoffmann, the censor, strikes out the word liberty. Certainly 
one may ask oneself what effect this word can have as a result 
of this stricdy material censorship, but that is another problem. 
But it is certainly here that the dynamism of the unconscious 
operates in the most efficient way. 

Let us turn again to an example that has never been suffi- 
ciently exploited, the first used by Freud to demonstrate his 
theory, namely, his forgetting, his inability to remember the 
word Signorelli after his visit to the paintings at Orvieto. Is it 
possible not to see emerging from the text itself, and establishing 
itself, not metaphor, but the reality of the disappearance, of 
the suppression, of the Unterdruckung, the passing underneath? 
The term Signor, Herr, passes underneath — the absolute master, 
I once said, which is in fact death, has disappeared there. 
Furthermore, do we not see, behind this, the emergence of 
that which forced Freud to find in the myths of the death of the 
father the regulation of his desire ? After all, it is to be found in 
Nietzsche, who declares, in his own myth, that God is dead. 
And it is perhaps against the background of the same reasons. 
For the myth of the God is dead — which, personally, I feel much 
less sure about, as a myth of course, than most contemporary 
intellectuals, which is in no sense a declaration of theism, nor 
of faith in the resurrection — perhaps this myth is simply a 
shelter against the threat of castration. 

If you know how to read them, you will see this threat in the 
apocalyptic frescos of Orvieto cathedral. If not, read Freud's 
conversation in the train — where only the end of sexual 
potency is referred to. Freud's interlocutor, a doctor — the same 
interlocutor in fact before whom he is unable to remember the 
name Signorelli — is describing to Freud the dramatic character 
that a loss of potency usually has for his patients. 

27 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 
Thus the unconscious is always manifested as that which 
vacillates in a split in the subject, from which emerges a dis- 
covery that Freud compares with desire — a desire that we will 
temporarily situate in the denuded metonymy of the discourse 
in question, where the subject surprises himself in some un- 
expected way. 

As far as Freud and his relation to the father are concerned, 
let us not forget that, despite all his efforts to understand, he 
was forced to admit, to a woman of his acquaintance, that, for 
him, the question — What does a woman want? — remained un- 
answered. He never resolved this question, as we can see from 
what was in fact his relations with women, his uxorious char- 
acter, as Jones rather delicately puts it. I would say that Freud 
would certainly have made a perfect impassioned idealist had 
he not devoted himself to the other, in the form of the hysteric. 
I have decided to stop my seminar always at a particular 
time, at twenty-to-two. As you see, I have not managed today 
to deal fully with the function of the unconscious. 
(Questions and answers are missing.) 

22 January 1964 



28 



OF THE SUBJECT 
OF CERTAINTY 

Neither being, nor non-being • Finitude of desire • The elusive • The 
status of the unconscious is ethical • That all theory has to be revised • 
Freud, Cartesian • The desire of the hysteric 

Last week, my introduction of the unconscious through the 
structure of a gap provided an opportunity for one of my 
listeners, Jacques-Alain Miller, to give an excellent outline of 
what he recognized, in my previous writings, as the structuring 
function of a lack, and by an audacious arch he linked this up 
with what, speaking of the function of desire, I have designated 
as manque-a-itre, a 'want-to-be'. 

Having made this synopsis, which has certainly not been 
without its uses, at least for those who already had some idea of 
my teaching, he questioned me as to my ontology. 

I was able to answer him only within the limits imposed on 
dialogue by the time-table, and I ought to have obtained from 
him to begin with a more specific definition of what he means 
by the term ontology. Nevertheless, I hope he did not think 
that I found the question at all inappropriate. I would go 
further. It came at a particularly good point, in that when 
speaking of this gap one is dealing with an ontological function, 
by which I thought I had to introduce, it being the most 
essential, the function of the unconscious. 



The gap of the unconscious may be said to be pre-ontologkal. 
I have stressed that all too often forgotten characteristic — 
forgotten in a way that is not without significance — of the 
first emergence of the unconscious, namely, that it does not 
lend itself to ontology. Indeed, what became apparent at first 
to Freud, to the discoverers, to those who made the first steps, 

29 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

and what still becomes apparent to anyone in analysis who 
spends some time observing what truly belongs to the order to 
the unconscious, is that it is neither being, nor non-being, but 
the unrealized. 

I mentioned the function of limbo. I might also have spoken 
of what, in the constructions of the Gnostics, are called the 
intermediary beings — sylphs, gnomes, and even higher forms 
of these ambiguous mediators. Furthermore, let us not forget 
that when Freud began to disturb this world, he gave voice to 
the line Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta movebo. It seemed heavy 
with disturbing apprehensions when he pronounced it, but 
remarkably enough, its threat is completely forgotten after 
sixty years of experience. It is remarkable that what was 
thought to be an infernal opening should later have been so 
remarkably asepticized. 

But it is also revealing that what seemed so evidently to be 
an opening on to a lower world, did not, with a few rare 
exceptions, form any serious alliance with that whole world — 
then so prevalent, and still so today, but to a lesser degree than 
in the period of Freudian discovery — of meta-psychical re- 
search, as one used to say, even of spiritist, invocatory, necro- 
mantic practice, as did the Gothic psychology of Myers, which 
strove to follow up the fact of telepathy. 

Of course, in passing, Freud does touch on these facts, in so 
far as they were borne in upon him by experience. But it is 
clear that his theorization was moving towards a rationalist, 
elegant reduction. One may regard as exceptional, not to say 
aberrant, any concern in the analytic circle of today with what 
have been called — significantly enough, in order to sterilize 
them — thepsi (ip) phenomena. I am referring to such research 
as that of Servadio, for example. 

Certainly, it is not in this direction that our experience has 
led us. The result of our research into the unconscious moves, 
on the contrary, in the direction of a certain desiccation, a 
reduction to a herbarium, whose sampling is limited to a 
register that has become a catalogue raisonni, a classification that 
would certainly like to be thought a natural one. If, in the 
register of a traditional psychology, stress is laid on the un- 
controllable, infinite character of human desire — seeing in it 
the mark of some divine slipper that has left its imprint on it — 

3° 



OF THE SUBJECT OF CERTAINTY 

what analytic experience enables us to declare is rather the 
limited function of desire. Desire, more than any other point 
in the range of human possibility, meets its limit somewhere. 

We shall come back to all this, but I would point out that I 
said desire, not pleasure. Pleasure limits the scope of human 
possibility — the pleasure principle is a principle of homeostasis. 
Desire, on the other hand, finds its boundary, its strict relation, 
its limit, and it is in the relatioxLto^this limit that it is sustained 
as such, crossing the threshold_^mp6sed by the pleasure 
principle. 

This repudiation, into the field of religious sentimentality, of 
what he called the oceanic aspiration does not stem from a 
personal prejudice of Freud himself. Our experience is there to 
reduce this aspiration to a phantasy, to provide us with firm 
foundations elsewhere and to relegate it to the place occupied 
by what Freud called, on the subject of religion, illusion. 

What is ontic in the function of the unconscious is the split 
through which that something, whose adventure in our field 
seems so short, is for a moment brought into the light of day — 
a moment because the second stage, which is one of closing up, 
gives this apprehension a vanishing aspect. I will come back to 
this — it may be even the step that I will be able to cross now, 
not having been able to so far, for reasons of context. 
• The context is an urgent one, you know. Our technical 
habits have become — for reasons that will have to be analysed 
— so touchy about the functions of time, that in wishing to 
introduce distinctions so essential that they are emerging 
everywhere except in our discipline, it seemed that I was under 
an obligation to embark on a more or less defensive discussion. 

It is apparent that the very level of the definition of the un- 
conscious — to refer only to what Freud says about it, in a 
necessarily approximate way, being able at first to use it only 
in hesitant touches here and there, when discussing the primary 
process — that what happens there is inaccessible to contradic- 
tion, to spatio-temporal location and also to the function of 
time. 

Now, although desire merely conveys what it maintains of an 
image of the past towards an ever short and limited future, 
Freud declares that it is nevertheless indestructible. Notice that 
in the term indestructible, it is precisely the most inconsistent 

3i 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

reality of all that is affirmed. If indestructible desire escapes 
from time, to what register does it belong in the order of things ? 
For what is a thing, if not that which endures, in an identical 
state, for a certain time ? Is not this the place to distinguish in 
addition to duration, the substance of things, another mode of 
time — a logical time? You know that I have already touched 
"oirSus'thenTe in one of my essays. 

We find here once again the rhythmic structure of this 
pulsation of the slit whose function I referred to last time. The 
appearance/disappearance takes place between two points, the 
initial and the terminal of this logical time — between the 
instant of seeing, when something of the intuition itself is always 
elided, not to say lost, and that elusive moment when the 
apprehension of the unconscious is not, in fact, concluded, 
when it is always a question of an 'absorption* fraught with 
false trails (une ricupiration leurrie). 

Ontically, then, the unconscious is the elusive — but we are 
beginning to circumscribe it in a structure, a temporal structure, 
which, it can be said, has never yet been articulated as such. 



Since Freud himself, the development of the analytic experience 
has shown nothing but disdain for what appears in the gap. We 
have not — according to the comparison that Freud uses at a 
particular turning-point of The Interpretation of Dreams— fed 
with blood the shades that have emerged from it. 

We have concerned ourselves with other things, and I am 
here to show you this year in what way these displacements of 
interest have always been more in the direction of uncovering 
structures, which are badly described in analysis, and of which 
one speaks almost as a prophet. Too often, when reading the 
best theoretical work that analysts bring from their experience, 
one has the feeling that it has to be interpreted. I shall demon- 
strate this for you in due course when dealing with something 
that is of the most vital importance in our experience, namely, 
the transference, from which we see co-existing the most 
fragmentary and the most illuminating evidence, in total 
confusion. 

This explains why I can proceed only step by step, for others 

3a 



OF THE SUBJECT OF CERTAINTY 

will speak to you of what I am dealing with here — the un- 
conscious, repetition — at the level of the transference, and say 
that it is all a question of that. It is quite common, for example, 
to hear it said that the transference is a form of repetition. I am 
not saying that this is untrue, or that there is not an element of 
repetition in the transference. I am not saying that it is not on 
the basis of his experience of the transfer ence that Freud 
approached repetition . What I am saying isTKat the concept of 
repetition has nothing to do with the concept of the transference. 
Because of this confusion, I am obliged to go through this 
explanation at the outset, to lay down the necessary logical 
steps. For to follow chronology would be to encourage the 
ambiguities of the concept of repetition that derive from the 
fact that its discovery took place in the course of the first 
hesitant steps necessitated by the experience of the transference. 

I would now like to make clear, astonishing as the formula 
may seem to you, that its status of being, which is so elusive, so 
unsubstantial, is given to the unconscious by the procedure of 
i ts discovere r, v 

The status of the unconscious, which, as I have shown, is so 
fragile on the ggtir plan*, is ethical In his thirst for truth, 
Freud says, Whatever it is, I must go there, because, somewhere, 
this unconscious reveals itself. And he says this on the basis of 
his experience of what was, up to that time, for the physician, 
the most rejected, the most concealed, the most contained, 
reality, that of the hysteric, in so far as it is — in a sense, from 
its origin — marked by the sign of deception. 

Of course, this led us to many other things in the field in 
which we were taken by this initial approach, by the dis- 
continuity constituted by the fact that one man, a discoverer, 
Freud, said, There is the country where I shall take my people. For a 
long time, what was situated in this field appeared marked 
with the characteristics of its original discovery — the desire of 
the hysteric. But soon, as the discovery proceeded, something 
quite different made itself felt, something that was always 
formulated somewhat belatedly. This was because the theory 
had been forged only for the discoveries that preceded it. As a 
result, everything has to be revised, including the question of 
the desire of the hysteric. This imposes on us a sort of retro- 
active leap if we wish to mark here the essence of Freud's 

33 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

position concerning that which occurs in the field of the 
unconscious. 

I am not being impressionistic when I say that Freud's 
approach here is ethical — I am not thinking of the legendary 
courage of the scientist who recoils before nothing. This image, 
like all the others, requires some modification. If I am formu- 
lating here that the status of the unconscious is ethical, and not 
ontic, it is precisely because Freud himself does^not stress it 
when he gives the unconscious its status. And what I have 
said about the thirst for truth that animated him is a mere 
indication of the approaches that will enable us to ask our- 
selves where Freud's passion lay. 

Freud shows that he is very well aware how fragile are the 
veils of the unconscious where this register is concerned, when 
he opens the last chapter of The Interpretation of Dreams with the 
dream which, of all those that are analysed in the book, is in a 
category of its own — a dream suspended around the most 
anguishing mystery, that which links a father to the corpse of 
his son close by, of his dead son. As he is falling asleep, the 
father sees rise up before him the image of the son, who says to 
him, Father, can't you see I'm burning? In fact, the son really is 
burning, in the next room. 

What is the point, then, of sustaining the theory according to 
which the dream is the image of a desire with an example in 
which, in a sort of flamboyant reflection, it is precisely a reality 
which, incompletely transferred, seems here to be shaking the 
dreamer from his sleep ? Why, if not to suggest a mystery that 
is simply the world of the beyond, and some secret or other 
shared by the father and the son who says to him, Father, can't 
you see Pm burning? What is he burning with, if not with that 
which we see emerging at other points designated by the 
Freudian topology, namely, the weight of the sins of the father, 
borne by the ghost in the myth of Hamlet, which Freud couples 
with the myth of Oedipus? The father, the Name-of-the-father, 
sustains the structure of desire with the structure of the law — 
but the inheritance of the father is that which Kierkegaard 
designates for us, namely, his sin. 

Where does Hamlet's ghost emerge from, if not from the 
place from which he denounces his brother for surprising him 
and cutting him off in the full flower of his sins? And far from 

34 



OF THE SUBJECT OF CERTAINTY 

providing Hamlet with the prohibitions of the Law that would 
allow his desire to survive, this too ideal father is constantly 
being doubted. 

Everything is within reach, emerging, in this example that 
Freud places here in order to indicate in some way that he does 
not exploit it, that he appreciates it, that he weighs it, savours 
it. It is from this most fascinating point that he deflects our 
attention, and embarks on a discussion concerning the for- 
getting of the dream, and the value of its transmission by the 
subject. This discussion centres entirely around a certain 
number of terms that need to be stressed. 

The major term, in fact, is not truth. It is Gewissheit, certainty. 
Freud's method is Cartesian — in the sense that he sets out from 
the basis of the subject of certainty. The question is — of what 
can one be certain ? With this aim, the first thing to be done is 
to overcome that which connotes anything to do with the 
content of the unconscious — especially when it is a question of 
extracting it from the experience of the dream — to overcome 
that which floats everywhere, that which marks, stains, spots, 
the text of any dream communication — / am not sure, I 
doubt. 

And who would not have doubts about the transmission of 
the dream when, in effect, there is such an obvious gap between 
what was experienced and what is recounted ? 

Now — and it is here that Freud lays all his stress — doubt is 
the support of his certainty. 

He goes on to explain why — this is precisely the sign, he 
says, that there is something to preserve. Doubt, then, is a sign - 
of resistance. 

Yet the function he gives to doubt remains ambiguous, for 
this something that is to be preserved may also be the something 
that has to be shown — since, in any case, what is shown, shows 
itself only under a Verkleidung, a disguise, and an ill-fitting one 
it often is. But, nevertheless, I must insist on the fact that there 
is a point at which the two approaches of Descartes and Freud 
come together, converge. 

Descartes tells us — By virtue of the fact that I doubt, I am sure 
that I think, and — I would say, to stick to a formula that is no 
more prudent than his, but which will save us from getting 
caught up in the cogito, the / think — by virtue of thinking, I am. 

35 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

Note in passing that in avoiding the / think, I avoid the dis- 
cussion that results from the fact that this I think, for us, certainly 
cannot be detached from the fact that he can formulate it only 
by saying it to us, implicitly — a fact that he forgets. I will return 
to this later. 

In a precisely similar way, Freud, when he doubts — for they 
are his dreams, and it is he who, at the outset, doubts — is 
assured that a thought is there, which is unconscious, which 
means that it reveals itself as absent. As soon as he comes to 
deal with others, it is to this place that he summons the / think 
through which the subject will reveal himself. In short, he is 
sure that this thought is there alone with a^his / am, if I may 
put it like this, provided, and this is th^leapy someone thinks 
in his place. jc -^ 

It is here that the dissymmetry betweeirFreud and Descartes 
is revealed. It is not in the initial method of certainty grounded 
on the subject. It stems from the fact that the subject is 'at home' 
in this field of the unconscious. It is because Freud declares the 
certainty of the unconscious that the progress by which he 
changed the world for us was made. 

For Descartes, in the initial cogito — the Cartesians will grant 
me this point, but I will develop it in the discussion — what the 
/ think is directed towards, in so far as it lurches into the / am, is 
a real. But the true remains so much outside that Descartes 
then has to re-assure himself — of what, if not of an Other that 
is not deceptive, and which shall, into the bargain, guarantee 
by its very existence the bases of truth, guarantee him that there 
are in his own objective reason the necessary foundations for 
the very real, about whose existence he has just re-assured 
himself, to find the dimension of truth. I can do no more than 
suggest the extraordinary consequences that have stemmed 
from this handing back of truth into the hands of the Other, 
in this instance the perfect God, whose truth is the nub of the 
matter, since, whatever he might have meant, would always 
be the truth — even if he had said that two and two make five, it 
would have been true. 

What does this imply, if not that we will be able to begin 
playing with the small algebraic letters that transform geometry 
into analysis, that the door is open to set theory, that we can 
permit ourselves everything as a hypothesis of truth? 

36 



OF THE SUBJECT OF CERTAINTY 

But let us leave this — it is not our business, except in so far 
as we know that what begins at the level of the subject is never 
without consequence, on condition that we know what the 
term subject means. 

Descartes did not know, except that it involved the subject of 
a certainty and the rejection of all previous knowledge — but 
we know, thanks to Freud, that the subject of the unconscious 
manifests itself, that it thinks before it attains certainty. 

This is what we're left with. It's certainly our problem. But 
in any case, it is now a field to which we cannot refuse our- 
selves entry — at least as far as the question it poses is concerned. 

3 
I would now like to stress that the correlative of the subject is 
henceforth no longer the deceiving Other, but the deceived 
Other. And this is something that we are aware of in the most 
concrete way as soon as we enter the experience of analysis. 
What the subject fears most is to mislead us (nous tromper), to 
put us on a wrong track, or more simply, that we will make a 
mistake (nous nous trompions), for, after all, it is obvious, just to 
look at us, that we are people who could make a mistake like 
anybody else. 

Now, this does not bother Freud because — it is precisely 
this that one must understand, especially when one reads the 
first paragraph of the chapter on forgetting in dreams — the 
signs intersect, one must take everything into account, one 
must free oneself, he says, frei machen oneself of the whole scale 
of the evaluation that is sought there, PreisschStzvng, the evalua- 
tion of what is sure and what is not sure. The slightest indication 
that something is entering the field should make us regard it as 
of equal value as a trace in relation to the subject. 

Later, in the famous case of a female homosexual, he pokes 
fun at those who, on the subject of his patient's dreams can say 
to him: But where is this unconscious that is supposed to bring us to the 
truth, to a divine truth? they ask sarcastically. Tour patient is just 
laughing at you, since, in analysis, she has dreams on purpose to convince 
you that she was returning to what was asked of her, a liking for men. 
Freud sees no objection to this. The unconscious, he tells us, is not 
the dream. What he means is that the unconscious may operate 
in the direction of deception, and that this does not in any way 

37 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

count as an objection for him. Indeed, how could there not be 
truth about lying — that truth which makes it perfectly possible, 
contrary to the supposed paradox, to declare, lam lying? 

It is simply that Freud, on this occasion, failed to formulate 
correctly what was the object both of the hysteric's desire and 
of the female homosexual's desire. This is why — in each case, 
in the case of Dora as well as in the famous case of the female 
homosexual — he allowed himself to be overwhelmed, and the 
treatment was broken off. With regard to his interpretation, he 
is himself still hesitant — a little too early, a little too late. Freud 
could not yet see — for lack of those structural reference-points 
that I hope to bring out for you — that the hysteric's desire — 
which is legible in the most obvious way in the case — is to 
sustain the desire of the father — and, in the case of Dora, to 
sustain it by procuring. 

Dora's obvious complaisance in the father's adventure with 
the woman who is the wife of Herr K., whose attentions to 
herself she accepts, is precisely the game by which she must 
sustain the man's desire. Furthermore, the passage & facte — 
breaking off the relationship by striking him, as soon as Herr K. 
says to her not, I am not interested in you, but, I am not interested in 
my wife — shows that it was necessary for her that the link should 
be preserved with that third element that enabled her to see the 
desire, which in any case was unsatisfied, subsisting — both the 
desire of the father whom she favoured qua impotent and her 
own desire of being unable to realize herself qua desire of the 
Other. 

Similarly, and this once again justifies the formula I have 
given, the formula that originated in the experience of the 
hysteric, as a means of situating it at its correct level — man's 
desire is the desire of the Other — it is in the desire of the father 
that the female homosexual finds another solution, that is, to 
defy the desire of the father. If you re-read the case, you will 
see the obviously provocative character of the whole behaviour 
of this girl who, dogging the footsteps of some demi-mondaine 
whom she had found in the town, constandy made show of the 
chivalrous attentions she paid the girl until one day, meeting 
her father — what she meets in the father's gaze is unconcern, 
disregard, contempt for what is happening in front of him — 
she immediately throws herself over the railing of a local rail- 

38 



OF THE SUBJECT OF CERTAINTY 

way bridge. Literally, she can no longer conceive, other than 
by destroying herself, of the function she had, that of showing 
the father how one is, oneself, an abstract, heroic, unique 
phallus, devoted to the service of a lady. 

What the female homosexual does in her dream, in deceiving 
Freud, is still an act of defiance in relation to the father's desirei-— 
You want me to love men, you unit have as many dreams about love of 
men as you wish. It is defiance in the form of derision. 

I have developed this introduction in such detail so that you 
may distinguish the exact position of the Freudian approach to 
the subject — in so far as it is the subject that is concerned in the 
field of the unconscious. In this way, I have distinguished the 
function of the subject of certainty from the search for the truth. 

Next time, we shall approach the concept of repetition, by 
asking ourselves how it should be conceived. We shall see how 
by means of repetition, as repetition of deception, Freud co- 
ordinates experience, qua deceiving, with a real that will hence- 
forth be situated in the field of science, situated as that which 
the subject is condemned to miss, but even this miss is 
reve latory . 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

X: Are not logical time and time-substance identical? 

Lac an : Logical time is constituted by three stages. First, 
the moment of seeing — which is not without mystery, although 
correctly enough defined in the psychological experience of the 
intellectual operation that is called insight. Secondly, the stage of 
understanding. Thirdly, the moment to conclude. This is merely a 
reminder. 

In order to understand logical time, one must set out with the 
presupposition that from the outset the signifying battery is 
given. On this basis, two terms are to be introduced, necessitated, 
as we shall see, by the function of repetition — Willkur, chance, 
and Zufall, the arbitrary. 

In this way, Freud considers, with a view to the interpre- 
tation of dreams, the consequences of the chance of transcrip- 
tion, and the arbitrary nature of the links made — why link 
this with that, rather than with something else? Freud certainly 
brings us here to the heart of the question posed by the modern 

39 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

development of the sciences, in so far as they demonstrate what 
we can ground on chance. 

Nothing, in effect, can be grounded on chance — the calcu- 
lation of chances, strategies — that does not involve at the out- 
set a limited structuring of the situation, in terms of signifiers. 
When modern games theory elaborates the strategy of the 
two partners, each meets the other with the maximum chances 
of winning on condition that each reasons in the same way as 
the other. What is the value of an operation of this kind, if not 
that one's bearings are already laid down, the signifying 
reference-points of the problem are already marked in it and 
the solution will never go beyond them? 

Well! As far as the unconscious is concerned, Freud reduces 
everything that comes within reach of his hearing to the 
function of pure signifiers. It is on the basis of this reduction 
that it operates, and that a moment to conclude may appear, 
says Freud — a moment when he feels he has the courage to 
judge and to conclude. This is part of what I have called his 
ethical witness. 

Experience later shows that where the subject is concerned, 
he encounters limits, which are non-conviction, resistance, 
non-cure. Remembering always involves a limit. And, no 
doubt, it can be obtained more completely by other ways than 
analysis, but they are inoperant as far as cure is concerned. 

It is here that we must distinguish the scope of these two 
directions, remembering and repetition. From the one to the 
other, there is no more temporal orientation than there is 
reversibility. It is simply that they are not commutative — to 
begin by remembering in order to deal with the resistances of 
repetition is not the same thing as to begin by repetition in order 
to tackle remembering. 

It is this that shows us that the time-function is of a logical 
order here, and bound up with a signifying shaping of the real. 
Non-commutativity, in effect, is a category that belongs only 
to the register of the signifier. 

This enables us to grasp by what means the order of the 
unconscious appears. To what does Freud refer it? What is its 
surety? It is what he succeeds, in a second stage, in resolving 
by elaborating the function of repetition. We will see later how 
we can formulate it by referring to Aristotle's Physics. 

40 



OF THE SUBJECT OF CERTAINTY 

P. Kaufm ann : Lastyear,you declared that anxiety is that which 
does not deceive. Can you link this statement with ontology and 
certainty? 

Lacan: For analysis, anxiety is a crucial term of reference, 
because in effect anxiety is that which does not deceive. But 
anxiety may be lacking. 

In experience, it is necessary to canalize it and, if I may say 
so, to take it in small doses, so that one is not overcome by it. 
This is a difficulty similar to that of bringing the subject into 
contact with the real — a term that I shall try to define next 
time in order to dissipate the ambiguity that still persists about 
it in the minds of many of my pupils. 

What, for the analyst, can confirm in the subject what occurs 
in the unconscious? In order to locate the truth — I have shown 
you this in studying the formations of the unconscious — Freud 
relies on a certain signifying scansion. What justifies this trust 
is a reference to the real. But to say the least, the real does not 
come to him easily. Take the example of the Wolf Man. The 
exceptional importance of this case in Freud's work is to show 
that it is in relation to the real that the level of phantasy 
functions. The real supports the phantasy, the phantasy protects 
the real. Next time, by way of elucidating this relation for you, 
I shall take Spinoza's cogitation, but I shall bring into play 
another term to replace the attribute. 

29 January 1964 



4* 



OF THE NETWORK 
OF SIGNIFIERS 

Thoughts of the unconscious • The colophon of doubt • Subversion of the 

subject • Introduction to repetition ■ The real is that which always 

comes back to the same place 

It has been my habit to absent myself for the period of two of 
my seminars in order to go to that mode of ritual rest, spent in 
accordance with our customs, that we call winter sports. I am 
pleased to announce that this will not be the case this year, the 
lack of snow having given me an excuse to give up this 
obligation. 

Chance so has it that, by virtue of this fact, I can also 
announce another event that I am happy to bring to the 
knowledge of a wider public. It so happens that just as I was 
declining the opportunity of leaving my deposit with the 
travel agency, I was warmly thanked, for they had received a 
booking from eight members of the French Psycho-analytic 
Association. 

I must say that it gives me all the more pleasure to bring this 
event to your notice as it is what is called a truly good act, an 
action of the kind to which one may well apply the words of 
the Gospel, The left hand must not know what the right hand is 
doing. 

Eight of the most eminent members of the teaching section 
of the Association are now in London to discuss ways of warding 
off the effects of my teaching. This is a very praiseworthy 
concern and the said Association is willing to make any sacrifice 
for the well-being of its members, unless, perhaps, by reciprocity, 
the British Association has defrayed the expenses of this journey, 
as it is our custom to defray the travelling expenses of its mem- 
bers when they come and concern themselves very closely in the 
functioning of our Association. 

42 



OF THE NETWORK OF SIGNIFIERS 

I thought I had to make this announcement so that the 
paeons of gratitude might hide the few signs of nervousness 
that have probably appeared in connection with this expedition. 



Last time, I spoke to you about the concept of the unconscious, 
whose true function is precisely that of being in profound, 
initial, inaugural, relation with the function of the concept of 
the Unbegriff — or Begriffoixht original Un, namely, the cut. 

I saw a profound link between this cut and the function as 
such of the subject, of the subject in its constituent relation to 
the signifier itself. 

It seems something of a new departure — and it is — that I 
should have referred to the subject when speaking of the un- 
conscious. I thought I had succeeded in making you feel that 
all this happens in the same place, in the place of the subject, 
which — from the Cartesian experience reducing to a single 
point the ground of inaugural certainty — has taken on an 
Archimedic value, if indeed that really was the point of 
application that made possible the quite different direction 
that science has taken, namely, that initiated by Newton. 

I have constantly stressed in my preceding statements the 
pulsative function, as it were, of the unconscious, the need to 
disappear that seems to be in some sense inherent in it — every- 
thing that, for a moment, appears in its slit seems to be destined, 
by a sort of pre-emption, to close up again uponitseK as Freud 
himself used this metaphor, to vanish, to disappear. At the 
same time, I have formulated the hope that through this may 
be renewed the trenchant, decisive crystallization that has 
already been produced in the physical sciences, but this time 
in a different direction that we shall call the conjectural science of 
the subject. This is less paradoxical than might at first appear. 

When Freud realized that it was in the field of the dream 
that he had to find confirmation of what he had learnt from his 
experience of the hysteric, he began to move forward with truly 
unprecedented boldness. What does he now tell us about the 
unconscious ? He declares that it is constituted essentially, not 
by what the consciousness may evoke, extend, locate bring out 
of the subliminal, but by that which is, essentially, /refused. And 
what does Freud call this? He calls it by the same term by 

43 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

which Descartes designates what I just called his point of 
application — Gedanken, thoughts. 

There are thoughts in this field of the beyond of consciousness, 
and it is impossible to represent these thoughts other than in the 
same homology of determination in which the subject of the / 
think finds himself in relation to the articulation of the I doubt. 

Descartes apprehends his / think in the enunciation of the 
/ doubt, not in its statement, which still bears all of this know- 
ledge to be put in doubt. Shall I say that Freud makes one more 
step — which designates for us sufficiently the legitimacy of our 
association — when he invites us to integrate in the text of the 
dream what I shall call the colophon of doubt — the colophon, in 
an old text, is that small pointing hand that used to be printed, 
in the days when we still had a typography, in the margin. The 
colophon of doubt is part of the text. This indicates that Freud 
places his certainty, his Gewissfuit, only in the constellation of 
the signifiers as they result from the recounting, the com- 
mentary, the association, even if they are later retracted. 
Everything provides signifying material, which is what he 
depends on to establish his own Gewissfuit — for I stress that 
experience begins only with his method. That is why I compare 
it to the Cartesian method. 

I am not saying that Freud introduces the subject into the 
world — the subject as distinct from psychical function, which 
is a myth, a confused nebulosity — since it was Descartes who 
did this. But I am saying that Freud addresses the subject in 
order to say to him the following, which is new — Here, in the 
field of the dream, you are at home. Wo es war, soil Ich werden. 

This does not mean, as some execrable translation would 
have it, Le mot doit diloger le fa (the ego must dislodge the id). 
See how Freud — and in a formula worthy in resonance of the 
pre-Socratics — is translated in French. It is not a question of 
the ego in this soil Ich werden; the fact is that throughout Freud's 
work — one must, of course, recognize its proper place — the 
Ich is the complete, total locus of the network of signifiers, that 
is to say, the subject, where it was, where it has always been, the 
dream. The ancients recognized all kinds of things in dreams, 
including, on occasion, messages from the gods — and why not? 
The ancients made something of these messages from the gods. 
And, anyway — perhaps you will glimpse this in what I shall 

44 



OF THE NETWORK OF SIGNIFIERS 

say later — who knows, the gods may still speak through dreams. 
Personally, I don't mind either way. What concerns us is the 
^tissue that envelops these messages, the network in which, on 
occasion, something is caught. Perhaps the voice of the gods 
makes itself heard, but it is a long time since men lent their 
ears to them in their original state — it is well known that the 
ears are made not to hear with. 

v But the subject is there t o redisco wr »■**« »'* mp* — T anticipate "a 
— the real. I will justify what I have just said in a little while, 
but those who have been listening to me for some time know 
that I use, quite intentionally, the formula — The gods belong to 
the field of the real. 

Where it was, the Ich — the subject, not psychology — the 
subject, must come into existence. And there is only one method 
" of knowing that one is there, namely, to map the network. And 
how is a network mapped ? One goes back and forth over one's 
ground, one crosses one's path, one cross-checks it always in the < 
same way, and in this seventh chapter of The Interpretation of 
Dreams there is no other confirmation for one's Gewissheit, one's 
certainty, than this — Speak of chance, gentlemen, if you like. In my 
experience I have observed nothing arbitrary in this field, for it is cross- 
checked in such a way that it escapes chance. 

I would remind those who have already attended my lectures 
on this subject of letter fifty-two to Fliess, which comments on 
the schema that later, in The Interpretation of Dreams, is called 
optical. This model represents a number of layers, permeable 
to something analogous to light whose refraction changes from 
layer to layer. This is the locus where the affair of the subject of 
the unconscious is played out. And it is not, says Freud, a spatial, 
anatomical locus, otherwise how could one conceive it in the 
way it is presented to us? That is, as an immense display, a 
special spectre, situated between perception and consciousness. 
You know that these two elements will later, when Freud 
establishes his second topography, form the perception- 
consciousness system, the Wahrnehmung-Bewusstsein, but one 
should not then forget the interval that separates them, in 
which the place of the Other is situated, in which the subject 
is constituted. 

Well, to return to the letter to Fliess, how do the Wahmeh- 
mungszeichen, the traces of perception, function? Freud deduces 

45 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

from his experience the need to make an absolute separation 
between perception and consciousness — in order for these 
traces of perception to pass into memory, they must first be 
effaced in perception, and reciprocally. He then designates a 
time when these Wahrtuhmungszeichen must be constituted in 
simultaneity. What is this time, if not signifying synchrony ? 
And, of course, Freud says this all the more in that he does not 
know that he is saying it fifty years before the linguists. But we 
can immediately give to these Wahrtuhmungszeichen their true 
name of signifiers. And our reading makes it quite clear that 
Freud, when he comes back to this locus in The Interpretation of 
Dreams, designates still other layers, in which the traces are 
constituted this time by analogy. What we have here are those 
functions of contrast and similitude so essential in the constitu- 
tion of metaphor, which is introduced by a diachrony. 

I won't elaborate this point too much, because we must move 
on today. But I would like to say that we find in Freud's 
articulations a quite unambiguous indication that what is 
involved in this synchrony is not only a network formed by 
random and contiguous associations. The signifiers were able 
> to constitute themselves in simultaneity only by virtue of a very 
I defined structure of constituent diachrony. The diachrony is 
orientated by the structure. Freud shows clearly that, for us, 
at the level of the last layer of the unconscious, where the 
diaphragm functions, where the pre-relations between the pri- 
mary process and that part of it that will be used at the level 
of the pre-conscious are established, there can be no such thing 
as a miracle. It must, he says, have a relation with causality.- J^ 5 ; 

All these indications cross-check one another and these cross- ' 
checkings assure us too that we are rediscovering Freud — 
though we do not know whether it is here that we shall find our 
Ariadne's thread, because, of course, we read it before formu- 
lating our theory of the signifier, but without being able, for the 
moment, to understand it. It is no doubt through the particular 
necessities of our experience that we have set at the heart of 
the structure of the unconscious thecausal gap, but the fact 
that we have found an enigmatic, unexplained indication of it 
in Freud's text is for us a sign that we are progressing in the way 
of his certainty. For the subject of certainty is divided here — it 
is Freud who has certainty. 

46 



OF THE NETWORK OF SIGNIFIERS 



This brings us to the heart of the problem that I am raising. 
Is psycho-analysis, here and now, a science ? What distinguishes 
modern science from science in its infancy, which is discussed 
in the Theaetetus, is that, when science arises, a master is always 
present. Freud is certainly a master. But if everything that is 
written as analytic literature is not mere buffoonery, it always 
functions as such — which poses the question as to whether this 
pedicle might, one day, be reduced. 

Opposite his certainty, there is the subject, who, as I said 
just now, has been waiting there since Descartes. I dare to state 
as a truth that the Freudian field was possible only a certain 
time after the emergence of the Cartesian subject, in so far as 
modern science began only after Descartes made bis inaugural 
step. 

It is on this step that depends the fact that one can call upon 
the subject to re-enter himself in the unconscious — for, after 
all, it is important to know who one is calling. It is not the soul, 
either mortal or immortal, which has been with us for so long, 
nor some shade, some double, some phantom, nor even some 
supposed psycho-spherical shell, the locus of the defences and 
other such simplified notions. It is the subject who is called — 
there is only he, therefore, who can be chosen. There may be, 
as in the parable, many called and few chosen, but there will 
certainly not be any others except those who are called. 

In order to understand the Freudian concepts, one must set 
out on the basis that it is the subject who is called — the subject 
of Cartesian origin. This basis gives its true function to what, 
in analysis, is called recollection or remembering. Recollection 
is not Platonic reminiscence — it is not the return of a form, an 
imprint, a eidos of beauty and good, a supreme truth, coming to 
us from the beyond. It is something that comes to us from the 
structural necessities, something humble, born at the level of 
the lowest encounters and of all the talking crowd that precedes 
us, at the level of the structure of the signifier, of the languages 
spoken in a stuttering, stumbling way, but which cannot elude 
constraints whose echoes, model, style can be found, curiously 
enough, in contemporary mathematics. 

As you saw with the notion of cross-checking, the function of 

47 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

return, Wiederkehr, is essential. It is not only Wuderkehr in the 
sense of that which has been repressed — the very constitution 
of the field of the unconscious is based on the Wiederkehr. It is 
there that Freud bases his certainty. But it is quite obvious that 
it is not from there that it comes to him. It comes to him from 
the fact that he recog niz es the law of his own d esire. He would 
nofnave been able toadvance with this bet of certainty if he had 
not been guided in it, as his writings show, by his self-analysis. 

And what is his self-analysis, if not the brilliant mapping of 
the law of desire suspended in the Name-of-the-father. Freud 
advances, sustained by a certain relation to his desire, and by 
his own achievement, namely, the constitution of psycho- 
analysis. 

I shall not elaborate much more, though I always hesitate to 
leave this terrain. If I have insisted on it, it is to show you that 
the notion of hallucination, in Freud, as a process of regressive 
investment on perception necessarily implies that the subject 
must be completely subverted in it — which he is, in effect, only 
in extremely fleeting moments. 

No doubt this leaves entirely open the question of hallucina- 
tion proper, in which the subject does not believe, and in which 
he does not recognize himself as implicated. No doubt this is 
merely a mythical pin-pointing — for it is not certain that one 
can speak of the delusion of hallucinatory psychosis of a con- 
fusional origin, as Freud does, rather too rapidly, seeing in it the 
manifestation of the perceptual regression of arrested desire. 
But the fact that there is a mode in which Freud can conceive as 
possible the subversion of the subject shows clearly enough to 
what extent he identifies the subject with that which is origin- 
ally subverted by the system of the signifier. 

So let us leave this time of the unconscious and move towards 
the question of what repetition is. It will need more than one of 
our sessions. 

3 
What I now have to say to you is so new — though obviously 
supported by what I have said about the signifier — that I 
thought I ought to formulate for you today, without keeping 
any of my cards up my sleeve, what I understand by the 
function of repetition. 

48 



OF THE NETWORK OF SIGNIFIERS 

In any case, this function has nothing to do with the open or 
closed character of the circuits that I have just called Wiederkehr. 

I am not saying that Freud introduced this function, but he 
articulated it for the first time, in the article of 1914, Erinnern, 
WiederhoUn und Durcharbeiten ('Remembering, Repeating and 
Working-Through') — which, of all psycho-analytic texts is 
certainly the one that has inspired the greatest amount of 
stupidity — and which culminates in chapter five ofjenseits des 
Lustprinzips. 

Try to read this chapter five, line by line, in some language 
other than French. Those who do not know German should 
read it in the English translation. You will find this translation 
— I say this in passing — quite entertaining. You will see, for 
example, that the translation of instinct for Trieb, and instinctual 
for triebhqfi has so many drawbacks for the translator that, 
although it is maintained throughout quite uniformly — thus 
basing the whole edition on a complete misunderstanding, 
since Trieb and instinct have nothing in common — the discord 
becomes so impossible at one point that the implications of a 
sentence cannot be carried through by translating Triebhqfi by 
instinctual. A footnote becomes necessary — At the beginning of 
the next paragraph the word Trieb . . . is much more revealing of 
urgency than the word instinctual. Trieb gives you a kick in the arse, 
my friends — quite different from so-called instinct. That's how 
psycho-analytic teaching is passed on ! 

Let us take a look, then, at how WiederhoUn (repeating) is 
introduced. WiederhoUn is related to Erinnerung (remembering). 
The subject in himself, the recalling of his biography, all this 
goes only to a certain limit, which is known as the real. If I 
wished to make a Spinozian formula concerning what is at 
issue, I would say — cogitatio adaequata semper vital tandem rem. 
An adequate thought, qua thought, at the level at which we are, 
always avoids — if only to find itself again later in everything — 
the same thing. Here, the real is that which always comes back 
to the same place — to the place where the subject in so far as 
he thinks, where the res cogitans, does not meet it. 

The whole history of Freud's discovery of repetition as func- 
tion becomes clear only by pointing out in this way the relation 
between thought and the real. This was fine at the beginning, 
because one was dealing with hysterics. How convincing the 

49 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

process of remembering was with the first hysterics ! But what 
is at issue in this remembering could not be known at the outset 
— one did not know that the desire of the hysteric was the desire 
of the father, to be sustained in his status. It was hardly sur- 
prising that, for the benefit of him who takes the place of the 
father, one remembered things right down to the dregs. 

I will take this opportunity to point out to you that in Freud's 
texts repetition is not reproduction. There is never any ambi- 
guity on this point: Wiederholen is not Reproduzieren. 

To reproduce is what one thought one could do in the 
optimistic days of catharsis. One had the primal scene in 
reproduction as today one has pictures of the great masters for 
g francs 50. But what Freud showed when he made his next 
steps — and it did not take him long — was that nothing can be 
grasped, destroyed, or burnt, except in a symbolic way, as one 
says, in effigie, in absentia. 

Repetition first appears in a form that is not clear, that is not 
self-evident, like a reproduction, or a making present, in act. 
That is why I have placed The Act with a large question-mark 
at the bottom of the blackboard so as to indicate that, as long 
as we speak of the relations ofrepetition with the real, this act 
will remain on our horizon. 

It is curious enough that neither Freud, nor any of his 
epigones, ever attempted to remember what is nevertheless 
within the grasp of everybody concerning the act — let us say, 
human act, if you like, since to our knowledge there is no other 
act but the human one. Why is an act not mere behaviour? Let 
us concentrate, for example, on an act that is unambiguous, 
the act of cutting open one's belly in certain conditions — inci- 
dentally, it's not called hara-kiri, but seppuku. Why do people do 
that? Because they think it annoys others, because, in the 
structure, it is an act that is done in honour of something. But 
wait. Let us not be precipitate until we know, and let us take 
note of this, that an act, a true act, always has an element of 
structure, by the fact of concerning a real that is not self- 
evidently caught up in it. 

Wiederholen. Nothing has been more enigmatic — especially 
on the subject of that bipartition, of such structural importance 
to the whole of Freudian psychology, of the pleasure principle 
and the reality principle — nothing has been more enigmatic 

5° 



OF THE NETWORK OF SIGNIFIERS 

than this Wiederholen, which is very close, so the most prudent 
etymologists tell us, to the verb 'to haul' (haler) — hauling as on 
a towpath — very close to a hauling of the subject, who always 
drags his thing into a certain path that he cannot get out of. 

And why, at first, did repetition appear at the level of what is 
called traumatic neurosis? 

Contrary to all the neurophysiologists, pathologists and 
others, Freud made it quite clear that, although it was difficult 
for the subject to reproduce in dream the memory of the heavy 
bombing-raid, for example, from which his neurosis derives — 
it does not seem, when he is awake, to bother him either way. 
What, then, is this function of traumatic repetition if nothing 
— quite the reverse — seems to justify it from the point of view 
of die pleasure principle ? To master the painful event, some- 
one may say — but who masters, where is the master here, to be 
mastered ? Why speak so hastily when we do not know precisely 
where to situate the agency that would undertake this operation 
of mastery? 

At the end of the series of writings of which I have given you 
the two essentials, Freud shows that we can conceive here of 
what occurs in the dreams of traumatic neurosis only at the 
level of the most primitive functioning — that in which it is a 
question of obtaining the binding of energy. So let us not 
presume in advance that it is a question here of some gap, 
some division of function such as we might find at some first 
i nfinitely more elaborate level of the real. On the contrary, we 
see here a point that the subject can approach only by dividing 
himself into a certain number of agencies. One might say what 
is said of the divided kingdom, that any conception of the unity 
of the psyche, of the supposed totalizing, synthesizing psyche, 
ascending towards consciousness, perishes there. 

Lastly — in these first stages of the experience in which 
remembering is gradually substituted for itself and approaches 
ever nearer to a sort of focus, or centre, in which every event 
seems to be under an obligation to yield itself — precisely at 
this moment, we see manifest itself what I will also call — in 
inverted commas, for one must also change the meaning of the 
three words that I am going to say, one must change it com- 
pletely in order to give it its full scope — the resistance of the 
subject, which becomes at that moment repetition in act. 

5 1 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

What I will articulate next time will show you how to 
appropriate to this statement the admirable fourth and fifth 
chapters of Aristotle's Physics. Aristotle turns and manipulates 
two terms that are absolutely resistant to his theory, which is 
nevertheless the most elaborate that has ever been made on the 
function of cause — two terms that are incorrectly translated as 
chance and fortune. It is a question, then, of revising the relation 
that Aristotle establishes between the automaton — and we 
know, at the present stage of modern mathematics, that it is 
the network of signifiers — and what he designates as the 
tuchi — which is for us the encounter with the real. 
Questions and Answers are missing. 

5 February 1964 



5« 



TUCHE AND AUTOMATON 

Psycho-analysis is not an idealistnj The real as trauma • Theory of the 
dream and of waking • Consciousness and representation • God is un- 
conscious • The objet petit a in the fort-da 

Today I shall continue the examination of the concept of 
repetition, as it is presented by Freud and the experience of 
psycho-analysis. 

I wish to stress here that, at first sight, psycho-analysis seems 
to lead in the direction of idealism. 

God knows that it has been reproached enough for this — it 
reduces the experience, some say, that urges us to find in the 
hard supports of conflict, struggle, even of the exploitation of 
man by man, the r eason s for ou r deficiencies — it leads to an 
ontology of the tendencies, which it regards as primitive, inter- 
nal, already given by the condition of the subject. 

We have only to consider the course of this experience from 
its first steps to see, on the contrary, that it in no way allows us 
to accept some such aphorism as life is a dream. No praxis is 
more orientated towards that which, at the heart of experience, 
is the kernel of the real than psycho-analysis. 



Where do we meet this real ? For what we have in the discovery 
of psycho-analysis is an encounter, an essential encounter — an 
appointment to which we are always called with a real that 
eludes us. That is why I have put on the blackboard a few 
words that are for us, today, a reference-point of what we wish 
to propose. 

First, the tuchi, which we have borrowed, as I told you last 
time, from Aristotle, who uses it in his search for cause. We have 
translated it as the enc ounter wit hthe real. The real is beyond the 
automaton, the return, the coming-back, the insistence of the 

53 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

signs, by which we see ourselves governed by the pleasure 
principle. The real is that which always lies behind the auto- 
maton, and it is quite obvious, throughout Freud's research, 
that it is this that is the object of his concern, : 

If you wish to understand what is Freud's true preoccupation 
as the function of phantasy is revealed to him, remember the 
development, which is so central for us, of the Wolf Man. He 
applies himself, in a way that can almost be described as an- 
guish, to the question — what is the first encounter, the real, 
that lies behind the phantasy? We feel that throughout this 
analysis, this real brings with it the subject, almost by force, so 
directing the research that, after all, we can today ask ourselves 
whether this fever, this presence, this desire of Freud is not that 
which, in his patient, might have conditioned the belated 
accident of his psychosis. 

So there is no question of confusing with repetition either the 
return of the signs, or reproduction, or the modulation by the 
act of a sort of acje4^ut re membering . Repetition is something 
which, of its true nature, is always veiled in analysis, because of 
the identification of repetition^ with the transference in the 
conceptualization of analysts7^6w~,~this really is the point at 
which a distinction should be made. 

The relation to the real that is to be found in the transference 
was expressed by Freud when he declared that nothing can be 
apprehended in effigie, in absentia — and yet is not the transference 
given to us as effigy and as relation to absence? We can succeed 
in Unravelling this ambiguity of the reality involved in the 
transference only on the basis of the function of the real in 
repetition. 

What is repeated, in fact, is always something that occurs 
— the expression tells us quite a lot about its relation to the 
tuchi — as if by chance. This is something that we analysts never 
allow ourselves to be taken in by, on principle. At least, we 
always point out that we must not be taken in when the subject 
tells us that something happened to him that day that pre- 
vented him from realizing his wish to come to the session. 
Things must not be taken at the level at which the subject puts 
them — in as much as what we are dealing with is precisely 
this obstacle, this hitch, t hat we find at ev ery moment. It is this 
mode of apprehension above all that governs the new decipher- 

54 



TUCHfi AND AUTOMATON 

ing that we have given of the subject's relations to that which 
makes his condition. 

The function of the tuchi, of the real as encounter — the 
encounter in so far as it may be missed, in so far as it is essenti- 
ally the missed encounter — first presented itself in the history 
of psycho-analysis in a form that was in itself already enough 
to arouse our attention, that of the trauma. 

Is it not remarkable that, at the origin of the analytic ex- 
perience, the real should have presented itself in the form of 
that which is unassimilable in it — in the form of the trauma, 
determining all that follows, and imposing on it an apparently 
accidental origin ? We are now at the heart of what may enable 
us to understand the radical character of the conflictual notion 
introduced by the opposition of the pleasure principle and the 
reality principle — which is why we cannot conceive the reality 
principle as having, by virtue of its ascendancy, the last 
word. 

In effect, the trauma is conceived as having necessarily been 
marked by the subjectifying homeostasis that orientates the 
whole functioning defined by the pleasure principle. Our ex- 
perience then presents us with a problem, which derives from 
the fact that, at the very heart of the primary processes, we see 
preserved the insistence of the trauma in making us aware of 
its existence. The trauma reappears, in effect, frequently 
unveiled. How can the dream, the bearer of the subject's desire, 
produce that which makes the trauma emerge repeatedly — if 
not its very face, at least the screen that shows- us that it is still 
there behind? 

Let us conclude that the reality system, however far it is 
developed, leaves an essential part of what belongs to the real a 
prisoner in the toils of the pleasure principle. 

It is this that we have to investigate, this reality, one might 
say, whose presence is supposed to be required by us, if the 
motive force of development, as it is represented for us by some- 
one like Melanie Klein, for example, is not reducible to a 
formula like the one I used earlier, namely, life is a dream. 

To this requirement correspond those radical points in the 
real that I call encounters, and which enable us to conceive 
reality as unterlegt, untertragen, which, with the superb ambiguity 
of the French language, appear to be translated by the same 

55 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

word — souffrance. 1 Reality is in abeyance there, awaiting 
attention. And Z wan i> constraint, which Freud defines by 

^Wiederholung, governs the very diversions of the primary process. 
The primary process — which is simply what I have tried to 
define for you in my last few lectures in the form of the un- 
conscious — must, once again, be apprehended in its experience 
of rupture, between perception and consciousness, in that non- 
temporal locus, I said, which forces us to posit what Freud 
calls, in homage to Fechner, die Idee einer anderer Lokalitdt, the 
idea of another locality, another space, another scene, the 

, between perception and consciousness. 



We can, at any moment, apprehend this primary process. 

The other day, I was awoken from a short nap by knocking 
at my door just before I actually awoke. With this impatient 
knocking I had already formed a dream, a dream that mani- 
fested to me something other than this knocking. And when I 
awake, it is in so far as I reconstitute my entire representation 
around this knocking — this perception — that I am aware of it. 
I know that I am there, at what time I went to sleep, and why 
I went to sleep. When the knocking occurs, not in my per- 
ception, but in my consciousness, it is because my consciousness 
reconstitutes itself around this representation — tliat I know 
that I am waking up, that I am knocked up. 

But here I must question myself as to what I am at that 
moment — at the moment, so immediately before and so sepa- 
rate, which is that in which I began to dream under the effect 
of the knocking which is, to all appearances, what woke me. 2 

1 In French, the phrase 'en souffrance' means 'in suspense', 'in abeyance', 
'awaiting attention', 'pending'. It is this sense that translates the German 
word. 'Souffrance' also means 'pain', of course. Hence the ambiguity referred 
to by Lacan. |Tr.]. 

* There follows a passage in which Lacan comments on the use in French 
of the 'pleonastic ne', that is, the 'ne' used without the usually accompany- 
ing 'pas', 'que' or 'jamais', etc. Since the passage includes examples of this 
use in French, it is strictly untranslatable. I therefore give it below in the 
original : 

'Je suis, que je sache, avant queje ne me reveille — ce ne dit expletif, deja dans 
tel de mes ecrits design^, est le mode m£me de presence de ce je suis d'avant le 
reveil. II n'est point exptetif, il est plutdt l'expression de mon impleance, 

56 



TUCHfi AND AUTOMATON 

Observe what I am directing you towards — towards the 
symmetry of that structure that makes me, after the awakening 
knock, able to sustain myself, apparently only in a relation 
with my representation, which, apparently, makes of me only 
consciousness. A sort of involuted reflection — in my conscious- 
ness, it is only my representation that I recover possession of. 

Is that all? Freud has told us often enough that he would 
have to go back to the function of consciousness, but he never 
did. Perhaps we shall see better what is at issue, by apprehend- 
ing what is there that motivates the emergence of the repre- 
sented reality, namely the phenomenon, distance, the gap 
itself that constitutes awakening. 

To make things quite clear, let us return to the dream 
— which is also made up entirely of noise — that I left you time 
to look up in The Interpretation of Dreams. You will remember 
the unfortunate father who went to rest in the room next to the 
one in which his dead child lay — leaving the child in the care, 
we are told, of another old man — and who is awoken by some- 
thing. By what? It is not only the reality, the shock, the 
knocking, a noise made to recall him to the real, but this 
expresses, in his dream, the quasi-identity of what is happening, 
the very reality of an overturned candle setting light to the bed 
in which his child lies. 

Such an example hardly seems to confirm Freud's thesis in 
the Traumdeutung — that the dream is the realization of a desire. 

What we see emerging here, almost for the first time, in the 
Traumdeutung, is a function of the dream of an apparently 
secondary kind — in this case, the dream satisfies only the need 
to prolong sleep. What, then, does Freud mean by placing, 
at this point, this particular dream, stressing that it is in itself 
full confirmation of his thesis regarding dreams? 

If the function of the dream is to prolong sleep, if the dream, 
after all, may come so near to the reality that causes it, can we 
not say that it might correspond to this reality without emerging 



chaque fob qu'elle aise manifesto-. La langue, la langue francaise le 
deiinit bien dans l'acte de son emploi. Aurez-vous fim avant qu'il ne vieme? — 
cela m'importe que vous ayez fini, a Dieu ne plaise qu'il vint avant. 
Passerez-vous, avant qu'il vietme? — car, deja, quand il viendra, vous ne 
serez plus la.' 

57 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

from sleep? After all, there is such a thing as somnambulistic 
activity. The question that arises, and which indeed all Freud's 
previous indications allow us here to produce, is — What is it 
that wakes the sleeper? Is it not, in the dream, another reality? 
— the reality that Freud describes thus — Doss das Kind an 
seinem Bette steht, that the child is near his bed, ihn am Armefasst, 
takes him by the arm and whispers to him reproachfully, und 
ihm vorwurfsvoll zuraunt: Voter, siehst du denn nicht, Father, can't 
you see, doss ich verbrenne, that I am burning? 

Is there not more reality in this message than in the noise by 
which the father also identifies the strange reality of what is 
happening in the room next door. Is not the missed reality 
that caused the death of the child expressed in these words? 
Freud himself does not tell us that we must recognize in this 
sentence what perpetuates for the father those words forever 
separated from the dead child that were said to him, perhaps, 
Freud supposes, because of the fever — but who knows, perhaps 
these words perpetuate the remorse felt by the father that the 
man he has put at his son's bedside to watch over him may not 
be up to his task : die Besorgnis dass der greise Wdchter seiner Aufgabe 
nicht gewachsen sein dilrfie, he may not be up to his job, in fact, he 
has gone to sleep. 

Does not this sentence, said in relation to fever, suggest/to 
you what, in one of my recent lectures, I called the cause of 
fever? And is not the action, apparently so urgent, of preventing 
what is happening in the next room also perhaps felt as being 
in any case too late now, in relation to what is at issue, in the 
psychical reality manifested in the words spoken? Is not the 
dream essentially, one might say, an act of homage to the 
missed reality — the reality that can no longer produce itself 
except by repeating itself endlessly, in some never attained 
awakening? What encounter can there be henceforth with 
that forever inert being — even now being devoured by the 
flames — if not the encounter that occurs precisely at the 
moment when, by accident, as if by chance, the flames come 
to meet him? Where is the reality in this accident, if not that 
it repeats something actually more fatal by means of reality, a 
reality in which the person who was supposed to be watching 
over the body still remains asleep, even when the father re- 
emerges after having woken up ? 

58 



TUCHfi AND AUTOMATON 

Thus the encounter, forever missed, has occurred between 
dream and awakening, between the person who is still asleep 
and whose dream we will not know and the person who has 
dreamt merely in order not to wake up. 

If Freud, amazed, sees in this the confirmation of his theory 
of desire, it is certainly a sign that the dream is not a phantasy 
fulfilling a wish. 

For it is not that, in the dream, he persuades himself that the 
son is still alive. But the terrible vision of the dead son taking 
the father by the arm designates a beyond that makes itself 
heard in the dream. Desire manifests itself in the dream by the 
loss expressed in an image at the most cruel point of the object. 
It is only in the dream that this truly unique encounter can 
occur. Only a rite, an endlessly repeated act, can commemorate 
this not very memorable encounter — for no one can say 
what the death of a child is, except the father qua father, that 
is to say, no conscious being. 

For the true formula of atheism is not God is dead — even by 
basing the origin of the function of the father upon his murder, 
Freud protects the father — the true formula of atheism is God 
is unconscious. 

The awakening shows us the waking state of the subject's 
consciousness in the representation of what has happened 
— the unfortunate accident in reality, against which one can 
do no more than take steps! But what, then, was this accident? 
When everybody is asleep, including the person who wished to 
take a little rest, the person who was unable to maintain his 
vigil and the person of whom some well intentioned individual, 
standing at his bedside, must have said, He looks just as if he is 
asleep, when we know only one thing about him, and that is 
that, in this entirely sleeping world, only the voice is heard, 
Father, can't you see I'm burning? This sentence is itself a fire- 
brand — of itself it brings fire where it falls — and one cannot 
see what is burning, for the flames blind us to the fact that the 
fire bears on the Unterlegt, on the Untertragen, on the real. 

This is certainly what brings us to recognizing in this de- 
tached sentence from the dream of the grief-stricken father the 
counterpart of what will be, once he is awake, his consciousness, 
and to ask ourselves what is the correlative, in the dream, of the 
representation. This question is all the more striking in that, 

59 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

here, we see the dream really as the counterpart of the repre- 
sentation; it is the imagery of the dream and it is an opportunity 
for us to stress what Freud, when he speaks of the unconscious, 
designates as that which essentially determines it, the Vor- 
stellungsrepr&sentanz. This means not, as it has been mistranslated, 
the representative representative (le reprisentant reprisentatif), 
but that which takes the place of the representation {le tenant- 
lieu de la representation). We shall see its function later. 

I hope I have helped you to grasp what is nodal in the 
encounter, qua encounter forever missed, and which really 
sustains, in Freud's text, what seems to him, in his dream, 
absolutely exemplary. 

The place of the real, which stretches from the trauma to the 
phantasy — in so far as the phantasy is never anything more 
than the screen that conceals something quite primary, some- 
thing determinant in the function of repetition — this is what 
we must now examine. This, indeed, is what, for us, explains 
both the ambiguity of the function of awakening and of the 
function of the real in this awakening. The real may be repre- 
sented by the accident, the noise, the small element of reality, 
which is evidence that we are not dreaming. But, on the other 
hand, this reality is not so small, for what wakes us is the other 
reality hidden behind the lack of that which takes the place of 
representation — this, says Freud is the Trieb. 

But be careful! We have not yet said what this Trieb is 
— and if, for lack of representation, it is not there, what is 
this Trieb? We may have to consider it as being only Trieb to 
come. 

How can we fail to see that awakening works in two direc- 
tions — and that the awakening that re-situates us in a con- 
stituted and represented reality carries out two tasks? The 
real has to be sought beyond the dream — in what the dream 
has enveloped, hidden from us, behind the lack of representa- 
tion of which there is only one representative. This is the real 
that governs our activities more than any other and it is psycho- 
analysis that designates it for us. 

3 
Thus Freud finds himself providing the solution to the 
problem which, for the most acute of the questioners of the 

60 



TUCHfi AND AUTOMATON 

soul before him — Kierkegaard — had already been centred on 
repetition. 

I would ask you to re-read Kierkegaard's essay on Repetition, 
so dazzling in its lightness and ironic play, so truly Mozartian 
in the way, so reminiscent of Don Giovanni, it abolishes the 
mirages of love. With great acuteness, and in a quite unanswer- 
able way, Kierkegaard stresses the feature that, in his love, the 
young man — whose portrait Kierkegaard paints for us with 
a mixture of emotion and derision — addresses only to himself 
through the medium of memory. Really, is there not something 
here more profound than La Rochefoucauld's remark that few 
would experience love if they had not had its ways and means 
explained to them? Yes, but who began it? And does not 
everything essentially begin by deceiving the first to whom the 
enchantment of love was addressed — who has passed off this 
enchantment as the exaltation of the other, by making himself 
the prisoner of this exaltation, of this breathlessness which, 
with the other, has created the most false of demands, that of 
narcissistic satisfaction, the ego ideal whether it is or the ego 
that regards itself as the ideal? 

Freud is not dealing with any repetition residing in the 
natural, no return of need, any more than is Kierkegaard. The 
return of need is directed towards consumption placed at the 
service of appetite. Repetition demands the new. It is turned 
towards the ludic, which finds its dimension in this new 
— Freud also tells us this in the chapter I referred to last time. 

Whatever, in repetition, is varied, modulated, is merely 
alienation of its meaning. The adult, and even the more ad- 
vanced child, demands something new in his activities, in his 
games. But this 'sliding-away' (glissement) conceals what is the 
true secret of the ludic, namely, the most radical diversity 
constituted by repetition in itself. It can be seen in the child, 
in his first movement, at the moment when he is formed as a 
human being, manifesting himself as an insistence that the 
story should always be the same, that its recounted realization 
should be ritualized, that is to say, textually the same. This 
requirement of a distinct consistency in the details of its telling 
signifies that the realization of the signifier will never be able 
to be careful enough in its memorization to succeed in designat- 
ing the primacy of the significance as such. To develop it by 

61 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

varying the significations is, therefore, it would seem, to elude 
it. This variation makes one forget the aim of the significance 
by transforming its act into a game, and giving it certain outlets 
that go some way to satisfying the pleasure principle. 

When Freud grasps the repetition involved in the game 
played by his grandson, in the reiterated /ort-<£z, he may indeed 
point out that the child makes up for the effect of his mother's 
disappearance by making himself the agent of it — but, this 
phenomenon is of secondary importance. Wallon stresses that 
the child does not immediately watch the door through which 
his mother has disappeared, thus indicating that he expects to 
see her return through it, but that his vigilance was aroused 
earlier, at the very point she left him, at the point she moved 
away from him. The ever-open gap introduced by the absence 
indicated remains the cause of a centrifugal tracing in which 
that which falls is not the other qua face in which the subject is 
projected, but that cotton-reel linked to itself by the thread that 
it holds — in which is expressed that which, of itself, detaches 
itself in this trial, self-mutilation on the basis of which the order 
of significance will be put in perspective. For the game of the 
cotton-reel is the subject's answer to what the mother's absence 
has created on the frontier of his domain — the edge of his 
cradle — namely, a ditch, around which one can only play at 
"jumping. 

This reel is not the mother reduced to a little ball by some 
magical game worthy of the Jivaros — it is a small part of the 
subject that detaches itself from him while still remaining his, 
still retained. This is the place to say, in imitation of Aristotle, 
that man thinks with his object. It is with his object that the 
child leaps the frontiers of his domain, transformed into a well,' 
and begins the incantation. If it is true that the signifier is the 
first mark of the subject, how can we fail to recognize here 
— from the very fact that this game is accompanied by one of 
the first oppositions to appear — that it is in the object to which 
the opposition is applied in act, the reel, that we must designate 
the subject. To this object we will later give the name it bears 
in the Lacanian algebra — the petit a. 

The activity as a whole symbolizes repetition, but not at all 
that of some need that might demand the return of the mother, 
and which would be expressed quite simply in a cry. It is the 

62 



TUCHfi AND AUTOMATON 

repetition of the mother's departure as cause of a Spattung in 
the subject — overcome by the alternating game, fort-da, which 
is a here or there, and whose aim, in its alternation, is simply that 
of being the fort of a da, and the da of a. fort. It is aimed at what, 
essentially, is not there, qua represented — for it is the game 
itself that is the ReprSsentanz of the VorsteUung. What will become 
of the VorsteUung when, once again, this ReprSsentanz of the 
mother — in her outline made up of the brush-strokes and 
gouaches of desire — will be lacking? 

I, too, have seen with my own eyes, opened by maternal 
divination, the child, traumatized by the fact that I was going 
away despite the appeal, precociously adumbrated in his voice, 
and henceforth more renewed for months at a time — long 
after, having picked up this child — I have seen it let his head 
fall on my shoulder and drop off to sleep, sleep alone being 
capable of giving him access to the living signifier that I had 
become since the date of the trauma. 

You will see that this sketch that I have given you today of 
the function of the tuchi will be essential for us in rectifying 
what is the duty of the analyst in the interpretation of the 
transference. 

Let me just stress today that it is not in vain that analysis 
posits itself as modulating in a more radical way this relation 
of man to the world that has always been regarded as know- 
ledge. 

If knowledge is so often, in theoretical writings, related to 
something similar to the relation between ontogenesis and 
phylogenesis — it is as the result of a confusion, and we shall 
show next time that the very originality of psycho-analysis lies 
in the fact that it does not centre psychological ontogenesis on 
supposed stages — which have literally no discoverable found- 
ation in development observable in biological terms. If develop- 
ment is entirely animated by accident, by the obstacle of the 
tuchi, it is in so far as the tuchi brings us back to the same point 
at which pre-Socratic philosophy sought to motivate the world 
itself. 

It required a clinamen, an inclination, at some point. When 
Democritus tried to designate it, presenting himself as already 
the adversary of a pure function of negativity in order to 
introduce thought into it, he says, It is not the (iridfr that is 

63 



THE UNCONSCIOUS AND REPETITION 

essential, and adds — thus showing you that from what one of 
my pupils called the archaic stage of philosophy, the mani- 
pulation of words was used just as in the time of Heidegger 
— it is not an yn\bh, but a Sev, which, in Greek, is a coined word. 
He did not say &>, let alone Bv. What, then, did he say? He 
said, answering the question I asked today, that of idealism, 
Nothing, perhaps? — not perhaps nothing, but not nothing. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

F. Dolto: / don't see how, in describing the formation of intelli- 
gence up to the age of three or four, one can do without stages. I think 
that as far as the defence phantasies and the phantasies of the castration 
veil are concerned, and also the threats of mutilation, one needs to refer to 
the stages. 

Lacan: The description of the stages, which go to form the 
libido, must not be referred to some natural process of pseudo- 
maturation, which always remains opaque. The stages are 
organized around the fear of castration. The copulatory fact 
of the introduction of sexuality is traumatizing — this is a snag 
of some size — and it has an organizing function for develop- 
ment. 

The fear of castration is like a thread that perforates all the 
stages of development. It orientates the relations that are 
anterior to its actual appearance — weaning, toilet training, 
etc. It crystallizes each of these moments in a dialectic that has 
as its centre a bad encounter. If the stages are consistent, it is 
in accordance with their possible registration in terms of bad 
encounters. 

The central bad encounter is at the level of the sexual. This 
does not mean that the stages assume a sexual taint that is 
diffused on the basis of the fear of castration. On the contrary, 
it is because this empathy is not produced that one speaks of 
trauma and primal scene. 

12 February 1964 



64 



OF THE GAZE AS 
Objet Petit a 



This page intentionally left blank 



THE SPLIT BETWEEN THE EYE 
AND THE GAZE 

The split of the subject • The facticity of the trauma • Maurice 

Merleau-Ponty • The philosophical tradition • Mimicry • The all-seer • 

In the dream, it shows 

To continue. 

Wiederholung — let me remind you once again of the etymo- 
logical reference that I gave you, holen (to haul), of its con- 
notation of something tiring, exhausting. 

To haul, to draw. To draw what? Perhaps, playing on the 
ambiguity of the word in French, to draw lots (tirer au sort). 
This Zwang, this compulsion, would then direct us towards the 
obligatory card — if there is only one card in the pack, I can't 
draw another. 

The character of a set, in the mathematical sense of the term, 
possessed by the play^of signifiers, and which opposes it for 
example to the indefiniteness of the whole number, enables us 
to conceive a schema in which the function of the obligatory 
card is immediately applicable. If the subject is the subject of 
the signifier — determined by it — one may imagine the syn- 
chronic network as it appears in the diachrony of preferential 
effects. This is not a question, you understand, of unpredictable 
statistical effects — it is the very structure of the network that 
implies the returns. Through the elucidation of what we call 
strategies, this is the figure that Aristotle's automaton assumes for 
us. Furthermore, it is by automatisme that we sometimes translate 
into French the %wang of the Wiederholungszwang, the com- 
pulsion to repeat. 



Later, I shall give you the facts that suggest that at certain 
moments of that infantile monologue, imprudently termed 

67 



OF THE GAZE 

egocentric, there are strictly syntactical games to be observed. 
These games belong to the field that we call pre-conscious, but 
make, one might say, the bed of the unconscious reserve — to 
be understood in the sense of an Indian reserve — within the 
social network. 

Syntax, of course, is pre-conscious. But what eludes the 
subject is the fact that his syntax is in relation with the un- 
conscious reserve. When the subject tells his story, something 
acts, in a latent way, that governs this syntax and makes it 
more and more condensed. Condensed in relation to what? In 
relation to what Freud, at the beginning of his description of 
psychical resistance, calls a nucleus. 

To say that this nucleus refers to something traumatic is no 
more than an approximation. We must distinguish between 
the resistance of the subject and that first resistance of discourse, 
when the discourse proceeds towards the condensation around 
the nucleus. For the expression resistance of the subject too much 
implies the existence of a supposed ego and it is not certain 
whether — at the approach of this nucleus — it is something 
that we can justifiably call an ego. 

The nucleus must be designated as belonging to the real — 
the real in so far as the identity of perception is its rule. At most, 
it is grounded on what Freud indicates as a sort of deduction, 
which assures us that we are in perception by means of the 
sense of reality that authenticates it. What does this mean, if not 
that, as far as the subject is concerned, this is called awakening? 

Although, last time, it was around the dream in chapter 
seven of The Interpretation of Dreams that I approached the whole 
question of repetition, it was because the choice of this dream 
— so enclosed, so doubly and triply enclosed as it is, since it is 
not analysed — is very revealing here, occurring as it does at 
the moment when Freud is dealing with the process of the 
dream in its last resort. Is the reality that determines the awaken- 
ing the slight noise against which the empire of the dream and 
of desire is maintained? Is it not rather something else? Is it 
not that which is expressed in the depths of the anxiety of this 
dream — namely, the most intimate aspects of the relation 
between the father and the son, which emerges, not so much 
in that death as in the fact that it is beyond, in the sense of 
destiny? 

68 



THE EYE AND THE GAZE 

Between what occurs as if by chance, when everybody is 
asleep — the candle that overturns and the sheets that catch 
fire, the meaningless event, the accident, the piece of bad luck 
— and the element of poignancy, however veiled, in the words 
Father, can't you see I'm burning — there is the same relation to 
what we were dealing with in repetition. It is what, for us, is 
represented in the term neurosis of destiny or neurosis of failure. 
What is missed is not adaptation, but tuche", the encounter. 

Aristotle's formula — that the tuche" is denned by being able 
to come to us only from a being capable of choice, proairesis, 
that the tuche", good or bad fortune, cannot come to us from an 
inanimate object, a child or an animal — is controverted here. 
The very accident of this exemplary dream depicts this. Cer- 
tainly, Aristotle marks the extreme limit of that point that stops 
it on the edge of the extravagant forms of sexual behaviour, 
which he can only describe as teriotes, monstrosities. 

The enclosed aspect of the relation between the accident, 
which is repeated, and the veiled meaning, which is the true 
reality and leads us towards the drive — confirms for us that the 
demystification of that artefact of treatment known as the 
transference does not consist in reducing it to what is called the 
actuality of the situation. The direction indicated in this 
reduction to the actuality of the session, or the series of sessions, 
is not even of propedeutic value. The correct concept of re- 
petition must be obtained in another direction, which we 
cannot confuse with the effects of the transference taken as a 
whole. Our next problem, when we approach the function of 
the transference, will be to grasp how the transference may 
lead us to the heart of repetition. 

That is why it is necessary to ground this repetition first of all 
in the very split that occurs in the subject in relation to the 
encounter. This split constitutes the characteristic dimension 
of analytic discovery and experience; it enables us to apprehend 
the real, in its dialectical effects, as originally unwelcome. It is 
precisely through this that the real finds itself, in the subject, 
to a very great degree the accomplice of the drive — which we 
shall come to last, because only by following this way will we 
be able to conceive from what it returns. 

For, after all, why is the primal scene so traumatic ? Why is 
it always too early or too late? Why does the subject take 

69 



OF THE GAZE 

either too much pleasure in it — at least, this is how at first we 
conceived the traumatizing causality of the obsessional neurotic 
— or too little, as in the case of the hysteric? Why doesn't it 
arouse the subject immediately, if it is true that he is so pro- 
foundly libidinal? Why is the fact here dustuckia? Why is the 
supposed maturation of the pseudo-instincts shot through, 
transfixed with the tychic, I would say — from the word tuchi? 

For the moment, it is our horizon that seems factitious in the 
fundamental relation to sexuality. In analytic experience, it is 
a question of setting out from the fact that the primal scene is 
traumatic ; it is not sexual empathy that sustains the modulations 
of the analysable, but a factitious fact. A factitious fact, like 
that which appears in the scene so fiercely tracked down in 
the experience of the Wolf Man — the strangeness of the dis- 
appearance and reappearance of the penis. 

Last time, I wanted to point out where the split in the subject 
lay. This split, after awakening, persists — between the return 
to the real, the representation of the world that has at last 
fallen back on its feet, arms raised, what a terrible thing, what has 
happened, how horrible, how stupid, what an idiot he was to fall asleep 
— and the consciousness re-weaving itself, which knows it is 
living through all this as through a nightmare, but which, all 
the same, keeps a grip on itself, it is I who am living through all 
this, I have no need to pinch myself to known that I am not dreaming. 
The fact remains that this split is still there only as representing 
the more profound split, which is situated between that which 
refers to the subject in the machinery of the dream, the image 
of the approaching child, his face full of reproach and, on the 
other hand, that which causes it and into which he sinks, the 
invocation, the voice of the child, the solicitation of the gaze 
— Father can't you see . . . 



It is there that — free as I am to pursue, in the path in which 
I am leading you, the way that seems best to me — threading 
my curved needle through the tapestry, I jump on to the side 
on which is posed the question that offers itself as a crossroads, 
between us and all those who try to conceive of the way of the 
subject. 

In so far as it is a search for truth, is this way to be forged in 

70 



THE EYE AND THE GAZE 

our style of adventure, with its trauma seen as a reflection of 
facticity? Or is it to be located where tradition has always 
placed it, at the level of the dialectic of truth and appearance, 
grasped at the outset of perception in its fundamentally ideic, 
in a way aesthetic, and accentuated character as visual cent- 
ring? 

It is not mere chance — belonging to the order of the pure 
tychic — if this very week I have received a copy of the newly 
published, posthumous work of my friend Maurice Merleau- 
Ponty, Le Visible et Virwisible. 

Here is expressed, embodied, what made the alternation of 
our dialogue, and I remember so clearly the Congres de Bon- 
neval where his intervention revealed the nature of his path, a 
path that had broken off at one point of the oeuvre, which left it 
nevertheless in a state of completion, prefigured in the work of 
piety that we owe to Claude Lefort, to whom I would like to 
pay homage here for the kind of perfection which, in a long and 
difficult transcription, he seems to me to have achieved. 

This work, Le Visible et I'invisible, may indicate for us the 
moment of arrival of the philosophical tradition — the tradition 
that begins with Plato with the promulgation of the idea, of 
which one may say that, setting out from an aesthetic world, it 
is determined by an end given to being as sovereign good, thus 
attaining a beauty that is also its limit. And it is not by chance 
that Maurice Merleau-Ponty recognized its guide in the eye. 

In this work, which is both an end and a beginning, you 
will find both a recapitulation and a step forward in the path 
of what had first been formulated in Merleau-Ponty's La 
Phinominologie de la perception. In this work, one finds a re- 
capitulation of the regulatory function of form, invoked in 
opposition to that which, as philosophical thinking progressed, 
had been taken to that extreme of vertigo expressed in the term 
idealism — how could the 'lining' that representation then 
became be joined to that which it is supposed to cover? La 
Phinominologie brings us back, then, to the regulation of form, 
which is governed, not only by the subject's eye, but by his 
expectations, his movement, his grip, his muscular and visceral 
emotion — in short, his constitutive presence, directed in what 
is called his total intentionality. 

Maurice Merleau-Ponty now makes the next step by forcing 

7i 



OF THE GAZE 

the limits of this very phenomenology. You will see that the 
ways through which he will lead you are not only of the order 
of visual phenomenology, since they set out to rediscover — this 
is the essential point — the dependence of the visible on that 
which places us under the eye of the seer. But this is going too 
far, for that eye is only the metaphor of something that I would 
prefer to call the seer's 'shoot* (pousse) — something prior to his 
eye. What we have to circumscribe, by means of the path he 
indicates for us, is the pre-existence of a gaze — I see only from 
one point, but in my existence I am looked at from all sides. 

It is no doubt this seeing, to which I am subjected in an 
original way, that must lead us to the aims of this work, to that 
ontological turning back, the bases of which are no doubt to be 
found in a more primitive institution of form. 

Precisely this gives me an opportunity to reply to someone 
that, of course, I have my ontology — why not? — like everyone 
else, however naive or elaborate it may be. But, certainly, what 
I try to outline in my discourse — which, although it re- 
interprets that of Freud, is nevertheless centred essentially on 
the particularity of the experience it describes — makes no 
claim to cover the entire field of experience. Even this between- 
the-two that opens up for us the apprehension of the uncon- 
scious is of concern to us only in as much as it is designated for 
us, through the instructions Freud left us, as that of which the 
subject has to take possession. I will only add that the main- 
tenance of this aspect of Freudianism, which is often described 
as naturalism, seems to be indispensable, for it is one of the few 
attempts, if not the only one, to embody psychical reality 
without substantifying it. 

In the field offered us by Maurice Merleau-Ponty, more or 
less polarized indeed by the threads of our experience, the 
scopic field, the ontological status, is presented by its most 
factitious, not to say most outworn, effects. But it is not between 
the invisible and the visible that we have to pass. The split that 
concerns us is not the distance that derives from the fact that 
there are forms imposed by the world towards which the in- 
tentionality of phenomenological experience directs us — hence 
the limits that we encounter in the experience of the visible. 
The gaze is presented to us only in the form of a strange con- 
tingency, symbolic of what we find on the horizon, as the thrust 

72 



THE EYE AND THE GAZE 

of our experience, namely, the lack that constitutes castration 
anxiety. 

The eye and the gaze — this is for us the split in which the 
drive is manifested at the level of the scopic field. 

3 
In our relation to things, in so far as this relation is constituted 
by the way of vision, and ordered in the figures of representa- 
tion, something slips, passes, is transmitted, from stage to stage, 
and is always to some degree eluded in it — that is what we call 
th^gaze? 

'You can be made aware of this in more than one way. Let 
me describe it, at its extreme point, by one of the enigmas that 
the reference to nature presents us with. It is a question of 
nothing less than the phenomenon known as mimicry. 

A lot has been said about this subject and a great deal that 
is absurd — for example, that the phenomenon of mimicry can 
be explained in terms of adaptation. I do not think this is the 
case. I need only refer you, among others, to a short work that 
many of you may already know, Roger Caillois' Miduse et 
compagnie, in which the reference to adaptation is criticized in 
aparticularlyperspicacious way. On the one hand, in order to be 
effective, the determining mutation of mimicry, in the insect, 
for example, may take place only at once and at the outset. On 
the other hand, its supposed selective effects are annihilated 
by the observation that one finds in the stomach of birds, 
predators in particular, as many insects supposedly protected 
by mimicry as insects that are not. 

But, in any case, the problem does not lie there. The most 
radical problem of mimicry is to know whether we must attri- 
bute jt_to_some- formative pow^r of the very organism that 
shows uslS^nanifestationsjrFor this" to be legitimate, we would 



have to be able"to "concave by what circuits,t his force might 
find itself in a position to control, not only the very form oTthe 
imitated~bo3y, but its relation to the environment^ from which 
is has to be distinguished or, on the contrary ,_in_adlich-it-has- 
to_merge. In short, as Caillois reminds us very pertinently, on 
the subject of such mimetic manifestations, and especially of 
the manifestation that may remind us of the function of the eyes, 
that is, the ocelli, it is a question of understanding whether they 

73 



OF THE GAZE 

impress — it is a fact that they have this effect on the predator 
or on the supposed victim that looks at them — whether they 
impress by their resemblance to eyes, or whether, on the con- 
trary, the eyes are fascinating only by virtue of their relation to 
the form of the ocelli. In other words, must we not distinguish 
between the function of the eye and that of the gaze? 

This distinctive example, chosen as such — for its location, 
for its facticity, for its exceptional character — is for us simply a 
small manifestation of the function to be isolated, the function, 
let us say the word, of the stain. This example is valuable in 
marking the pre-existence to the seen of a given-to-be-seen. 

There is no need for us to refer to some supposition of the 
existence of a universal seer. If the function of the stain is 
recognized in its autonomy and identified with that of the gaze, 
we can seek its track, its thread, its trace, at every stage of the 
constitution of the world, in the scopic field. We will then 
realize that the function of the stain and of the gaze is both that 
which governs the gaze most secretly and that which always 
escapes from the grasp of that form of vision that is satisfied 
with itself in imagining itself as consciousness. 

That in which the consciousness may turn back upon itself 
— grasp itself, like Valdry's Young Parque, as seeing oneself seeing 
oneself— represents mere sleight of hand. An avoidance of the 
function of the gaze is at work there. 

This much we can map of this topology, which last time we 
worked out for ourselves on the basis of that which appears 
from the position of the subject when he accedes to the imagin- 
ary forms offered him by the dream, as opposed to those of the 
waking state. 

Similarly, in that order, which is particularly satisfying for 
the subject, connoted in psycho-analytic experience by the 
term narcissism — in which I have striven to reintroduce the 
essential structure it derives from its reference to the specular 
image — in the satisfaction, not to say self-satisfaction, that 
diffuses from it, which gives the subject a pretext for such a 
profound m&connaissance — and does its empire not extend as far 
as this reference of the philosophical tradition represented by 
plenitude encountered by the subject in the mode of con- 
templation — can we not also grasp that which has been eluded, 
namely, the function of the gaze? I mean, and Maurice 

74 



THE EYE AND THE GAZE 

Merleau-Ponty points this out, that we are beings who are 
looked at, in the spectacle of the world. That which makes us 
consciousness institutes us by the same token as speculum mundi. 
Is there no satisfaction in being under that gaze of which, 
following Merleau-Ponty, I spoke just now, that gaze that 
circumscribes us, and which in the first instance makes us 
beings who are looked at, but without showing this? 

The spectacle of the world, in this sense, appears to us as 
all-seeing. This is the phantasy to be found in the Platonic 
perspective of an absolute being to whom is transferred the 
quality of being all-seeing. At the very level of the phenomenal 
experience of contemplation, this all-seeing aspect is to be 
found in the satisfaction of a woman who knows that she is 
being looked at, on condition that one does not show her that 
one knows that she knows. 

The world is all-seeing, but it is not exhibitionistic — it does 
not provoke our gaze. When it begins to provoke it, the feeling 
of strangeness begins too. 

What does this mean, if not that, in the so-called waking 
state, there is an elision of the gaze, and an elision of the fact 
that not only does it look, it also shows. In the field of the dream, 
on the other hand, what characterizes the images is that it 
shows. 

It shows — but here, too, some form of 'sliding away' of the 
subject is apparent. Look up some description of a dream, any 
one — not only the one I referred to last time, in which, after 
all, what I am going to say may remain enigmatic, but any 
dream — place it in its co-ordinates, and you will see that this 
it shows is well to the fore. So much is it to the fore, with the 
characteristics in which it is co-ordinated — namely, the ab- 
sence of horizon, the enclosure, of that which is contemplated 
in the waking state, and, also, the character of emergence, of 
contrast, of stain, of its images, the intensification of their 
colours — that, in the final resort, our position in the dream is 
profoundly that of someone who does not see. The subject does 
not see where it is leading, he follows. He may even on occasion 
detach himself, tell himself that it is a dream, but in no case 
will he be able to apprehend himself in the dream in the way 
in which, in the Cartesian cogito, he apprehends himself as 
thought. He may say to himself, It's only a dream. But he does 

75 



OF THE GAZE 

not apprehend himself as someone who says to himself — After 
all, I am the consciousness of this dream. 

In a dream, he is a butterfly. What does this mean? It 
means that he sees the butterfly in his reality as gaze. What are 
so many figures, so many shapes, so many colours, if not this 
gratuitous shouting, in which is marked for us the primal nature 
of the essence of die gaze. Good heavens, it is a butterfly that 
is not very different from the one that terrorized the Wolf Man 
— and Maurice Merleau-Ponty is well aware of the importance 
of it and refers us to it in a footnote to his text. When Choang- 
tsu wakes up, he may ask himself whether it is not the butterfly 
who dreams that he is Choang-tsu. Indeed, he is right, and 
doubly so, first because it proves he is not mad, he does not 
regard himself as absolutely identical with Choang-tsu and, 
secondly, because he does not fully understand how right he is. 
In fact, it is when he was the butterfly that he apprehended 
one of the roots of his identity — that he was, and is, in his 
essence, that butterfly who paints himself with his own colours 
— and it is because of this that, in the last resort, he is Choang- 
tsu. 

This is proved by the fact that, when he is the butterfly, the 
idea does not occur to him to wonder whether, when he is 
Choang-tsu awake, he is not the butterfly that he is dreaming 
of being. This is because, when dreaming of being the butterfly, 
he will no doubt have to bear witness later that he represented 
himself as a butterfly. But this does not mean that he is cap- 
tivated by the butterfly — he is a captive butterfly, but captured 
by nothing, for, in the dream, he is a butterfly for nobody. It 
is when he is awake that he is Choang-tsu for others, and is 
caught in their butterfly net. 

This is why the butterfly may — if the subject is not Choang- 
tsu, but the Wolf Man — inspire in him the phobic terror of 
recognizing that the beating of little wings is not so very far 
from the beating of causation, of the primal stripe marking his 
being for the first time with the grid of desire. 

Next time, I propose to introduce you to the essence of 
scopic satisfaction. The gaze may contain in itself the objet a of 
the Lacanian algebra where the subject falls, and what specifies 
the scopic field and engenders the satisfaction proper to it is 
the fact that, for structural reasons, the fall of the subject always 

76 



THE EYE AND THE GAZE 

remains unperceived, for it is reduced to zero. In so far as the 
gaze, qua objet a, may come to symbolize this central lack 
expressed in the phenomenon of castration, and in so far as it 
is an objet a reduced, of its nature, to a punctiform, evanescent 
function, it leaves the subject in ignorance as to what there is 
beyond the appearance, an ignorance so characteristic of all 
progress in thought that occurs in the way constituted by 
philosophical research. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

X. Audouard: To what extent is it necessary, in analysis, to let 
the subject know that one is looking at him, that is to say, that one is 
situated as the person who is observing in the subject the process of 
looking at oneself? 

Lac an : I shall take up again what I have said above, adding 
that my discourse here has two aims, one of concern to analysts, 
the other to those who have come here in order to discover 
whether psycho-analysis is a science. 

Psycho-analysis is neither a Weltanschauung, nor a philosophy 
that claims to provide the key to the universe.lt is governed by a 
particular aim, which is historically denned by the elaboration 
of the notion of the subject. It poses this notion in a new way, 
by leading the subject back to his signifying dependence. 

To go from perception to science is a perspective that seems 
to be self-evident, in so far as the subject has no better testing 
ground for the apprehension of being. This way is the same 
one that Aristotle follows, taking as his starting-point the pre- 
Socratics. But it is a way that analytic experience must rectify, 
because it avoids the abyss of castration. We see this, for ex- 
ample, in the fact that the tuchi does not enter, except in a 
punctiform way, into theogony and genesis. 

I am trying here to grasp how the tuchi is represented in 
visual apprehension. I shall show that it is at the level that I 
call the stain that the tychic point in the scopic function is found. 
This means that the level of reciprocity between the gaze and 
the gazed at is, for the subject, more open than any other to 
alibi. That is why we should try to avoid, by our interventions 
in the session, allowing the subject to establish himself on this 
level. On the contrary, we should cut him off from this point 
of ultimate gaze, which is illusory. 

77 



OF THE GAZE 

The obstacle you point out is certainly there to illustrate the 
fact that we take a great deal of care. We do not say to the 
patient, at every end and turn, Now, now! What a face you're 
making!, or, The top button of your waistcoat is undone. It is not, 
after all, for nothing that analysis is not carried out face to face. 
The split between gaze and vision will enable us, you will see, 
to add the scopic drive to the list of the drives. If we know how 
to read it, we shall see that Freud already places this drive to 
the fore in Triebe und Triebschicksale ('Instincts and their Vicissi- 
tudes'), and shows that it is not homologous with the others. 
Indeed, it is this drive that most completely eludes the term 
castration. 

19 February 1964 



78 



ANAMORPHOSIS 

Of the foundation of consciousness • The privilege of the gaze as objet a • 
The optics of the blind • The phallus in the picture 

Vainement ton image arrive a ma rencontre 
Et ne m'entre ouje suis qui settlement la montre 
Toi te tournant vers moi tu ne saurais trouver 
Au mur de mon regard que ton ombre rivie 

Je suis ce malheureux comparable aux miroirs 
Qui peuvent riflechir mais ne peuvent pas voir 
Comme eux mon oeil est vide et comme eux habiti 
De F absence de toi qui fait sa ciciti 1 

You may remember that, in one of my earner lectures, I 
began by quoting the poem, Contrechant, from Aragon's Le Fou 
d'Elsa. I did not realize at the time that I would be developing 
the subject of the gaze to such an extent. I was diverted into 
doing so by the way in which I presented the concept of 
repetition in Freud. 

We cannot deny that it is within the explanation of repetition 
that this digression on the scopic function is situated — no doubt 
by Maurice Merleau-Ponty's recently published work, Le 
Visible et ^invisible. Moreover, it seemed to me that, if an 
encounter were to be found there, it was a happy one, one 
destined to stress, as I shall try to do today, how, in the per- 
spective of the unconscious, we can situate consciousness. 

You know that some shadow, or, to use another term, some 
'resist' — in the sense one speaks of 'resist' in the dying of 
material — marks the fact of consciousness in Freud's very 
discourse. 

But, before taking things up again at the point we left them 
last time, I must first clear up a misunderstanding that appears 

1 For a translation of the poem, see page 17. 

79 



OF THE GAZE 

to have arisen in the minds of certain members of the audience 
concerning a term I used last time. Some of you seem to have 
been perplexed by a word that is simple enough, and which I 
commented on, namely, the tychic. Apparently, it sounded to 
some of you like a sneeze. Yet I made it quite clear that it was 
the adjective formed from tuchi just as psychiqtu (psychical) is 
the adjective corresponding to psuchi (psyche). I used this 
analogy at the heart of the experience of repetition quite 
intentionally, because for any conception of the psychical 
development as elucidated by psycho-analysis, the fact of the 
tychic is central. It is in relation to the eye, in relation to the 
eutuchia or the dustuchia, the happy encounter and the unhappy 
encounter, that my lecture today will be ordered. 



I saw myself seeing myself, young Parque says somewhere. Cer- 
tainly, this statement has rich and complex implications in 
relation to the theme developed in La Jeune Parque, that of 
femininity — but we haven't got there yet. We are dealing with 
the philosopher, who apprehends something that is one of the 
essential correlates of consciousness in its relation to repre- 
sentation, and which is designated as I see myself seeing myself. 
What evidence can we really attach to this formula ? How is it 
that it remains, in fact, correlative with that fundamental mode 
to which we referred in the Cartesian cogito, by which the 
subject apprehends himself as thought? 

What isolates this apprehension of thought by itself is a sort 
of doubt, which has been called methodological doubt, which 
concerns whatever might give support to thought in repre- 
sentation. How is it, then, that the / see myself seeing myself 
remains its envelope and base, and, perhaps more than one 
thinks, grounds its certainty? For, / warm myself by warming 
myself 'is a reference to the body as body — I feel that sensation 
of warmth which, from some point inside me, is diffused and 
locates me as body. Whereas in the / see myself seeing myself 
there is no such sensation of being absorbed by vision. 

Furthermore, the phenomenologists have succeeded in 
articulating with precision, and in the most disconcerting way, 
that it is quite clear that I see outside, that perception is not in 
me, that it is on the objects that it apprehends. And yet I 

80 



ANAMORPHOSIS 

apprehend the world in a perception that seems to concern the 
immanence of the I see myself seeing myself. The privilege of the 
subject seems to be established here from that bipolar reflexive 
relation by which, as soon as I perceive, my representations 
belong to me. 

This is how the world is struck with a presumption of ideali- 
zation, of the suspicion of yielding me only my representations. 
Serious practice does not really weigh very heavy, but, on the 
other hand, the philosopher, the idealist, is placed there, as 
much in confrontation with himself as in confrontation with 
those who are listening to him, in an embarrassing position. 
How can one deny that nothing of the world appears to me 
except in my representations ? This is the irreducible method of 
Bishop Berkeley, about whose subjective position much might 
be said — including something that may have eluded you in 
passing, namely, this belong to me aspect of representations, so 
reminiscent of property. When carried to the limit, the process 
of this meditation, of this reflecting reflection, goes so far as to 
reduce the subject apprehended by the Cartesian meditation 
to a power of annihilation. 

The mode of my presence in the world is the subject in 
so far as by reducing itself solely to this certainty of being a 
subject, it becomes active annihilation. In fact, the process of 
the philosophical meditation throws the subject towards the 
transforming historical action, and, around this point, orders 
the configured modes of active self-consciousness through its 
metamorphoses in history. As for the meditation on being 
that reaches its culmination in the thought of Heidegger, it 
restores to being itself that power of annihilation — or at least 
poses the question of how it may be related to it. 

This is also the point to which Maurice Merleau-Ponty 
leads us. But, if you refer to his text, you will see that it is at this 
point that he chooses to withdraw, in order to propose a return 
to the sources of intuition concerning the visible and the in- 
visible, to come back to that which is prior to all reflection, 
tlicttc or non-thetic, in order to locate the emergence of vision 
itself. For him, it is a question of restoring — for, he tells us, it 
tun only be a question of a reconstruction or a restoration, not 
of a path traversed in the opposite direction — of reconstituting 
lite way by which, not from the body, but from something 

81 



OF THE GAZE 

that he calls the flesh of the world, the original point of vision 
was able to emerge. It would seem that in this way one sees, 
in this unfinished work, the emergence of something like the 
search for an unnamed substance from which I, the seer, 
extract myself. From the toils (rets), or rays (rats), if you prefer, 
of an iridescence of which I am at first a part, I emerge as eye, 
assuming, in a way, emergence from what I would like to call 
the function of seeingness (voyure). 

A wild odour emanates from it, providing a glimpse on the 
horizon of the hunt of Artemis — whose touch seems to be 
associated at this moment of tragic failure in which we lost him 
who speaks. 

Yet is this really the way he wished to take? The traces that 
remain of the part to come from his meditation permits us to 
doubt it. The reference-points that are provided in it, more 
particularly for the strictly psycho-analytic unconscious, allow 
us to perceive that he may have been directed towards some 
search, original in relation to the philosophical tradition, to- 
wards that new dimension of meditation on the subject that 
analysis enables us to trace. 

Personally, I cannot but be struck by certain of these notes, 
which are for me less enigmatic than they may seem to other 
readers, because they correspond very exactly to the schemata 
— with one of them, in particular — that I shall be dealing 
with here. Read, for example, the note concerning what he 
calls the turning inside-out of the finger of a glove, in as much 
as it seems to appear there — note the way in which the leather 
envelops the fur in a winter glove — that consciousness, in its 
illusion of seeing itself seeing itself, finds its basis in the inside-out 
structure of the gaze. 



But what is the gaze? 

I shall set out from this first point of annihilation in which is 
marked, in the field of the reduction of the subject, a break — 
which warns us of the need to introduce another reference, 
that which analysis assumes in reducing the privileges of the 
consciousness. 

Psycho-analysis regards the consciousness as irremediably 
limited, and institutes it as a principle, not only of idealization, 

82 



ANAMORPHOSIS 

but of miconnaissance, as — using a term that takes on new value 
by being referred to a visible domain — scotoma. The term was 
introduced into the psycho-analytic vocabulary by the French 
School. Is it simply a metaphor? We find here once again the 
ambiguity that affects anything that is inscribed in the register 
of the scopic drive. 

For us, consciousness matters only in its relation to what, for 
propaedeutic reasons, I have tried to show you in the fiction of 
the incomplete text — on the basis of which it is a question of 
recentring the subject as speaking in the very lacunae of that 
in which, at first sight, it presents itself as speaking. But I am 
stating here only the relation of the pre-conscious to the un- 
conscious. The dynamic that is attached to the consciousness as 
such, the attention the subject brings to his own text, remains 
up to this point, as Freud has stressed, outside theory and, 
strictly speaking, not yet articulated. 

It is here that I propose that the interest the subject takes in 
his own split is bound up with that which determines it 
— namely, a privileged object, which has emerged from some 
primal separation, from some self-mutilation induced by the 
very approach of the real, whose name, in our algebra, is the 
objet a. 

In the scopic relation, the object on which depends the 
phantasy from which the subject is suspended in an essential 
vacillation is the gaze. Its privilege — and also that by which 
the subject for so long has been misunderstood as being in its 
dependence — derives from its very structure. 

Let us schematize at once what we mean. From the moment 
that this gaze appears, the subject tries to adapt himself to it, he 
becomes that punctiform object, that point of vanishing being 
with which the subject confuses his own failure. Furthermore, 
of all the objects in which the subject may recognize his de- 
pendence in the register of desire, the gaze is specified as un- 
apprehensible. That is why it is, more than any other object, 
misunderstood (mdconnu), and it is perhaps for this reason, too, 
that the subject manages, fortunately, to symbolize his own 
vanishing and punctiform bar (trait) in the illusion of the con- 
sciousness of seeing oneself see oneself, in which the gaze is elided. 

If, then, the gaze is that underside of consciousness, how shall 
we try to imagine it? 

83 



OF THE GAZE 

The expression is not inapt, for we can give body to the gaze. 
Sartre, in one of the most brilliant passages olV&tre et le Mont, 
brings it into function in the dimension of the existence of 
others. Others would remain suspended in the same, partially 
de-realizing, conditions that are, in Sartre's definition, those of 
objectivity, were it not for the gaze. The gaze, as conceived by 
Sartre, is the gaze by which I am surprised — surprised in so 
far as it changes all the perspectives, the lines of force, of my 
world, orders it, from the point of nothingness where I am, in a 
sort of radiated reticulation of the organisms. As the locus of the 
relation between me, the annihilating subject, and that which 
surrounds me, the gaze seems to possess such a privilege that it 
goes so far as to have me scotomized, I who look, the eye of him 
who sees me as object. In so far as I am under the gaze, Sartre 
writes, I no longer see the eye that looks at me and, if I see the 
eye, the gaze disappears. 

Is this a correct phenomenological analysis? No. It is not 
true that, when I am under the gaze, when I solicit a gaze, 
when I obtain it, I do not see it as a gaze. Painters, above all, 
have grasped this gaze as such in the mask and I have only to 
remind you of Goya, for example, for you to realize this. 

The gaze sees itself — to be precise, the gaze of which Sartre 
speaks, the gaze that surprises me and reduces me to shame, 
since this is the feeling he regards as the most dominant. The 
gaze I encounter — you can find this in Sartre's own writing 
— is, not a seen gaze, but a gaze imagined by me in the field 
of the Other. 

If you turn to Sartre's own text, you will see that, far from 
speaking of the emergence of this gaze as of something that 
concerns the organ of sight, he refers to the sound of rustling 
leaves, suddenly heard while out hunting, to a footstep heard in 
a corridor. And when are these sounds heard ? At the moment 
when he has presented himself in the action of looking through 
a keyhole. A gaze surprises him in the function of voyeur, 
disturbs him, overwhelms him and reduces him to a feeling of 
shame. The gaze in question is certainly the presence of others 
as such. But does this mean that originally it is in the relation 
of subject to subject, in the function of the existence of others as 
looking at me, that we apprehend what the gaze really is? Is it 
not clear that the gaze intervenes here only in as much as it is 

84 



ANAMORPHOSIS 

not the annihilating subject, correlative of the world of ob- 
jectivity, who feels himself surprised, but the subject sustaining 
himself in a function of desire? 

Is it not precisely because desire is established here in the 
domain of seeing that we can make it vanish ? 

3 
We can apprehend this privilege of the gaze in the function of 
desire, by pouring ourselves, as it were, along the veins through 
which the domain of vision has been integrated into the field 
of desire. 

It is not for nothing that it was at the very period when the 
Cartesian meditation inaugurated in all its purity the function 
of the subject that the dimension of optics that I shall dis- 
tinguish here by calling 'geometraP or 'flat' (as opposed to 
perspective) optics was developed. 

I shall illustrate for you, by one object among others, what 
seems to me exemplary in a function that so curiously attracted 
so much reflection at the time. 

One reference, for those who would like to carry further what 
I tried to convey to you today, is Baltrusaitis' book, Anamorphoses. 

In my seminar, I have made great use of the function of 
anamorphosis, in so far as it is an exemplary structure. What 
does a simple, non-cylindrical anamorphosis consist of? 
Suppose there is a portrait on this flat piece of paper that I am 
holding. By chance, you see the blackboard, in an oblique 
position in relation to the piece of paper. Suppose that, by 
means of a series of ideal threads or lines, I reproduce on the 
oblique surface each point of the image drawn on my sheet of 
paper. You can easily imagine what the result would be — you 
would obtain a figure enlarged and distorted according to the 
lines of what may be called a perspective. One supposes that 
—if I take away that which has helped in the construction, 
namely, the image placed in my own visual field — the im- 
pression I will retain, while remaining in that place, will be 
more or less the same. At least, I will recognize the general 
outlines of the image — at best, I will have an identical 
impression. 

I will now pass around something that dates from a hundred 
years earlier, from 1533, a reproduction of a painting that, I 

85 



OF THE GAZE 

think, you all know — Hans Holbein's The Ambassadors. It will 
serve to refresh the memories of those who know the picture 
well. Those who do not should examine it attentively. I shall 
come back to it shortly. 

Vision is ordered according to a mode that may generally be 
called the function of images. This function is defined by a 
point-by-point correspondence of two unities in space. What- 
ever optical intermediaries may be used to establish their 
relation, whether their image is virtual, or real, the point-by- 
point correspondence is essential. That which is of the mode of 
the image in the field of vision is therefore reducible to the 
simple schema that enables us to establish anamorphosis, that is 
to say, to the relation of an image, in so far as it is linked to a 
surface, with a certain point that we shall call the 'geometral' 
point. Anything that is determined by this method, in which the 
straight line plays its role of being the path of light, can be 
called an image. 

Art is mingled with science here. Leonardo da Vinci is both a 
scientist, on account of his dioptric constructions, and an 
artist. Vitruvius's treatise on architecture is not far away. It is 
in Vignola and in Alberti that we find the progressive inter- 
rogation of the geometral laws of perspective, and it is around 
research on perspective that is centred a privileged interest for 
the domain of vision — whose relation with the institution of 
the Cartesian subject, which is itself a sort of geometral point, 
a point of perspective, we cannot fail to see. And, around the 
geometral perspective, the picture — this is a very important 
function to which we shall return — is organized in a way that 
is quite new in the history of painting. 

I should now like to refer you to Diderot. The Lettre sur Us 
aveugles a V usage de ceux qui voient (Letter on the Blind for the use 
of those who see) will show you that this construction allows 
that which concerns vision to escape totally. For the geometral 
space of vision — even if we include those imaginary parts in the 
virtual space of the mirror, of which, as you know, I have 
spoken at length — is perfectly reconstructible, imaginable, by a 
blind man. 

What is at issue in geometral perspective is simply the map- 
ping of space, not sight. The blind man may perfectly well 
conceive that the field of space that he knows, and which he 

86 



ANAMORPHOSIS 

knows as real, may be perceived at a distance, and as a simul- 
taneous act. For him, it is a question of apprehending a tem- 
poral function, instantaneity. In Descartes, dioptrics, the action 
of the eyes, is represented as the conjugated action of two 
sticks. The geometral dimension of vision does not exhaust, 
therefore, far from it, what the field of vision as such offers us 
as the original subjectifying relation. 

This is why it is so important to acknowledge the inverted 
use of perspective in the structure of anamorphosis. 

It was Diirer himself who invented the apparatus to establish 
perspective. Durer's 'lucinda' is comparable to what, a little 
while ago, I placed between that blackboard and myself, 
namely, a certain image, or more exactly a canvas, a treliss 
that will be traversed by straight lines — which are not neces- 
sarily rays, but also threads — which will link each point that I 
have to see in the world to a point at which the canvas will, by 
this line, be traversed. 

It was to establish a correct perspective image, therefore, 
that the lucinda was introduced. If I reverse its use, I will have 
the pleasure of obtaining not the restoration of the world that 
lies at the end, but the distortion, on another surface, of the 
image that I would have obtained on the first, and I will dwell, 
as on some delicious game, on this method that makes anything 
appear at will in a particular stretching. 

I would ask you to believe that such an enchantment took 
place in its time. Baltrusaitis' book will tell you of the furious 
polemics that these practices gave rise to, and which culminated 
in works of considerable length. The convent of the Minims, 
now destroyed, which once stood near the rue des Tournelles, 
carried on the very long wall of one of its galleries and repre- 
senting as if by chance St John at Patmos a picture that had to 
be looked at through a hole, so that its distorting value could 
be appreciated to its full extent. 

Distortion may lend itself — this was not the case for this 
particular fresco — to all the paranoiac ambiguities, and every 
possible use has been made of it, from Arcimboldi to Salvador 
Dali. I will go so far as to say that this fascination complements 
what geometral researches into perspective allow to escape 
from vision. 

How is it that nobody has ever thought of connecting this 

87 



OF THE GAZE 

with . . . the effect of an erection ? Imagine a tattoo traced on 
the sexual organ ad hoc in the state of repose and assuming its, 
if I may say so, developed form in another state. 

How can we not see here, immanent in the geometral 
dimension — a partial dimension in the field of the gaze, a 
dimension that has nothing to do with vision as such — some- 
thing symbolic of the function of the lack, of the appearance 
of the phallic ghost? 

Now, in The Ambassadors — I hope everyone has had time 
now to look at the reproduction — what do you see? What is 
this strange, suspended, oblique object in the foreground in 
front of these two figures ? 

The two figures are frozen, stiffened in their showy adorn- 
ments. Between them is a series of objects that represent in the 
painting of the period the symbols of vanitas. At the same period, 
Cornelius Agrippa wrote his De Vanitate scientiarum, aimed as 
much at the arts as the sciences, and these objects are all 
symbolic of the sciences and arts as they were grouped at the 
time in the trivium and quadrivium. What, then, before this dis- 
play of the domain of appearance in all its most fascinating forms, 
is this object, which from some angles appears to be flying 
through the air, at others to be tilted? You cannot know — 
for you turn away, thus escaping the fascination of the picture. 

Begin by walking out of the room in which no doubt it has 
long held your attention. It is then that, turning round as you 
leave — as the author of the Anamorphoses describes it — you 
apprehend in this form . . . What? A skull. 

This is not how it is presented at first — that figure, which the 
author compares to a cuttlebone and which for me suggests 
rather that loaf composed of two books which Dali was once 
pleased to place on the head of an old woman, chosen deliber- 
ately for her wretched, filthy appearance and, indeed, because 
she seems to be unaware of the fact, or, again, Dali's soft 
watches, whose signification is obviously less phallic than that 
of the object depicted in a flying position in the foreground of 
this picture. 

All this shows that at the very heart of the period in which 
the subject emerged and geometral optics was an object of 
research, Holbein makes visible for us here something that is 
simply the subject as annihilated — annihilated in the form 

88 



ANAMORPHOSIS 

that is, strictly speaking, the imaged embodiment of the 
minus-phi [(— <f>)] of castration, which for us, centres the whole 
organization of the desires through the framework of the 
fundamental drives. 

But it is further still that we must seek the function of vision. 
We shall then see emerging on the basis of vision, not the phallic 
symbol, the anamorphic ghost, but the gaze as such, in its 
pulsatile, dazzling and spread out function, as it is in this 
picture. 

This picture is simply what any picture is, a trap for the gaze. 
In any picture, it is precisely in seeking the gaze in each of its 
points that you will see it disappear. I shall try to develop this 
further next time. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

F. Wahl : You have explained that the original apprehension of the 
gaze in the gaze of others, as described by Sartre, was not the funda- 
mental experience of the gaze. I would like you to explain in greater 
detail what you have already sketched for us, the apprehension of the gaze 
in the direction of desire. 

Lacan : If one does not stress the dialectic of desire one does 
not understand why the gaze of others should disorganize the 
field of perception. It is because the subject in question is not 
that of the reflexive consciousness, but that of desire. One 
thinks it is a question of the geometral eye-point, whereas it is a 
question of a quite different eye — that which flies in the fore- 
ground of The Ambassadors. 

Wahl : But I don't understand how others will reappear in your 
discourse . . . 

Lacan : Look, the main thing is that I don't come a cropper ! 

Wahl : / would also like to say that, when you speak of the subject 
and of the real, one is tempted, on first hearing, to consider the terms in 
themselves. But gradually one realizes that they are to be understood in 
their relation to one another, and that they have a topological definition 
— subject and real are to be situated on either side of the split, in the 
resistance of the phantasy. The real is, in a way, an experience of 
resistance. 

Lacan : My discourse proceeds, in the following way: each 
term is sustained only in its topological relation with the others, 
and the subject of the cogito is treated in exactly the same way. 

89 



OF THE GAZE 

Wahl : Is topology for you a method of discovery or of exposition? 

Lacan : It is the mapping of the topology proper to our 
experience as analysts, which may later be taken in a meta- 
physical perspective. I think Merleau-Ponty was moving in this 
direction — see the second part of the book, his reference to the 
Wolf Man and to the finger of a glove. 

P. Kaufmann : You have provided us with a typical structure of 
the gaze, but you have said nothing of the dilation of light. 

Lacan : I said that the gaze was not the eye, except in that 
flying form in which Holbein has the cheek to show me my own 
soft watch . . . Next time, I will talk about embodied light. 

26 February 1964 



90 



8 



THE LINE AND LIGHT 

Desire and the picture • The story of a sardine can • The screen • Mimi- 
cry • The organ • You never look at me from the place I see you 

The function of the eye may lead someone who is trying to 
enlighten you to distant explorations. When, for example, did 
the function of the organ and, to begin with, its very presence, 
appear in the evolution of living beings? 

The relation of the subject with the organ is at the heart of 
our experience. Among all the organs with which we deal, the 



Objtct 




Gtonutral point 



Point of light 




Picture 



breast, the faeces, etc., there is the eye, and it is striking to see 
that it goes back as far as the species that represent the appear- 
ance of life. You no doubt eat oysters, innocently enough, 
without knowing that at this level in the animal kingdom the 
eye has already appeared. Such discoveries teach us, it should 
be said, all manner of things. Yet we must choose from among 
these things those that are most relative to our search. 

Last time, I think I said enough to enable you to grasp the 
interest of this small, very simple triangular schema that I have 
reproduced at the top of the blackboard. 

It is there simply to remind you in three terms of the optics 

9i 



OF THE GAZE 

used in this operational montage that bears witness to the 
inverted use of perspective, which came to dominate the 
technique of painting, in particular, between the end of the 
fifteenth and the end of the seventeenth centuries. Anamor- 
phosis shows us that it is not a question in painting of a realistic 
reproduction of the things of space — a term about which one 
could have many reservations. 

The little schema also allows me to remark that certain 
optics allow that which concerns vision to escape. Such optics 
are within the grasp of the blind. I have already referred you 
to Diderot's Lettre, which shows to what extent the blind man is 
capable of taking account of, reconstructing, imagining, 
speaking about everything that vision yields to us of space. No 
doubt, on this possibility, Diderot constructs a permanent 
equivocation with metaphysical implications, but this ambi- 
guity animates his text and gives it its mordant character. 

For us, the geometral dimension enables us to glimpse how 
the subject who concerns us is caught, manipulated, captured, 
in the field of vision. 

In Holbein's picture I showed you at once — without hiding 
any more than usual — the singular object floating in the fore- 
ground, which is there to be looked at, in order to catch, I 
would almost say, to catch in its trap, the observer, that is to say, 
us. It is, in short, an obvious way, no doubt an exceptional one, 
and one due to some moment of reflection on the part of the 
painter, of showing us that, as subjects, we are literally called 
into the picture, and represented here as caught. For the 
secret of this picture, whose implications I have pointed out to 
you, the kinships with the vanitas, the way this fascinating 
picture presents, between the two splendidly dressed and 
immobile figures, everything that recalls, in the perspective of 
the period, the vanity of the arts and sciences — the secret of 
this picture is given at the moment when, moving slightly away, 
little by little, to the left, then turning around, we see what the 
magical floating object signifies. It reflects our own nothingness, 
in the figure of the death's head. It is a use, therefore, of the 
geometral dimension of vision in order to capture the subject, 
an obvious relation with desire which, nevertheless, remains 
enigmatic. 

What is the desire which is caught, fixed in the picture, but 

92 



THE LINE AND LIGHT 

which also urges the artist to put something into operation? 
And what is that something? This is the path along which we 
shall try to move today. 



In this matter of the visible, everything is a trap, and in a 
strange way — as is very well shown by Maurice Merleau-Ponty 
in the title of one of the chapters of Lt Visible et I' invisible — 
entrelacs (interlacing, intertwining). There is not a single one of 
the divisions, a single one of the double sides that the function 
of vision presents, that is not manifested to us as a labyrinth. As 
we begin to distinguish its various fields, we always perceive 
more and more the extent to which they intersect. 

In the domain that I have called that of the geometral, it 
seems at first that it is light that gives us, as it were, the thread. 
In effect, you saw this thread last time Unking us to each point 
of the object and, in the place where it crosses the network in 
the form of a screen on which we are going to map the image, 
functioning quite definitely as a thread. Now, the fight is 
propagated, as one says, in a straight line, this much is certain. 
It would seem, then, that it is light that gives us the thread. 

Yet, reflect that this thread has no need of light — all that is 
needed is a stretched thread. This is why the blind man would 
be able to follow all our demonstrations, providing we took 
some trouble in their presentation. We would get him, for 
example, to finger an object of a certain height, then follow the 
stretched thread. We would teach him to distinguish, by the 
sense of touch in his finger-ends, on a surface, a certain con- 
figuration that reproduces the mapping of the images — in 
the same way that we imagine, in pure optics, the variously 
proportioned and fundamentally homological relations, the 
correspondences from one point to another in space, which 
always, in the end, amounts to situating two points on a single 
thread. This construction does not, therefore, particularly 
enable us to apprehend what is provided by light. 

How can we try to apprehend that which seems to elude us 
in this way in the optical structuring of space? It is always on 
this question that the traditional argument bears. Philosophers, 
going back from Alain, the last to have concerned himself with 
it, and quite brilliantly, to Kant, and even to Plato, all expatiate 

93 



OF THE GAZE 

on the supposed deceptiveness of perception — and, at the same 
time, they all find themselves once again masters of the exercise, 
by stressing the fact that perception finds the object where it is, 
and that the appearance of the cube as a parallelogram is 
precisely, owing to the rupture of space that underlies our very 
perception, what makes us perceive it as a cube. The whole 
trick, the hey presto !, of the classic dialectic around perception, 
derives from the fact that it deals with geometral vision, that is 
to say, with vision in so far as it is situated in a space that is not 
in its essence the visual. 

The essence of the relation between appearance and being, 
which the philosopher, conquering the field of vision, so easily 
masters, lies elsewhere. It is not in the straight line, but in the 
point of light — the point of irradiation, the play of light, fire, 
the source from which reflections pour forth. Light may travel 
in a straight line, but it is refracted, diffused, it floods, it fills — 
the eye is a sort of bowl — it flows over, too, it necessitates, 
around the ocular bowl, a whole series of organs, mechanisms, 
defences. The iris reacts not only to distance, but also to light, 
and it has to protect what takes place at the bottom of the bowl, 
which might, in certain circumstances, be damaged by it. The 
eyelid, too, when confronted with too bright a light, first 
blinks, that is, it screws itself up in a well-known grimace. 

Furthermore, it is not that the eye has to be photo-sensitive 
— we know this. The whole surface of the tegument — no doubt 
for various reasons that are not visual — may be photo-sensitive, 
and this dimension can in no way be reduced to the functioning 
of vision. There is a certain adumbration of photo-sensitive 
organs in the pigmentary spots. In the eye, the pigment 
functions fully, in a way, of course, that the phenomenon shows 
to be infinitely complex. It functions within the cones, for 
example, in the form of a rhodopsin. It also functions inside the 
various layers of the retina. This pigment comes and goes in 
functions that are not all, nor always immediately discoverable 
and clear, but which suggest the depth, the complexity and, at 
the same time, the unity of the mechanisms concerned with 
light. 

The relation of the subject with that which is strictly con- 
cerned with light seems, then, to be already somewhat ambig- 
uous. Indeed, you see this on, the schema of the two triangles, 

94 



THE LINE AND LIGHT 

which are inverted at the same time as they must be placed one 
upon the other. What you have here is the first example of this 
functioning of interlacing, intersection, chiasma, which I 
pointed out above, and which structures the whole of this 
domain. 

In order to give you some idea of the question posed by this 
relation between the subject and light, in order to show you 
that its place is something other than the place of the geometral 
point defined by geometric optics, I will now tell you a little 
story. 

It's a true story. I was in my early twenties or thereabouts — 
and at that time, of course, being a young intellectual, I wanted 
desperately to get away, see something different, throw myself 
into something practical, something physical, in the country 
say, or at the sea. One day, I was on a small boat, with a few 
people from a family of fishermen in a small port. At that time, 
Brittany was not industrialized as it is now. There were no 
trawlers. The fisherman went out in his frail craft at his own 
risk. It was this risk, this danger, that I loved to share. But it 
wasn't all danger and excitement — there were also fine days. 
One day, then, as we were waiting for the moment to pull in the 
nets, an individual known as Petit-Jean, that's what we called 
him — like all his family, he died very young from tuberculosis, 
which at that time was a constant threat to the whole of that 
social class — this Petit-Jean pointed out to me something 
floating on the surface of the waves. It was a small can, a 
sardine can. It floated there in the sun, a witness to the canning 
industry, which we, in fact, were supposed to supply. It glittered 
in the sun. And Petit-Jean said to me — You see that can? Do you 
see it? Well, it doesn't see you! 

He found this incident highly amusing — I less so. I thought 
about it. Why did I find it less amusing than he ? It's an interest- 
ing question. 

To begin with, if what Petit-Jean said to me, namely, that 
the can did not see me, had any meaning, it was because in a 
sense, it was looking at me, all the same. It was looking at me 
at the level of the point of light, the point at which everything 
that looks at me is situated — and I am not speaking meta- 
phorically. 

The point of this little story, as it had occurred to my partner, 

95 



OF THE GAZE 

the fact that he found it so funny and I less so, derives from the 
fact that, if I am told a story like that one, it is because I, at 
that moment — as I appeared to those fellows who were earning 
their livings with great difficulty, in the struggle with what for 
them was a pitiless nature — looked like nothing on earth. In 
short, I was rather out of place in the picture. And it was be- 
cause I felt this that I was not terribly amused at hearing 
myself addressed in this humorous, ironical way. 

I am taking the structure at the level of the subject here, and 
it reflects something that is already to be found in the natural 
relation that the eye inscribes with regard to light. I am not 
simply that punctiform being located at the geometral point 
from which the perspective is grasped. No doubt, in the depths 
of my eye, the picture is painted. The picture, certainly, is in my 
eye. But I am not in the picture. 

That which is light looks at me, and by means of that light 
in the depths of my eye, something is painted — something that 
is not simply a constructed relation, the object on which the 
philosopher lingers — but something that is an impression, the 
shimmering of a surface that is not, in advance, situated for me 
in its distance. This is something that introduces what was 
elided in the geometral relation — the depth of field, with all its 
ambiguity and variability, which is in no way mastered by me. 
It is rather it that grasps me, solicits me at every moment, and 
makes of the landscape something other than a landscape, 
something other than what I have called the picture. 

The correlative of the picture, to be situated in the same 
place as it, that is to say, outside, is the point of gaze, while 
that which forms the mediation from the one to the other, that . 
which is between the two, is something of another nature than 
geometral, optical space, something that plays an exacdy 
reverse role, which operates, not because it can be traversed, 
but on the contrary because it is opaque — I mean the screen. 

In what is presented to me as space of light, that which is 
gaze is always a play of light and opacity. It is always that 
gleam of light — it lay at the heart of my little story — it is 
always this which prevents me, at each point, from being a 
screen, from making the light appear as an iridescence that 
overflows it. In short, the point of gaze always participates in 
the ambiguity of the jewel. 

96 



THE LINE AND LIGHT 

And if I am anything in the picture, it is always in the form 
of the screen, which I earlier called the stain, the spot. 



This is the relation of the subject with the domain of vision. 
The word subject must not be understood here in the usual 
sense of the word, in the subjective sense — this relation is not 
an idealist relation. This overview, which I call the subject, 
and which I regard as giving consistency to the picture, is not 
simply a representative overview. 

There are many ways of being wrong about this function of 
the subject in the domain of the spectacle. 

Certainly, there are plenty of examples in La Phinominologie 
de la perception of what happens behind the retina. Merleau- 
Ponty cleverly extracts from a mass of writing some very 
remarkable facts, showing, for example, that simply the fact 
of masking, by means of a screen, part of a field functioning as 
a source of composite colours — produced, for example, by two 
wheels, two screens, which, one revolving behind the other, must 
compose a certain tone of light — that this intervention alone 
reveals in a quite different way the composition in question. 
Indeed, here we grasp the purely subjective function, in the 
ordinary sense of the word, the note of central mechanism that 
intervenes, for the play of light arranged in the experiment, all 
the elements of which we know, is distinct from what is per- 
ceived by the subject. 

Perceiving the effects of reflection of a field or a colour is 
quite different — it does have a subjective side to it, but one 
arranged quite differently. Let us, for example, place a yellow 
field beside a blue field — by receiving the light reflected on the 
yellow field, the blue field will undergo some change. But, 
certainly, everything that is colour is merely subjective — there 
is no objective correlative in the spectrum to enable us to attach 
the quality of colour to the wavelength, or to the relevant 
frequency at this level of light vibration. There is something 
objective here, but it is situated differently. 

Is that all there is to it ? Is that what I am talking about when 
I speak of the relation between the subject and what I have 
called the picture ? Certainly not. 

The relation between the subject and the picture has been 

97 



OF THE GAZE 

approached by certain philosophers, but they have, if I may 
say so, missed the point. Read the book by Raymond Ruyer 
called Nio-finalisme, and see how, in order to situate perception 
in a teleological perspective, he is forced to situate the subject 
in an absolute overview. There is no need, except in the most 
abstract way, to posit the subject in absolute overview, when, 
in the example he gives, it is merely a question of getting us to 
grasp what the perception of a draught-board is — a draught- 
board belongs essentially to that geometral optics that I was 
careful to distinguish at the outset. We are here in space partes 
extra partes, which always provides such an objection to the 
apprehension to the object. In this direction, the thing is 
irreducible. 

Yet there is a phenomenal domain — infinitely more ex- 
tended than the privileged points at which it appears — that 
enables us to apprehend, in its true nature, the subject in abso- 
lute overview. Even if we cannot give it being, it is nonetheless 
necessary. There are facts that can be articulated only in the 
phenomenal dimension of the overview by which I situate 
myself in the picture as stain — these are the facts of mimicry. 

This is not the place to go into all the more or less complex 
problems posed by the question of mimicry. I would refer you 
to the specialized works on the subject — they are not only 
fascinating in themselves, but they provide ample material for 
reflexion. I shall content myself with stressing what has not, 
perhaps, been sufficiently brought out. To begin with, I shall 
ask a question — how important is the function of adaptation 
in mimicry? 

In certain phenomena of mimicry one may speak perhaps of 
an adaptive or adapted coloration and realize, for example — as 
Cuenot has shown, probably with some relevance in certain 
cases — that coloration, in so far as it is adapted completely, is 
simply a way of defending oneself against light. In an environ- 
ment in which, because of what is immediately around, the 
colour green predominates, as at the bottom of a pool con- 
taining green plants, an animalcule — there are innumerable 
ones that might serve as examples — becomes green for as long 
as the light may do it harm. It becomes green, therefore, in 
order to reflect the light qua green, thus protecting itself, by 
adaptation, from its effects. 

98 



THE LINE AND LIGHT 

But, in mimicry, we are dealing with something quite 
different. Let us take an example chosen almost at random — it 
is not a privileged case — that of the small crustacean known as 
caprella, to which is added the adjective acanthi/era. When such a 
crustacean settles in the midst of those animals, scarcely 
animals, known as briozoaires, what does it imitate ? It imitates 
what, in that quasi-plant animal known as the briozoaires, is a 
stain — at a particular phase of the briozoaires, an intestinal 
loop forms a stain, at another phase, there functions something 
like a coloured centre. It is to this stain shape that the crustacean 
adapts itself. It becomes a stain, it becomes a picture, it is 
inscribed in the picture. This, strictly speaking, is the origin of 
mimicry. And, on this basis, the fundamental dimensions of the 
inscription of the subject in the picture appear infinitely more 
justified than a more hesitant guess might suggest at first sight. 

I have already referred to what Gaillois says about this in his 
little book Miduse et compagnie, with that unquestionable 
penetration that is sometimes found in the non-specialist — his 
very distance may enable him to grasp certain implications in 
what the specialist has merely stated. 

Certain scientists claim to see in the register of coloration 
merely more or less successful facts of adaptation. But the facts 
show that practically nothing that can be called adaptation — in 
the sense in which the term is usually understood, that is to say, 
as behaviour bound up with the needs of survival — practically 
nothing of this is to be found in mimicry, which, in most cases, 
proves to be inoperant, or operating strictly in the opposite 
direction from that which the adaptive result might be pre- 
sumed to demand. On the other hand, Gaillois brings out 
the three headings that are in effect the major dimensions in 
which the mimetic activity is deployed — travesty, camouflage, 
intimidation. 

Indeed, it is in this domain that the dimension by which the 
subject is to be inserted in the picture is presented. Mimicry 
reveals something in so far as it is distinct from what might be 
called an itself that is behind. The effect of mimicry is camou- 
flage, in the strictly technical sense. It is not a question of 
harmonizing with the background but, against a mottled 
background, of becoming mottled — exactly like the technique 
of camouflage practised in human warfare. 

99 



OF THE GAZE 

In the case of travesty, a certain sexual finality is intended. 
Nature shows us that this sexual aim is produced by all kinds 
of effects that are essentially disguise, masquerade. A level is 
constituted here quite distinct from the sexual aim itself, which 
is found to play an essential role in it, and which must not be 
distinguished too hastily as being that of deception. The 
function of the lure, in this instance, is something else, some- 
thing before which we should suspend judgement before we 
have properly measured its effects. 

Finally, the phenomenon known as intimidation also in- 
volves this over-valuation that the subject always tries to 
attain in his appearance. Here too, we should not be too hasty 
in introducing some kind of inter-subjectivity. Whenever we 
are dealing with imitation, we should be very careful not to 
think too quickly of the other who is being imitated. To imitate 
is no doubt to reproduce an image. But at bottom, it is, for the 
subject, to be inserted in a function whose exercise grasps it. 
It is here that we should pause for a moment. 

Let us now see what the unconscious function as such tells 
us, in so far as it is the field which, for us, offers itself to the 
conquest of the subject. 

3 
In this direction, a remark of Caillois' should guide us. Gaillois 
assures us that the facts of mimicry are similar, at the animal 
level, to what, in the human being is manifested as art, or 
painting. The only objection one might make to this is that it 
seems to indicate, for Rene 1 Caillois, that the notion of painting 
is itself so clear that one can refer to it in order to explain 
something else. 

What is painting? It is obviously not for nothing that we 
have referred to as picture the function in which the subject 
has to map himself as such. But when a human subject is en- 
gaged in making a picture of himself, in putting into operation 
that something that has as its centre the gaze, what is taking 
place? In the picture, the artist, we are told by some, wishes 
to be a subject, and the art of painting is to be distinguished 
from all others in that, in the work, it is as subject, as gaze, 
that the artist intends to impose himself on us. To this, others 
reply by stressing the object-like side of the art product. In both 

ioo 



THE LINE AND LIGHT 

these directions, something more or less appropriate is mani- 
fested, which certainly does not exhaust the question. 

I shall advance the following thesis — certainly, in the picture, 
something of the gaze is always manifested. The painter knows 
this very well — his morality, his search, his quest, his practice 
is that he should sustain and vary the selection of a certain 
kind of gaze. Looking at pictures, even those most lacking in 
what is usually called the gaze, and which is constituted by a 
pair of eyes, pictures in which any representation of the human 
figure is absent, like a landscape by a Dutch or a Flemish 
painter, you will see in the end, as in filigree, something so 
specific to each of the painters that you will feel the presence of 
the gaze. But this is merely an object of research, and perhaps 
merely illusion. 

The function of the picture — in relation to the person to 
whom the painter, literally, offers his picture to be seen — has a 
relation with the gaze. This relation is not, as it might at first 
seem, that of being a trap for the gaze. It might be thought 
that, like the actor, the painter wishes to be looked at. I do not 
think so. I think there is a relation with the gaze of the spectator, 
but that it is more complex. The painter gives something to the 
person who must stand in front of his painting which, in part, 
at least, of the painting, might be summed up thus — You want 
to see? Well, take a look at this! He gives something for the eye 
to feed on, but he invites the person to whom this picture is 
presented to lay down his gaze there as one lays down one's 
weapons. This is the pacifying, Apollonian effect of painting. 
Something is given not so much to the gaze as to the eye, some- 
thing that involves the abandonment, the laying down, of the 
gaze. 

The problem is that a whole side of painting — expressionism 
— is separated from this field. Expressionist painting, and this 
is its distinguishing feature, provides something by way of a 
certain satisfaction — in the sense in which Freud uses the term 
in relation to the drive — of a certain satisfaction of what is 
demanded by the gaze. 

In other words, we must now pose the question as to the 
exact status of the eye as organ. The function, it is said, creates 
the organ. This is quite absurd — function does not even 
explain the organ. Whatever appears in the organism as an 

IOI 



OF THE GAZE 

organ is always presented with a large multiplicity of functions. 
In the eye, it is clear that various functions come together. The 
discriminatory function is isolated to the maximum degree at 
the level of the fovea, the chosen point of distinct vision. Some- 
thing quite different occurs over the rest of the surface of the 
retina, incorrectly distinguished by specialists as the locus of the 
scotopic funcdon. But here, too, chiasma is to be found, since 
it is this last field, supposedly created to perceive things in 
diminished lighting, which provides the maximum possibility 
of perceiving the effects of light. If you wish to see a star of the 
fifth or six size, do not look straight at it — this is known as the 
Arago phenomenon. You will be able to see it only if you fix 
your eye to one side. 

These functions of the eye do not exhaust the character of the 
organ in so far as it emerges on the couch, and in so far as the 
eye determines there what every organ determines, namely, 
duties. What is wrong about the reference to instinct, a reference 
that is so confused, is that one does not realize that instinct is the 
way in which an organism has of extricating itself in the best 
possible way from an organ. There are many examples, in the 
animal kingdom, of cases in which the organism succumbs to an 
excess, a hyper-development of an organ. The supposed function 
of instinct in the relation between organism and organ certainly 
seems to have been defined as a kind of morality. We are 
astonished by the so-called pre-adaptations of instinct. The 
extraordinary thing is that the organism can do anything with 
its organ at all. 

In my reference to the unconscious, I am dealing with the 
relation to the organ. It is not a question of the relation to. 
sexuality, or even to the sex, if it is possible to give any specific 
reference to this term. It is a question rather of the relation to 
the phallus, in as much as it is lacking in the real that might be 
attained in the sexual goal. 

It is in as much as, at the heart of the experience of the un- 
conscious, we are dealing with that organ — determined in the 
subject by the inadequacy organized in the castration complex 
— that we can grasp to what extent the eye is caught up in a 
similar dialectic. 

From the outset, we see, in the dialectic of the eye and the 
gaze, that there is no coincidence, but, on the contrary, a lure. 

102 



THE LINE AND LIGHT 

When, in love, I solicit a look, what is profoundly unsatisfying 
and always missing is that — You never look at me from the place 
from which I see you. 

Conversely, what I look at is never what I wish to see. And the 
relation that I mentioned earlier, between the painter and the 
spectator, is a play, a play of trompe-l'asil, whatever one says. 
There is no reference here to what is incorrectly called figura- 
tive, if by this you mean some reference or other to a subjacent 
reality. 

In the classical tale of Zeuxis and Parrhasios, Zeuxis has the 
advantage of having made grapes that attracted the birds. The 
stress is placed not on the fact that these grapes were in any way 
perfect grapes, but on the fact that even the eye of the birds was 
taken in by them. This is proved by the fact that his friend 
Parrhasios triumphs over him for having painted on the wall a 
veil, a veil so lifelike that Zeuxis, turning towards him said, 
Well, and now show us what you have painted behind it. By this he 
showed that what was at issue was certainly deceiving the eye 
(tromper I'asil). A triumph of the gaze over the eye. 

Next time, we shall return to this function of the eye and the 
gaze. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

M. Safouan: In the contemplation of the picture, if I have 
understood you correctly, the eye seeks relaxation from the gaze? 

Lac an : I shall take up here the dialectic of appearance and 
its beyond, in saying that, if beyond appearance there is 
nothing in itself, there is the gaze. It is in this relation that the 
eye as organ is situated. 

Safouan: Beyond the appearance, is there a lack, or the gaze? 

L ac an : At the level of the scopic dimension, in so far as the 
drive operates there, is to be found the same function of the 
objet a as can be mapped in all the other dimensions. 

The objet a is something from which the subject, in order to 
constitute itself, has separated itself off as organ. This serves as a 
symbol of the lack, that is to say, of the phallus, not as such, 
but in so far as it is lacking. It must, therefore, be an object 
that is, firstly, separable and, secondly, that has some relation 
to the lack. I'll explain at once what I mean. 

At the oral level, it is the nothing, in so far as that from which 

103 



OF THE GAZE 

the subject was weaned is no longer anything for him. In 
anorexia nervosa, what the child eats is the nothing. This will 
enable you to grasp obliquely how the object of weaning may 
come to function at the level of castration, as privation. 

The anal level is the locus of metaphor — one object for 
another, give the faeces in place of the phallus. This shows you 
why the anal drive is the domain of oblativity, of the gift. 
Where one is caught short, where one cannot, as a result of the 
lack, give what is to be given, one can always give something 
else. That is why, in his morality, man is inscribed at the anal 
level. And this is especially true of the materialist. 

At the scopic level, we are no longer at the level of demand, 
but of desire, of the desire of the Other. It is the same at the 
level of the invocatory drive, which is the closest to the experi- 
ence of the unconscious. 

Generally speaking, the relation between the gaze and what 
one wishes to see involves a lure. The subject is presented as 
other than he is, and what one shows him is not what he wishes 
to see. It is in this way that the eye may function as objet a, that 
is to say, at the level of the lack (— <f>). 

4 March 1964 



104 



WHAT IS A PICTURE? 

Being and its semblance • The lure of the screen • Dompte-regard and 

trompe-l'oeil 1 • The backward glance • Gesture and touch • Le don- 

ner-a-voir and invidia 2 

Today, then, I must keep to the wager to which I committed 
myself in choosing the terrain in which the objet a is most 
evanescent in its function of symbolizing the central lack of 
desire, which I have always indicated in a univocal way by the 
algorithm (— ^). 

I don't know whether you can see the blackboard, but as 
usual I have marked out a few reference-points. The objet a in 
the field of the visible is the gaze. After which, enclosed in a chain 
bracket, I have written : 



{ 



in nature 
as = {-+) 

We can grasp in effect something which, already in nature, 
appropriates the gaze to the function to which it may be put in 
the symbolic relation in man. 

Below this, I have drawn the two triangular systems that I 
have already introduced — the first is that which, in the geo- 
metral field, puts in our place the subject of the representation, 
and the second is that which turns me into a picture. On the 
right-hand line is situated, then, the apex of the first triangle, 
the point of the geometral subject, and it is on that line that I, 

1 The sense of the verb dompter is 'to tame', 'to subdue'. The reference, 
then, is to a situation in which the gaze is tamed by some object, such as a 
picture. Lacan has invented the phrase dompte-regard as a counterpart to the 
notion of trompe-Fail, which has of course passed into the English language 
[Tr.]. 

* Donner-a-voir means literally 'to give to be seen' and, therefore, 'to 
offer to the view'. The Latin invidia, translated as 'envy', derives, as Lacan 
points out, from videre, to see. 

105 



OF THE GAZE 

too, turn myself into a picture under the gaze, which is inscribed 
at the apex of the second triangle. The two triangles are here 
superimposed, as in fact they are in the functioning of the scopic 
register. 



The gaze 




The subject of representation 



I must, to begin with, insist on the following: in the scopic 
field, the gaze is outside, I am looked at, that is to say, I am a 
picture. 

This is the function that is found at the heart of the institution 
of the subject in the visible. What determines me, at the most 
profound level, in the visible, is the gaze that is outside. It is 
through the gaze that I enter light and it is from the gaze that 
I receive its effects. Hence it comes about that the gaze is the 
instrument through which light is embodied and through 
which — if you will allow me to use a word, as I often do, in a 
fragmented form — I am photo-graphed. 

What is at issue here is not the philosophical problem of 
representation. From that point of view, when I am presented 
with a representation, I assure myself that I know quite a lot 
about it, I assure myself as a consciousness that knows that it is 
only representation, and that there is, beyond, the thing, the 
thing itself. Behind the phenomenon, there is the noumenon, 
for example. I may not be able to do anything about it, because 
my transcendental categories, as Kant would say, do just as they 
please and force me to take the thing in their way. But, then, 
that's all right, really — everything works out for the best. 

In my opinion, it is not in this dialectic between the surface 
and that which is beyond that things are suspended. For my 
part, I set out from the fact that there is something that 
establishes a fracture, a bi-partition, a splitting of the being 
to which the being accommodates itself, even in the natural 
world. 

1 06 



WHAT IS A PICTURE? 

This fact is observable in the variously modulated scale of 
what may be included, ultimately, under the general heading 
of mimicry. It is this that comes into play, quite obviously, 
both in sexual union and in the struggle to the death. In both 
situations, the being breaks up, in an extraordinary way, 
between its being and its semblance, between itself and that 
paper tiger it shows to the other. In the case of display, usually 
on the part of the male animal, or in the case of grimacing 
swelling by which the animal enters the play of combat in the 
form of intimidation, the being gives of himself, or receives 
from the other, something that is like a mask, a double, an 
envelope, a thrown-off skin, thrown off in order to cover the 
frame of a shield. It is through this separated form of himself 
that the being comes into play in his effects of life and death, 
and it might be said that it is with the help of this doubling of 
the other, or of oneself, that is realized the conjunction from 
which proceeds the renewal of beings in reproduction. 

The lure plays an essential function therefore. It is not 
something else that seizes us at the very level of clinical ex- 
perience, when, in relation to what one might imagine of the 
attraction to the other poleasconjoiningmasculineandfeminine, 
we apprehend the prevalence of that which is presented as 
travesty. It is no doubt through the mediation of masks that 
the masculine and the feminine meet in the most acute, most 
intense way. 

Only the subject — the human subject, the subject of the 
desire that is the essence of man — is not, unlike the animal, 
entirely caught up in this imaginary capture. He maps himself 
in it. How? In so far as he isolates the function of the screen 
and plays with it. Man, in effect, knows how to play with the 
mask as that beyond which there is the gaze. The screen is here 
the locus of mediation. 

Last time, I alluded to the reference given by Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty in La PMnominologie de la perception in which, 
from well-chosen examples based on the experiments of Gelb 
and Goldstein, one can already see, simply at the perceptual 
level, how the screen re-establishes things, in their status as 
real. If, by being isolated, an effect of lighting dominates us, 
if, for example, a beam of light directing our gaze so captivates 
us that it appears as a milky cone and prevents us from seeing 

107 




OF THE GAZE 

what it illuminates, the mere fact of introducing into this field 
a small screen, which cuts into that which is illuminated without 
being seen, makes the milky light retreat, as it were, into the 
shadow, and allows the object it concealed to emerge. 

At the perceptual level, this is the phenomenon of a relation 
that is to be taken in a more essential function, namely, that in 
its relation to desire, reality appears only as marginal. 



reality is marginal 



This is certainly one of the features that scarcely seems to 
have been noticed in pictorial creation. Yet rediscovering in the 
picture what is, strictly speaking, composition, the lines dividing 
the surfaces created by the painter, vanishing traces, lines of 
force, frames (bdtis) in which the image finds its status is a 
fascinating game — but I am astonished that in one very re- 
markable book they are called frameworks (charpentes). For this 
term eliminates their principal effect. By a sort of irony, on the 
back of this book, there nevertheless figures, as being more 
exemplary than any other, a picture by Rouault on which is 
traced a circular line to enable us to grasp the main point. 

Indeed, there is something whose absence can always be 
observed in a picture — which is not the case in perception. 
This is the central field, where the separating power of the eye 
is exercised to the maximum in vision. In every picture, this 
central field cannot but be absent, and replaced by a hole — a 
reflection, in short, of the pupil behind which is situated the 
gaze. Consequently, and in as much as the picture enters into 
a relation to desire, the place of a central screen is always 
marked, which is precisely that by which, in front of the picture, 
I am elided as subject of the geometral plane. 

This is why the picture does not come into play in the field of 
representation. Its end and effect are elsewhere. 



1 08 



WHAT IS A PICTURE? 

2 

In the scopic field, everything is articulated between two terms 
that act in an antinomic way — on the side of things, there is 
the gaze, that is to say, things look at me, and yet I see them. 
This is how one should understand those words, so strongly 
stressed, in the Gospel, They have eyes that they might tat see. That 
they might not see what? Precisely, that things are looking at 
them. 

This is why I have introduced painting into our field of 
exploration by the narrow door offered by us by Roger Caillois 
— everyone noticed last time that I made a slip of the tongue 
in calling him Renl, heaven knows why — in observing that 
mimicry is no doubt the equivalent of the function which, in 
man, is exercised in painting. 

This is not the occasion to begin a psycho-analysis of the 
painter, which is always such a tricky matter, and which always 
produces a shocked reaction on the part of the listener. Nor is 
it a question of art criticism, and yet someone who is close tome, 
and whose views count for a great deal with me, told me that 
he was very troubled when I embarked on something very like 
art criticism. Of course, that is the danger, and I shall try to 
avoid any such confusion. 

If one considers all the modulations imposed on painting by 
the variations of the subjectifying structure that have occurred 
in history, it is clear that no formula can possibly embrace 
those aims, those ruses, those infinitely varied tricks. Indeed, 
you saw clearly enough last time that after declaring that there 
is in painting a certain dompte-regard, a taming of the gaze, that 
is to say, that he who looks is always led by the painting to lay 
down his gaze, I immediately introduced the corrective that it 
is nevertheless in a quite direct appeal to the gaze that expression- 
ism is situated. For those who remain unconvinced, I will 
explain what I mean. I am thinking of the work of such painters 
as Munch, James Ensor, Kubin, or even of that painting which, 
curiously enough, one might situate in a geographical way as 
laying siege to that which in our time is concentrated in paint- 
ing in Paris. When will we see the limits of this siege lifted? 
That, if I am to believe the painter Andre 1 Masson, with whom 
I was talking recently, is the most immediate question. Well! 

109 



OF THE GAZE 

To point out references like these, is not to enter into the 
shifting, historical game of criticism, which tries to grasp 
what is the function of painting at a particular moment, for a 
particular author at a particular time. For me, it is at the 
radical principle of the function of this fine art that I am trying 
to place myself. 

To begin with, I would stress that it is in setting out from 
painting that Maurice Merleau-Ponty was particularly led to 
overthrow the relation, which has always been made by thought, 
between the eye and the mind. What he has shown in a quite 
admirable way, beginning with what he calls, with Cezanne 
himself, those little blues, those little browns, those little whites, those 
touches that fall like rain from the painter's brush, is that the 
function of the painter is something quite different from the 
organization of the field of representation in which the philo- 
sopher held us in our status as subjects. 

And what is that? Where does that get us? It already gives 
form and embodiment to the field in which the psycho-analyst 
has advanced since Freud, with what, in Freud, is crazy daring, 
and what, in those who follow him, soon becomes imprudence. 

Freud always stressed with infinite respect that he did not 
intend to settle the question of what it was in artistic creation 
that gave it its true value. When he is dealing with painters 
and poets, there is a point at which his appreciation stops. He 
cannot say, he does not know, what, for everybody, for those 
who look or hear, is the value of artistic creation. Nevertheless, 
when he studies Leonardo, let us say, roughly speaking, that 
he tries to find the function that the artist's original phantasy 
played in his creation — his relation to those two mothers Freud 
sees represented in the painting in the Louvre or in the cartoon 
in London, by that double body, branching at the level of the 
waist, which seems to blossom from the entwined legs at the 
base. Is it in this direction that we must look? 

Or should we see the principle of artistic creation in the fact 
that it seems to extract — remember how I translated Vor- 
stellungsreprasentanz — that something that stands for repre- 
sentation ? Was it to this that I was leading you when I made 
a distinction between the picture and representation ? 

Certainly not — except in very rare works, except in a paint- 
ing that sometimes emerges, a dream painting, so rare that it 

no 



WHAT IS A PICTURE? 

can scarcely be situated in the function of painting. Indeed, 
perhaps this is the limit at which we would have to designate 
what is called psychopathological art. 

That which is the creation of the painter is structured in a 
quite different way. Precisely to the extent that we restore the 
point of view of structure in the libidinal relation, perhaps the 
time has come when we may question to advantage — because 
our new algorithms allow us to articulate the answer better 
— what is involved in artistic creation. For me, it is a question 
of creation as Freud designated it, that is to say, as sublimation, 
and of the value it assumes in a social field. 

In a way that is at once vague and precise, and which con- 
cerns only the success of the work, Freud declares that if a 
creation of desire, which is pure at the level of the painter, 
takes on commercial value — a gratification that may, all the 
same, be termed secondary — it is because its effect has some- 
thing profitable for society, for that part of society that comes 
under its influence. Broadly speaking, one can say that the 
work calms people, comforts them, by showing them that at 
least some of them can live from the exploitation of their desire. 
But for this to satisfy them so much, there must also be that 
other effect, namely, that their desire to contemplate finds some 
satisfaction in it. It elevates the mind, as one says, that is to say, 
it encourages renunciation. Don't you see that there is some- 
thing here that indicates the function I called dompte-regard? 

As I said last time, dompte-regard is also presented in the form 
of trompe-l'oeil. In this sense, I appear to be moving in the 
opposite direction from tradition, which situates its function as 
being very distinct from that of painting. Yet I did not hesitate 
to end my last talk by observing, in the opposition of the works 
of Zeuxis and Parrhasios, the ambiguity of two levels, that of 
the natural function of the lure and that of trompe-Vanl. 

If the birds rushed to the surface on which Zeuxis had 
deposited his dabs of colour, taking the picture for edible 
grapes, let us observe that the success of such an undertaking 
does not imply in the least that the grapes were admirably 
reproduced, like those we can see in the basket held by Gara- 
vaggio's Bacchus in the Ufnzi. If the grapes had been painted in 
this way, it is not very likely that the birds would have been 
deceived, for why should the birds see grapes portrayed with 

m 



OF THE GAZE 

such extraordinary verisimilitude? There would have to be 
something more reduced, something closer to the sign, in some- 
thing representing grapes for the birds. But the opposite ex- 
ample of Parrhasios makes it clear that if one wishes to deceive 
a man, what one presents to him is the painting of a veil, that 
is to say, something that incites him to ask what is behind it. 

It is here that this little story becomes useful in showing us 
why Plato protests against the illusion of painting. The point 
is not that painting gives an illusory equivalence to the object, 
even if Plato seems to be saying this. The point is that the 
trompe-l'ceil of painting pretends to be something other than 
what it is. 

What is it that attracts and satisfies us in trompe-l'ceil? When 
is it that it captures our attention and delights us ? At the moment 
when, by a mere shift of our gaze, we are able to realize that the 
representation does not move with the gaze and that it is 
merely a trompe-l'ceil. For it appears at that moment as some- 
thing other than it seemed, or rather it now seems to be that 
something else. The picture does not compete with appearance, 
it competes with what Plato designates for us beyond appear- 
ance as being the Idea. It is because the picture is the appear- 
ance that says it is that which gives the appearance that Plato 
attacks painting, as if it were an activity competing with his 
own. 

This other thing is the petit a, around which there revolves a 
combat of which trompe-l'ceil is the soul. 

If one tries to represent the position of the painter concretely 
in history, one realizes that he is the source of something that 
may pass into the real and on which, at all times, one might 
say, one takes a lease. The painter, it is said, no longer depends 
on aristocratic patrons. But the situation is not fundamentally 
changed with the advent of the picture dealer. He, too, is a 
patron, and a patron of the same stamp. Before the aristo- 
cratic patron, it was the religious institution, with the holy 
image, that gave artists a living. The artist always has some 
financial body behind him and it is always a question of the 
objet a, or rather a question of reducing it — which may, at a 
certain level, strike you as being rather mythical — to an a with 
which — this is true in the last resort — it is the painter as 
creator who sets up a dialogue. 

112 



WHAT IS A PICTURE? 

But it is much more instructive to see how the a functions in 
its social repercussions. 

Icons — the Christ in triumph in the vault at Daphnis or the 
admirable Byzantine mosaics — undoubtedly have the effect of 
holding us under their gaze. We might stop there, but were we 
to do so we would not really grasp the motive that made the 
painter set about making this icon, or the motive it satisfies in 
being presented to us. It is something to do with the gaze, of 
of course, but there is more to it than that. What makes the 
value of the icon is that the god it represents is also looking at 
it. It is intended to please God. At this level, the artist is 
operating on the sacrificial plane — he is playing with those 
things, in this case images, that may arouse the desire of God. 

Indeed, God is the creator of certain images — we see this in 
Genesis, with the ZeUm Elohim. And iconoclastic thought itself 
still preserves this when it declares there is a god that does not 
care for this. He is certainly alone in this. But I do not want to 
go too far today in a direction that would take us right to the 
heart of one of the most essential elements of the province of 
the Names-bf-the-Father : a certain pact may be signed beyond 
every image. Where we are, the image remains a go-between 
with the divinity — if Javeh forbids the Jews to make idols, it 
is because they give pleasure to the other gods. In a certain 
register it is not God who is not anthropomorphic, it is man 
who is begged not to be so. But that's enough of that. 

Let us pass now to the next stage, which I shall call communal. 
Let us gotothegreathallof theDoges' Palacein which are painted 
all kinds of battles, such as the battle of Lepanto, etc. The social 
function, which was already emerging at the religious level, is 
now becoming clear. Who comes here? Those who form what 
Retz calls 'lespeuples', the audiences. And what do the audiences 
see in these vast compositions. They see the gaze of those 
persons who, when the audience are not there, deliberate in 
this hall. Behind the picture, it is their gaze that is there. 

You see, one can say that there are always lots of gazes 
behind. Nothing new is introduced in this respect by the epoch 
that Andre 1 Malraux distinguishes as the modern, that which 
comes to be dominated by what he calls 'the incomparable monster', 
namely, the gaze of the painter, which claims to impose itself 
as being the only gaze. There always was a gaze behind. But 

"3 



OF THE GAZE 

— this is the most subtle point — where does this gaze come 
from? 

3 
We now come back to the little blues, little whites, little browns of 
Clzanne, or again to the delightful example that Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty gives in passing in his Signes, namely, that 
strange slow-motion film in which one sees Matisse painting. 
The important point is that Matisse himself was overwhelmed 
by the film. Maurice Merleau-Ponty draws attention to the 
paradox of this gesture which, enlarged by the distension of 
time, enables us to imagine the most perfect deliberation in 
each of these brush strokes. This is an illusion, he says. What 
occurs as these strokes, which go to make up the miracle of the 
picture, fall like rain from the painter's brush is not choice, but 
something else. Can we not try to formulate what this some- 
thing else is ? 

Should not the question be brought closer to what I called 
the rain of the brush ? If a bird were to paint would it not be by 
letting fall its feathers, a snake by casting off its scales, a tree by 
letting fall its leaves? What it amounts to is the first act in the 
laying down of the gaze. A sovereign act, no doubt, since it 
passes into something that is materialized and which, from this 
sovereignty, will render obsolete, excluded, inoperant, whatever, 
coming from elsewhere, will be presented before this product. 

Let us not forget that the painter's brushstroke is something 
in which a movement is terminated. We are faced here with 
something that gives a new and different meaning to the term 
regression — we are faced with the element of motive in the 
sense of response, in so far as it produces, behind it, its own 
stimulus. 

There, that by which the original temporality in which the 
relation to the other is situated as distinct is here, in the scopic 
dimension, that of the terminal moment. That which in the 
identificatory dialectic of the signifier and the spoken will be 
projected forward as haste, is here, on the contrary, the end, 
that which, at the outset of any new intelligence, will be called 
the moment of seeing. 

This terminal moment is that which enables us to distinguish 
between a gesture and an act. It is by means of the gesture that 

114 



WHAT IS A PICTURE? 

the brushstroke is applied to the canvas. And so true is it that 
the gesture is always present there that there can be no doubt 
that the picture is first felt by us, as the terms impression or 
impressionism imply, as having more affinity with the gesture 
than with any other type of movement. All action represented 
in a picture appears to us as a battle scene, that is to say, as 
something theatrical, necessarily created for the gesture. And, 
again, it is this insertion in the gesture that means that one 
cannot turn it upside down — whether or not it is figurative. If 
you turn a transparency around, you realize at once if it is 
being shown to you with the left in the place of the right. The 
direction of the gesture of the hand indicates sufficiently this 
lateral symmetry. 

What we see here, then, is that the gaze operates in a certain 
descent, a descent of desire, no doubt. But how can we express 
this? The subject is not completely aware of it — he operates by 
remote control. Modifying the formula I have of desire as 
unconscious — maris desire is the desire of the Other — I would say 
that it is a question of a sort of desire on the part of the Other, at 
the end of which is the showing (le donner-d-voir) . 

How could this showing satisfy something, if there is not some 
appetite of the eye on the part of the person looking? This 
appetite of the eye that must be fed produces the hypnotic 
value of painting. For me, this value is to be sought on a much 
less elevated plane than might be supposed, namely, in that 
which is the true function of the organ of the eye, the eye filled 
with voracity, the evil eye. 

It is striking, when one thinks of the universality of the function 
of the evil eye, that there is no trace anywhere of a good eye, 
of an eye that blesses. What can this mean, except that the eye 
carries with it the fatal function of being in itself endowed — if 
you will allow me to play on several registers at once — with a 
power to separate. But this power to separate goes much 
further than distinct vision. The powers that are attributed to 
it, of drying up the milk of an animal on which it falls — a 
belief as widespread in our time as in any other, and in the 
most civilized countries — of bringing with it disease or mis- 
fortune — where can we better picture this power than in 
invidia? 

Invidia comes from videre. The most exemplary invidia, for us 

"5 



OF THE GAZE 

analysts, is the one I found long ago in Augustine, in which he 
sums up his entire fate, namely, that of the little child seeing 
his brother at his mother's breast, looking at him amare conspectu, 
with a bitter look, which seems to tear him to pieces and has 
on himself the effect of a poison. 

In order to understand what invidia is in its function as gaze 
it must not be confused with jealousy. What the small child, or 
whoever, envies is not at all necessarily what he might want 
— avoir envie, as one improperly puts it. Who can say that the 
child who looks at his younger brother still needs to be at the 
breast? Everyone knows that envy is usually aroused by the 
possession of goods which would be of no use to the person who 
is envious of them, and about the true nature of which he does 
not have the least idea. 

Such is true envy — the envy that makes the subject pale 
before the image of a completeness closed upon itself, before the 
idea that the petit a, the separated a from which he is hanging, 
may be for another the possession that gives satisfaction, 
Befriedigung. 

It is to this register of the eye as made desperate by the gaze 
that we must go if we are to grasp the taming, civilizing and 
fascinating power of the function of the picture. The profound 
relation between the a and desire will serve as an example when 
I introduce the subject of the transference. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

M. Tort : Could you say more about the relation you posited 
between gesture and the moment of seeing? 

Lac an: What is a gesture? A threatening gesture, for 
example? It is not a blow that is interrupted. It is certainly 
something that is done in order to be arrested and suspended. 

I may carry it to its logical conclusion later, but, as a threaten- 
ing gesture it is inscribed behind. 

It is this very special temporality, which I have denned by 
the term arrest and which creates its signification behind it, 
that makes the distinction between the gesture and the act. 

What is very remarkable in the Peking Opera — I don't 
know whether you saw them on their recent visit — is the way 
fighting is depicted. One fights as one has always fought since 
time immemorial, much more with gestures than with blows. 

116 



WHAT IS A PICTURE? 

Of course, the spectacle itself is content with an absolute 
dominance of gestures. In these ballets, no two people ever 
touch one another, they move in different spaces in which are 
spread out whole series of gestures, which, in traditional combat, 
nevertheless have the value of weapons, in the sense that they 
may well be effective as instruments of intimidation. Everyone 
knows that primitive peoples go into battle with grimacing, 
horrible masks and terrifying gestures. You mustn't imagine 
that this is over and done with ! When fighting the Japanese, 
the American marines were taught to make as many grimaces 
as they. Our more recent weapons might also be regarded as 
gestures. Let us hope that they will remain such ! 

The authenticity of what emerges in painting is diminished 
in us human beings by the fact that we have to get our colours 
where they're to be found, that is to say, in the shit. If I referred 
to birds who might let fall their feathers, it is because we do not 
have these feathers. The creator will never participate in any- 
thing other than the creation of a small dirty deposit, a succes- 
sion of small dirty deposits juxtaposed. It is through this dimen- 
sion that we are in scopic creation — the gesture as displayed 
movement. 

Does this explanation satisfy you ? Was that the question you 
asked me? 

Tort: No, I wanted you to say more about that temporality to 
which you already referred once, and which presupposes, it seems to me, 
references that you have made elsewhere to logical time. 

Lac an: Look, what I noticed there was the suture, the 
pseudo-identification, that exists between what I called the 
time of terminal arrest of the gesture and what, in another 
dialectic that I called the dialectic of identificatory haste, I put 
as the first time, namely, the moment of seeing. The two over- 
lap, but they are certainly not identical, since one is initial and 
the other is terminal. 

I would like to say more about something for which I was 
not able, for lack of time, to give you the necessary indications. 

This terminal time of the gaze, which completes the gesture, 
I place strictly in relation to what I later say about the evil eye. 
The gaze in itself not only terminates the movement, it freezes 
it. Take those dances I mentioned — they are always punctuated 
by a series of times of arrest in which the actors pause in a 

117 



OF THE GAZE 

frozen attitude. What is that thrust, that time of arrest of the 
movement? It is simply the fascinatory effect, in that it is a 
question of dispossessing the evil eye of the gaze, in order to 
ward it off. The evil eye is the fascinum, it is that which has the 
effect of arresting movement and, literally, of killing life. At 
the moment the subject stops, suspending his gesture, he is 
mortified. The anti-life, anti-movement function of this terminal 
point is the fascinum, and it is precisely one of the dimensions 
in which the power of the gaze is exercised directly. The 
moment of seeing can intervene here only as a suture, a con- 
junction of the imaginary and the symbolic, and it is taken up 
again in a dialectic, that sort of temporal progress that is called 
haste, thrust, forward movement, which is concluded in the 
fascinum. 

What I wish to emphasize is the total distinction between the 
scopic register and the invocatory, vocatory, vocational field. 
In the scopic field, the subject is not essentially indeterminate. 
The subject is strictly speaking determined by the very separa- 
tion that determines the break of the a, that is to say, the 
fascinatory element introduced by the gaze. Does that satisfy 
you more? Completely? 

Tort: Almost. 

F. Wahl : You have left to one side a phenomenon that is situated, 
like the evil eye, in the Mediterranean civilizations, and which is the 
prophylactic eye. It has a protective Junction that lasts for the duration 
of a journey, and which is linked, not to an arrest, but to a movement. 

Lac an: What is prophylactic about such things is, one 
might say, allopathic, whether it is a question of a horn, 
whether or not made of coral, or innumerable other things 
whose appearance is clearer, like the turpicula res, described by 
Varro, I think, which is quite simply a phallus. For it is in so 
far as all human desire is based on castration that the eye 
assumes its virulent, aggressive function, and not simply its 
luring function as in nature. One can find among these amulets 
forms in which a counter-eye emerges — this is homeopathic. 
Thus, obliquely, the so-called prophylactic function is intro- 
duced. 

I was thinking that in the Bible, for example, there must be 
passages in which the eye confers the baraka or blessing. There 
are a few small places where I hesitated — but no. The eye may 

118 



WHAT IS A PICTURE? 

be prophylactic, but it cannot be beneficent — it is maleficent. 
In the Bible and even in the New Testament, there is no good 
eye, but there are evil eyes all over the place. 

J. -A. Miller : On several occasions recently, you have explained 
that the subject cannot be located in the dimension of quantity or measure, 
in a Cartesian space. On the other hand, you have said that Merleau- 
Pont/s research converged with your own. You have even maintained 
that he laid down the reference-points of the unconscious . . . 

Lacan : I did not say that. I suggested that the few whiffs 
of the unconscious to be detected in his notes might have led 
him to pass, let us say, into my field. I'm not at all sure. 

Miller: To continue. Mow, if Merleau-Ponty is seeking to 
subvert Cartesian space, is it in order to open up the transcendental space 
of the relation to the Other? Mo, it is in order to accede either to the so- 
called dimension of inter-subjectivity, or to that so-called pre-objective, 
savage, primordial world. This leads me to ask you if he Visible et 
l'invisible has led you to change anything in the article that you pub- 
lished on Merleau-Ponty in a number ofLes Temps Modernes? 

Lacan : Absolutely nothing. 

ii March 1964 



"9 



This page intentionally left blank. 



The Transference and the Drive 



This page intentionally left blank. 



10 



PRESENCE OF THE ANALYST 

Problems of the transference • Obscurantism in analysis • Ablata 
causa • The Other, already there • The unconscious is outside • An 
article in The International Journal 



So that I would not always have to be looking for a box of 
matches, someone gave me a very large box, as you can see. 
On it is written the following motto : the art of listening is almost as 
important as that of saying the right thing. This apportions our tasks. 
Let us hope that we will measure up to them. 

Today I shall be dealing with the transference, or rather I 
shall approach the question, in the hope of giving you some 
idea of the concept, as I promised I would do in my second 
talk. 



The transference is usually represented as an affect. A rather 
vague distinction is then made between a positive and a 
negative transference. It is generally assumed, not without 
some foundation, that the positive transference is love — though 
it must be said that, in the way it is used here, this term is 
employed in a very approximate way. 

At a very early stage, Freud posed the question of the 
authenticity of love as it occurs in the transference. To come to 
the point, it is usually maintained that in these circumstances 
It is a sort of false love, a shadow of love. But Freud himself did 
not weigh down the scales in this direction — far from it. Not 
If ost among the consequences of the experience of the trans- 
ference was that it led Freud to take the question of what is 
lulled true love, eine echte Liebe, further perhaps than it had ever 
Ix-cn taken. 

In the case of the negative transference, commentators are 
more prudent, more restrained, in the way they refer to it, and 

123 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

it is never identified with hate. They usually employ the term 
ambivalence, a term which, even more than the first, conceals 
things very well, confused things that are not always handled 
in a satisfactory way. 

It would be truer to say that the positive transference is when 
you have a soft spot for the individual concerned, the analyst in 
this instance, and the negative transference is when you have 
to keep your eye on him. 

There is another use of the term transference that is worth 
pointing out, as when one says that it structures all the par- 
ticular relations with that other who is the analyst, and that 
the value of all the thoughts that gravitate around this relation 
must be connoted by a sign of particular reserve. Hence the 
expression — which is always added as a kind of after-thought 
or parenthesis, as if to convey some kind of suspicion, when used 
about the behaviour of a subject — he is in fall transference. This 
presupposes that his entire mode of apperception has been 
restructured around the dominant centre of the transference. 

I will not go any further because this double semantic 
mapping seems to me to be adequate for the moment. 

We cannot, of course, remain satisfied with this, since our aim 
is to approach the concept of the transference. 

This concept is determined by the function it has in a 
particular praxis. This concept directs the way in which patients 
are treated. Conversely, the way in which they are treated 
governs the concept. 

It might seem to settle the question at the outset if we could 
decide whether or not the transference is bound up with 
analytic practice, whether it is a product, not to say an artefact, 
of analytic practice. Ida Macalpine, one of the many authors 
who have been led to express their opinions on the transference, 
has carried as far as possible the attempt to articulate the 
transference in this direction. Whatever her merits — she is a 
very stubborn person — let me say at once that I cannot, in any 
sense, accept this extreme position. 

In any case, approaching the question in this way does not 
settle it. Even if we must regard the transference as a product 
of the analytic situation, we may say that this situation cannot 
create the phenomenon in its entirety, and that, in order to 
produce it, there must be, outside the analytic situation, 

124 



PRESENCE OF THE ANALYST 

possibilities already present to which it will give their perhaps 
unique composition. 

This in no way excludes the possibility, where no analyst is in 
view, that there may be, properly speaking, transference 
effects that may be structured exactly like the gamut of trans- 
ference phenomena in analysis. It is simply that, in discovering 
these effects, analysis will make it possible to give them an 
experimental model that need not necessarily be at all different 
from the model I shall call the natural one. So to bring out the 
transference in analysis, where it acquires its structural founda- 
tions, may very well be the only way of introducing the uni- 
versality of the application of this concept. It should be enough, 
then, to open up this package in the sphere of analysis and, 
more especially, of the doxa that goes with it. 

This, after all, is a truism. Nevertheless, it is a rough indica- 
tion worth making as a start. 



The aim of this introduction is to remind you that if we are to 
approach the fundamentals of psycho-analysis we must intro- 
duce a certain coherence into the major concepts on which it is 
based. Such a coherence is already to be found in the way I 
have approached the concept of the unconscious — which, you 
will remember, I was unable to separate from the presence of 
the analyst. 

Presence of the analyst — a fine phrase that should not be 
reduced to the tear-jerking sermonizing, the serous inflation, 
the rather sticky caress to be found in a book that has appeared 
under this title. 

The presence of the analyst is itself a manifestation of the 
unconscious, so that when it is manifested nowadays in certain 
encounters, as a refusal of the unconscious — this is a tendency, 
readily admitted, in some people's thinking — this very fact 
must be integrated into the concept of the unconscious. You 
have rapid access here to the formulation, which I have placed 
in the forefront, of a movement of the subject that opens up 
only to close again in a certain temporal pulsation — a pulsation 
I regard as being more radical than the insertion in the signifier 
that no doubt motivates it, but is not primary to it at the level 
of essence, since I have been driven to speak of essence. 

125 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

I have shown, in a maieutic, eristic way, that one should see 
in the unconscious the effects of speech on the subject — in so 
far as these effects are so radically primary that they are 
properly what determine the status of the subject as subject. 
This proposition was intended to restore the Freudian un- 
conscious to its true place. Certainly, the unconscious has 
always been present, it existed and acted before Freud, but it is 
important to stress that all the acceptations given, before Freud, 
to this function of the unconscious have absolutely nothing to 
do with the Freudian unconscious. 

The primal unconscious, the unconscious as archaic function, 
the unconscious as veiled presence of a thought to be placed at 
the level of being before it is revealed, the metaphysical un- 
conscious of Edward von Hartmann — whatever reference 
Freud makes to it in an ad hominem argument — above all the 
unconscious as instinct — all this has nothing to do with the 
Freudian unconscious, nothing at all, whatever its analytic 
vocabulary, its inflections, its deviations may be — nothing at 
all to do with our experience. I will ask analysts a straight 
question: have you ever, for a single moment, the feeling that you are 
handling the clay of instinct? 

In my Rome report, 1 1 proceeded to a new alliance with the 
meaning of the Freudian discovery. The unconscious is the sum 
of the effects of speech on a subject, at the level at which the 
subject constitutes himself out of the effects of the signifier. 
This makes it clear that, in the term subject — this is why I 
referred it back to its origin — I am not designating the living 
substratum needed by this phenomenon of the subject, nor any 
sort of substance, nor any being possessing knowledge in his 
pathos, his suffering, whether primal or secondary, nor even 
some incarnated logos, but the Cartesian subject, who appears 
at the moment when doubt is recognized as certainty — except 
that, through my approach, the bases of this subject prove to be 
wider, but, at the same time much more amenable to the 
certainty that eludes it. This is what the unconscious is. 

There is a link between this field and the moment, Freud's 

1 'Fonction et champ de la parole et du langage en psychanalyse', 
Ecrits, Paris, Ed. du Seuil, 1966; 'The Function and Field of Speech and 
Language in Psycho-Analysis', JScrits: a selection, trans. Alan Sheridan, 
London, Tavistock Publications, 1977. 

126 



PRESENCE OF THE ANALYST 

moment, when it is revealed. It is this link I express when I 
compare it with the approach of a Newton, an Einstein, a 
Planck, an a-cosmological approach, in the sense that all these 
fields are characterized by tracing in the real a new furrow in 
relation to the knowledge that might from all eternity be 
attributed to God. 

Paradoxically, the difference which will most surely guar- 
antee the survival of Freud's field, is that the Freudian field is a 
field which, of its nature, is lost. It is here that the presence of 
the psycho-analyst as witness of this loss, is irreducible. 

At this level, we can get nothing more out of it — for it is a 
dead loss, with no gain to show, except perhaps its resumption 
in the function of pulsation. The loss is necessarily produced in 
a shaded area — which is designated by the oblique stroke with 
which I divide the formulae which unfold, in linear form, 
opposite each of the terms, unconscious, repetition, transference. 
This area of loss even involves, as far as these facts of analytic 
practice are concerned, a certain deepening of obscurantism, 
very characteristic of the condition of man in our times of 
supposed information — obscurantism which, without really 
knowing why, I can well believe will be regarded as incredible 
in the future. What I mean by obscurantism is, in particular, 
the function assumed by psycho-analysis in the propagation of a 
style that calls itself the American way of life, in so far as it is 
characterized by the revival of notions long since refuted in the 
field of psycho-analysis, such as the predominance of the 
functions of the ego. 

In this sense, then, the presence of the psycho-analyst, seen 
in the very same perspective in which the vanity of his discourse 
appears, must be included in the concept of the unconscious. 
Psycho-analysts of today, we must take account of this slag in 
our operations, as we must of the caput mortuum of the discovery 
of the unconscious. It justifies the maintenance, within analysis, 
of a conflict situation, necessary to the very existence of 
analysis. 

If it is true that psycho-analysis rests on a fundamental 
conflict, on an initial, radical drama as far as everything that 
might be included under the heading psychical is concerned, 
the innovation to which I refer, and which is called recall of the 
field and function of speech and language in psychoanalytic experience, 

127 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

does not claim to exhaust the possibilities of the unconscious, 
since it is, itself, an intervention in the conflict. This recall has 
an immediate implication in that it has itself a transferential 
effect. In any case, this is recognized by the fact that my 
seminar has been criticized precisely for playing, in relation to 
my audience, a function regarded by the orthodoxy of the 
psycho-analytic association as dangerous, for intervening in the 
transference. Now, far from denying it, I would regard this 
effect as radical, as constituting, indeed, this renewal of the 
alliance with Freud's discovery. This indicates that the cause 
of the unconscious — and you see that the word cause is to be 
taken here in its ambiguity, a cause to be sustained, but also a 
function of the cause at the level of the unconscious — this 
cause must be conceived as, fundamentally, a lost cause. And 
it is the only chance one has of winning it. 

That is why, in the misunderstood concept of repetition, I 
stress the importance of the ever avoided encounter, of the 
missed opportunity. The function of missing lies at the centre of 
analytic repetition. The appointment is always missed — this 
is what constitutes, in comparison with tuchi, the vanity of 
repetition, its constitutive occultation. 

The concept of repetition brings me to the following dilemma 
— either I assume quite simply my implication as analyst in the 
eristic character of the discord of any description of my ex- 
perience, or I polish up the concept at the level of something 
that would be impossible to objectify, if not at the level of a 
transcendental analysis of cause. 

Cause might be formulated on the basis of the classical 
formula of the ablata causa tollitur effectus — I would have only 
to stress the singular of the protasis, ablata causa, by putting the 
terms of the apodosis in the plural tolluntur effectus — which 
would mean that the effects are successful only in the absence of cause. 
All the effects are subjected to the pressure of a transfactual, 
causal order which demands to join in their dance, but, if they 
held their hands tightly, as in the song, they would prevent the 
cause intruding in their round. 

At this point, I should define unconscious cause, neither as 
an existent, nor as a ohcdv, a non-existent — as, I believe Henri 
Ey does, a non-existent of possibility. It is a ftfj&v of the pro- 
hibition that brings to being an existent in spite of its non- 
128 



PRESENCE OF THE ANALYST 

advent, it is a function of the impossible on which a certainty 
is based. 

3 
This brings us to the function of the transference. For this 
indeterminate of pure being that has no point of access to 
determination, this primary position of the unconscious that 
is articulated as constituted by the indetermination of the 
subject — it is to this that the transference gives us access, in an 
enigmatic way. It is a Gordian knot that leads us to the follow- 
ing conclusion — the subject is looking for his certainty. And 
the certainty of the analyst himself concerning the unconscious 
cannot be derived from the concept of the transference. 

It is striking, therefore, to observe the multiplicity, the 
plurality, the plurivalence even, of the conceptions of the 
transference that have been formulated in analysis. I do not 
claim to be able to provide you with an exhaustive account of 
them. I shall simply try to guide you through the paths of a 
chosen exploration. 

At its emergence in the writings and teachings of Freud, a 
sliding-away (glissement), which we cannot impute to him, lies 
in wait for us — this consists in seeing in the concept of the 
transference no more than the concept of repetition itself. Let 
us not forget that when Freud presents it to us, he says — what 
cannot be remembered is repeated in behaviour. This behaviour, in 
order to reveal what it repeats, is handed over to the analyst's 
reconstruction. 

One may go so far as to believe that the opacity of the 
trauma — as it was then maintained in its initial function by 
Freud's thought, that is to say, in my terms, its resistance to 
signification — is then specifically held responsible for the 
limits of remembering. And, after all, it is hardly surprising, 
given my own theorization, that I should see this as a highly 
significant moment in the transfer of powers from the subject 
to the Other, what I call the capital Other (le grand Autre), the 
locus of speech and, potentially, the locus of truth. 

Is this the point at which the concept of the transference 
appears? It would seem so, and one often goes no further. But 
let us look at it more closely. In Freud, this moment is not 
simply the moment-limit that seems to correspond to what I 

129 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

designated as the moment of the closing up of the unconscious, 
a temporal pulsation that makes it disappear at a certain point 
of its statement (tnonci). When Freud introduces the function 
of the transference, he is careful to mark this moment as the 
cause of what we call the transference. The Other, latent or not, 
is, even beforehand, present in the subjective revelation, It is 
already there, when something has begun to yield itself from 
the unconscious. 

The analyst's interpretation merely reflects the fact that the 
unconscious, if it is what I say it is, namely, a play of the 
signifier, has already in its formations — dreams, slips of tongue 
or pen, witticisms or symptoms — proceeded by interpretation. 
The Other, the capital Other, is already there in every open- 
ing, however fleeting it may be, of the unconscious. 

What Freud shows us, from the outset, is that the transference 
is essentially resistant, Vbertragungswiderstand. The transference 
is the means by which the communication of the unconscious 
is interrupted, by which the unconscious closes up again. Far 
from being the handing over of powers to the unconscious, the 
transference is, on the contrary, its closing up. 

This is essential in noting the paradox that is expressed quite 
commonly in the fact — which may even be found in Freud's 
writings — that the analyst must await the transference before 
beginning to give his interpretation. 

I want to stress this question because it is the dividing line 
between the correct and incorrect conception of the transference. 

In analytic practice, there are many ways of conceiving the 
transference. They are not necessarily mutually exclusive. 
They may be defined at different levels. For example, although 
the conceptions of the relation of the subject to one or other of 
those agencies which, in the second stage of his Topography, 
Freud was able to define as the ego-ideal or the super-ego, are 
partial, this is often simply to give a lateralized view of what is 
essentially the relation with the capital Other. 

But there are other divergences that are irreducible. There is 
a conception which, wherever it is formulated, can only con- 
taminate practice — I am referring to the conception which 
would have the analysis of the transference proceed on the 
basis of an alliance with the healthy part of the subject's ego, 
and consists in appealing to his common sense, by way of 

130 



PRESENCE OF THE ANALYST 

pointing out to him the illusory character of certain of his 
actions in his relation with the analyst. This is a thesis that 
subverts what it is all about, namely the bringing to awareness 
of this split in the subject, realized here, in fact, in presence. To 
appeal to some healthy part of the subject thought to be there 
in the real, capable of judging with the analyst what is happen- 
ing in the transference, is to misunderstand that it is precisely 
this part that is concerned in the transference, that it is this 
part that closes the door, or the window, or the shutters, or 
whatever — and that the beauty with whom one wishes to 
speak is there, behind, only too willing to open the shutters 
again. That is why it is at this moment that interpretation 
becomes decisive, for it is to the beauty one must speak. 

I can do no more than suggest here the reversion involved in 
this schema in relation to the model one has of it in one's head. 
I say somewhere that the unconscious is the discourse of the Other. 
Now, the discourse of the Other that is to be realized, that of 
the unconscious, is not beyond the closure, it is outside. It is this 
discourse, which, through the mouth of the analyst, calls for 
the reopening of the shutter. 

Nevertheless, there is a paradox in designating this movement 
of closure as the initial moment when the interpretation may 
assume its full force. And here is revealed the permanent 
conceptual crisis that exists in analysis concerning the way in 
which the function of the transference should be conceived. 

The contradiction of its function, which causes it to be 
apprehended as the point of impact of the force of the inter- 
pretation by the very fact that, in relation to the unconscious, 
it is a moment of closure — this is why we must treat it as what 
it is, namely, a knot. Whether or not we treat it as a Gordian 
knot remains to be seen. It is a knot, and it prompts us to 
account for it — as I have been doing for several years — by 
considerations of topology. It will not be thought unnecessary, 
I hope, to remind you of these. 

4 
There is a crisis in analysis and, to show that there is nothing 
biased in this, I would support my view by citing a recent 
article that demonstrates this in the most striking way — and 
it is the work of no mediocre mind. It is a closely argued, very 

»3> 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

engaging article by Thomas S. Szasz — who hails from Syracuse, 
which fact, unfortunately, does not make him any more closely 
related to Archimedes, for this Syracuse is in New York State — 
which appeared in the latest number of The International 
Journal of Psychoanalysis. 

The author was inspired to write this article by an idea in 
keeping with the line of investigation that inspired his earlier 
articles, a truly moving search for the authenticity of the 
analytic way. 

It is quite striking that an author, who is indeed one of the 
most highly regarded in his circle, which is specifically that of 
American psycho-analysis, should regard the transference as 
nothing more than a defence on the part of the psycho-analyst, 
and should arrive at the following conclusion — the transference 
is the pivot on which the entire structure of psycho-analytic treatment 
rests. This is a concept that he calls inspired — I am always 
suspicious of faux amis in English vocabulary, so I have tried to 
tread warily when translating it. This inspired, it seemed to me, 
did not mean inspire", but something like qfficieux. It is an inspired 
and indispensable concept — I quote — yet it harbours the seeds, not 
only of its own destruction, but of the destruction of psycho-analysis 
itself Why? Because it tends to place the person of the analyst beyond 
the reality testing of patients, colleagues, and self. This hazard must be 
frankly recognized. Neither professionalization, nor the 'raising of 
standards*, nor coerced training analyses can protect us from this danger. 
And here the confusion arises — only the integrity of the analyst and 
of the analytic situation can safeguard from extinction the unique 
dialogue between analysand and analyst. 

This blind alley that Szasz has created for himself is, for him, 
necessitated by the very fact that he can conceive of the 
analysis of the transference only in terms of an assent obtained 
from the healthy part of the ego, that part which is capable of 
judging reality and of separating it from illusion. 

His article begins thus, quite logically — Transference is similar 
to such concepts as delusion, illusion, and phantasy. Once the presence 
of the transference has been established, it is a question of 
agreement between the analysand and the analyst, except that 
here the analyst is a judge against whom there is neither appeal 
nor recourse, we are led to call any analysis of the transference 
a field of pure, uncontrolled hazard. 

132 



PRESENCE OF THE ANALYST 

I have taken this article only as an extreme case, but a very 
revealing one, so as to encourage us to restore here a determina- 
tion that should bring into play another order — that of truth. 
Truth is based only on the fact that speech, even when it 
consists of lies, appeals to it and gives rise to it. This dimension 
is always absent from the logical positivism that happens to 
dominate Szasz's analysis of the concept of transference. 

My own conception of the dynamics of the unconscious has 
been called an intellectualization— on the grounds that I based 
the function of the signifier in the forefront. Is it not apparent 
that it is in this operational mode — in which everything makes 
light of the confrontation between a reality and a connotation 
of illusion attributed to the phenomenon of the transference — 
that this supposed intellectualization really resides ? 

Far from us having to consider two subjects, in a dual 
position, to discuss an objectivity that appears to have been 
posited there as the gravitational effect of a compression in 
behaviour, we must bring out the domain of possible deception. 
When I introduced you to the subject of Cartesian certainty as 
the necessary starting-point of all our speculations as to what the 
unconscious reveals, I pointed out the role of essential balancer 
played in Descartes by the Other which, it is said, must on no 
account be deceptive. In analysis, the danger is that this Other 
will be deceived. This is not the only dimension to be appre- 
hended in the transference. But one has to admit that if there 
is one domain in which, in discourse, deception has some 
chance of success, it is certainly love that provides its model. 
What better way of assuring oneself, on the point on which one 
is mistaken, than to persuade the other of the truth of what one 
says! Is not this a fundamental structure of the dimension of 
love that the transference gives us the opportunity of depicting? 
In persuading the other that he has that which may comple- 
ment us, we assure ourselves of being able to continue to 
misunderstand precisely what we lack. The circle of deception, 
in so far as it highlights the dimension of love at the point 
named — this will serve us as an exemplary door to demon- 
strate the trick next time. 

But this is not all I have to show you, for it is not what 
radically causes the closure involved in the transference. What 
causes it, and this will be the other side of our examination of 

133 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

the concepts of the transference, is — to come back to the 
question mark inscribed in the left part, the shaded, reserved 
part — what I have designated by the objet a. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

F. Wahl : To what theory of knowledge, in the system of existing 
theories, might what you said in the first half of the lecture be related? 

Lagan : Since I am saying that it is the novelty of the 
Freudian field to provide us in experience with something that 
is fundamentally apprehended like that, it is hardly surprising 
if you cannot find a model for it in Plotinus. 

Having said this, I know that, despite my refusal to follow 
Miller's first question on the subject of an ontology of the 
unconscious, I nevertheless gave you a little rope with some 
very precise references. I spoke of the Sv, of the obx. With the 
Sv, I was referring specifically to the formulation of it given by 
Henri Ey, of whom it cannot be said that he is the best qualified 
person to speak of the unconscious — he manages to situate the 
unconscious somewhere in his theory of consciousness. I spoke 
of the fifj&v, of the prohibition, of the says-no. This does not go 
very far as a strictly metaphysical indication, and I do not 
think that here I am transgressing the boundaries that I have 
laid down for myself. All the same, it does structure in a 
perfectly transmissible way the points on which your question 
bears. In the unconscious there is a corpus of knowledge 
(un savoir), which must in no way be conceived as knowledge 
to be completed, to be closed. 

Sv, oix Sv, /i^Bv — to use these terms is still to over-sub- 
stantify the unconscious. This is why I have carefully avoided 
them. What there is beyond, what a little while ago I called the 
beauty behind the shutters, this is what is in question and which 
I have not touched on today. It is a question of mapping out 
how something of the subject is, behind the screen, magnetized, 
magnetized to the profound degree of dissociation, of split. 
This is the key-point at which we must see the Gordian knot. 

P. Kaufmann: What relation is there between what you have 
designated as slag and what you earlier spoke of as remainder? 

Lagan : In human destiny, the remainder is always fruitful. 
The slag is the extinguished remainder. Here, the term slag is 
used in an entirely negative way. It refers to that true regression 

'34 



PRESENCE OF THE ANALYST 

that may occur on the plane of the theory of psychological 
knowledge, in so far as the analyst finds himself placed in a 
field in which he has no other course but to flee. He then seeks 
for assurances in theories that operate in the direction of an 
orthopaedic, conformist therapeutics, providing access for the 
subject to the most mythical conception of happiness [English in 
the original — Tr.]. Together with an uncritical manipulation 
of evolutionism, this is what sets the tone of our era. By slag, I 
mean here the analysts themselves, nothing more — whilst the 
discovery of the unconscious is still young, and it is an un- 
precedented opportunity for subversion. 

15 April 1964 



'35 



II 



ANALYSIS AND TRUTH OR 
THE CLOSURE OF THE UNCONSCIOUS 

Telling the truth, lying, being wrong • The I lie and the I think • 
Homunculus or $ • The validity of psychology • Illusion and its rectifica- 
tion • The transference is the enaction of the reality of the unconscious 

Last time, I introduced the concept of the transference. I did 
so in a rather problematic way, from the standpoint of the 
difficulties it presented to the analyst. I took the opportunity 
offered me by an article published in a recent number of the 
most official organ of psycho-analysis, The International Journal 
of Psycho-Analysis, which went so far as to question the use in 
analysis of the notion of transference. I now intend to return 
to this article. 



According to the author, the analyst is supposed to point out to 
the patient the effects of more or less manifest discordances 
that occur with regard to the reality of the analytic situation, 
namely, the two real subjects who are present in it. 

First, there are the cases in which the effect of discordance 
is very obvious. It is illustrated, in a humourous way, by 
Spitz, one of the old guard, and no fool, by way of amusing his 
public. He takes as an example one of his patients, who, in a 
dream that is called a transference dream — that is to say, a 
dream involving the realization of erotic desires with one's 
analyst, with Spitz himself, as it happens — sees him sporting a 
head of luxuriant blond hair — which, for anyone who has seen 
the bald pate of the character in question, and it is well enough 
known to be regarded as famous, would seem to be a case in 
which the analyst could quite easily show the subject just how 
far the effects of the unconscious can give rise to distortion. 

But when it is a question of qualifying a patient's behaviour 

136 



ANALYSIS AND TRUTH 

as uncomplimentary to the analyst, You have the choice of two 
things, says Szasz — the analyst's view is correct and is considered 
'reality ; the patient's view is incorrect, and is considered 'transference'. 
This brings us back to that at once mythical and idealizing pole 
that Szasz calls the integrity of the analyst. What can this mean, if 
it is not a recall to the dimension of truth ? 

I can only situate this article, then, in the perspective in 
which its author himself places it, considering him as operating 
not in a heuristic, but in an eristic way, manifesting, in the 
impasse into which his reflection has led him, the presence of a 
true crisis of conscience in the function of the analyst. This 
crisis of conscience concerns us only in an incidental way, 
since I have shown that a certain one-sided way of theorizing 
the practice of the analysis of the transference would necessarily 
lead to it. It is a slippery slope that I myself have been de- 
nouncing for a long time. 

To bring us back to the almost phenomenological data that 
enable us to resituate the problem where it actually is, I 
showed you last time that in the relation of the one with the 
other that is set up in analysis, one dimension is eluded. 

It is clear that this relation is established on a plane that is 
not reciprocal, not symmetrical. This much Szasz observes, only, 
quite wrongly, to deplore it — in this relation of the one with 
the other, there is established a search for truth in which the one 
is supposed to know, or at least to know more than the other. 
From the latter, the thought immediately arises that not only 
must he not make a mistake (se trompe), but also that he can be 
misled (on pent le tromper). The making a mistake (se tromper) is, by 
the same token, thrown back upon the subject. It is not simply 
that the subject is, in a static way, lacking, in error. It is 
that, in a moving way, in his discourse, he is essentially situated 
in the dimension of the making a mistake (se tromper). 

I have found a description of this from yet another analyst. I 
am referring to Nunberg, who, in the International Journal of 
Psycho-analysis, published, in 1926, an article entitled The Will 
of Recovery. By recovery, he means not so much guirison (cure), as 
restauration (restoration), retour (return). The word is very well 
chosen and poses a question well worth our attention. What, in 
the last resort, can drive the patient to have recourse to the 
analyst, to ask him for something he calls health, when his 

137 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

symptom — so the theory says — is created in order to bring 
him certain satisfactions? 

With a great many examples, many of them humorous, 
Nunberg has no difficulty in showing that one doesn't have to 
have gone very far in analysis to see, sometimes with great 
clarity, that what motivated the patient in his search for health, 
for balance, is precisely his unconscious aim, in its most 
immediate implications. What shelter, for example, does 
recourse to analysis have to offer him, in order to re-establish 
peace in his home, when some hitch has occurred in his sexual 
function, or some extra-marital desire! From the outset, the 
patient admits to a desire, in the form of a temporary suspension 
of his presence at home, the opposite of what he came to 
propose as the first aim of his analysis — not the restoration of 
his marriage, but a break with it. 

We now find ourselves at last — in the very act of the com- 
mitment to analysis and certainly, therefore, in its first stages 
— in maximum contact with the profound ambiguity of any 
assertion on the part of the patient, and the fact that it is, of 
itself, double-sided. In the first instance, it is as establishing 
itself in, and even by, a certain lie, that we see set up the 
dimension of truth, in which respect it is not, strictly speaking, 
shaken, since the lie as such is itself posited in this dimension 
of truth. 



You will see why the relation of the subject to the signifier is 
the reference-point that I wished to place at the forefront of a 
general rectification of analytic theory, for it is as primary and 
constitutive in the establishment of analytic experience as it is 
primary and constitutive in the radical function of the 
unconscious. 

It is, no doubt, one of the effects of my teaching to limit the 
unconscious to what might be called its narrowest platform. 
But it is in relation to this point of division that I cannot err 
on the side of any substantification. 

I will centre things on the four-cornered schema of my 
graph, which purposely distinguishes the level of the enuncia- 
tion (Jnonriation) from the level of the statement {tnonci). Its 
use can be illustrated from the fact that a too formal logical 

138 



ANALYSIS AND TRUTH 

thinking introduces absurdities, even an antinomy of reason in 
the statement / am lying, whereas everyone knows that there is 
no such thing. 

It is quite wrong to reply to this / am lying — If you say, 
/ am lying, you are telling the truth, and therefore you are not 
lying, and so on. It is quite clear that the I am lying, despite its 
paradox, is perfectly valid. Indeed, the / of the enunciation is 
not the same as the I of the statement, that is to say, the shifter 
which, in the statement, designates him. So, from the point at 
which I state, it is quite possible for me to formulate in a valid 
way that the / — the I who, at that moment, formulates the 



Enunciation 




I am deceiving yto 




Statement 



s(O) 

statement — is lying, that he lied a little before, that he is 
lying afterwards, or even, that in saying I am lying, he declares 
that he has the intention of deceiving. One does not have to go 
very far to illustrate this with an example — take the Jewish 
joke in which one Jew tells another that he is catching the 
train for Lemberg. Why are you telling me you are going to Lemberg, 
the other replies, since you really are going there, and that, if you are 
telling me this, it is so that I shall think that you are going to Cracow? 
This division between the statement and the enunciation 
means that, in effect, from the I am lying which is at the level of 
the chain of the statement — the am lying is a signifier, forming 
part, in the Other, of the treasury of vocabulary in which the I, 
determined retroactively, becomes a signification, engendered 
at the level of the statement, of what it produces at the level of 
the enunciation — what results is an lam deceiving you. The J am 
deceiving you arises from the point at which the analyst awaits 

139 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

the subject, and sends back to him, according to the formula, 
his own message in its true signification, that is to say, in an 
inverted form. He says to him — in this I am deceiving you, 
what you are sending as message is what I express to you, and in doing 
so you are telling the truth. 

In the way of deception in which the subject is venturing, the 
analyst is in a position to formulate this you are telling the truth, 
and my interpretation has meaning only in this dimension. 

I would like to show you how this schema can help us 
in grasping Freud's fundamental approach, which became 
possible with the discovery of the unconscious — which, of 



Emaciation 




Statement 



course, has always been there, at the time of Thales and at the 
level of the most primitive inter-human modes of relations. 

Let us bring to this schema the Cartesian / think. Certainly, 
the distinction between the enunciation and the statement is 
what makes their sliding away (glissement) always possible, and 
their possible stumbling block. In effect, if anything is estab- 
lished by the cogito, it is the register of thought, in so far as it is 
extracted from an opposition to extension — a fragile status, but 
a sufficient status in the order of the signifying constitution. 
Let us say that it is by taking its place at the level of the 
enunciation that the cogito acquires its certainty. But the 
status of the I think is as reduced, as minimal, as punctual — and 
might be just as affected by the connotation of the that is mean- 
ingless — as that of the / am lying referred to earlier. 

Perhaps the / think, reduced to this punctuality of being 
certain only of the' absolute doubt concerning all signification, 

140 



ANALYSIS AND TRUTH 

its own included, has a still more fragile status than that in 
which we were able to attack the / am lying. 

I will now dare to define the Cartesian / think as participating, 
in its striving towards certainty, in a sort of abortion. The 
difference of status given to the subject by the discovered 
dimension of the Freudian unconscious derives from desire, 
which must be situated at the level of the cogito. Whatever 
animates, that which any enunciation speaks of, belongs to 
desire. I would remark in passing that desire, as I formulate it, 
in relation to what Freud contributes here, goes further. 

I will pinpoint the function of the Cartesian cogito by the term 
monster or homunculus. This function is illustrated by the 
curve, which has not failed to occur in the history of what is 
called thought, which consists in taking this /of the cogito for the 
homunculus who has long been represented whenever one has 
wished to practise psychology — whenever one has wished to 
account for inanity or psychological discordance by the presence, 
inside man, of the celebrated little fellow who governs him, 
who is the driver, the point of synthesis, as we now say. The 
function of this little fellow was already denounced by pre- 
Socratic thought. 

In my own vocabulary, on the other hand, I symbolize the 
subject by the barred S [$], in so far as it is constituted as 
secondary in relation to the signifier. In order to illustrate this, 
I will remind you that the thing may be presented in the 
simplest possible way by the single stroke. The first signifier is 
the notch by which it is indicated, for example, that the subject 
has killed one animal, by means of which he will not become 
confused in his memory when he has killed ten others. He will 
not have to remember which is which, and it is by means of this 
single stroke that he will count them. 

The subject himself is marked off by the single stroke, and 
first he marks himself as a tatoo, the first of the signifiers. When 
this signifier, this one, is established — the reckoning is one one. 
It is at the level, not of the one, but of the one one, at the level 
of the reckoning, that the subject has to situate himself as such. 
In this respect, the two ones are already distinguished. Thus is 
marked the first split that makes the subject as such distinguish 
himself from the sign in relation to which, at first, he has been 
able to constitute himself as subject. I would now warn you 

141 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

against confusing the function of the $ with the image of the 
objet a, in so far as it is thus that the subject sees himself dupli- 
cated — sees himself as constituted by the reflected, momentary, 
precarious image of mastery, imagines himself to be a man 
merely by virtue of the fact that he imagines himself. 

In analytic practice, mapping the subject in relation to 
reality, such as it is supposed to constitute us, and not in relation 
to the signifier, amounts to falling already into the degradation 
of the psychological constitution of the subject. 

3 
Any departure taken from the relation of the subject to a real 
context may have its raison d'Stre in this or that psychologist's 
experience. It may produce results, have effects, make possible 
the drawing up of tables. Of course, this will always be in 
contexts in which it is we who make reality — for example, 
when we arrange for the subject to take tests, tests which have 
been organized by us. It is the domain of validity of what is 
called psychology, which has nothing to do with the level at 
which we sustain the psycho-analytic experience, and which, 
if I may say so, reinforces to an incredible degree the denuda- 
tion of the subject. 

What I have called the psychological isolate is not the old, or 
ever young, monad traditionally set up as the centre of know- 
ledge, for the Leibnizian monad, for example, is not isolated, 
it is the centre of knowledge; it is not separable from a cos- 
mology, it is, in the cosmos, the centre from which, according 
to the inflections, what is contemplation or harmony takes 
place. The psychological isolate comes up again in the concept 
of the ego, which — by a deviation which, I think, is merely a 
detour — is confused, in psycho-analytic thinking, with the 
subject in distress in the relation to reality. 

I would first like to stress that this way of theorizing the 
operation is in flagrant contradiction, totally at variance, with 
what in other respects experience leads me to stress, and which 
we cannot eliminate from the analytic text, namely, the function 
of the internal object. 

The terms introjection or projection are always used rather 
recklessly. But, certainly, even in this context of unsatisfactory 
theorization, something is given to us that comes into the 

142 



ANALYSIS AND TRUTH 

foreground on all sides, namely, the function of the internal 
object. In the end, this function is polarized into the extremes 
of that good or bad object, around which, for some, revolves 
everything in a subject's behaviour that represents distortion, 
inflection, paradoxical fear, foreign body. It is thus the operat- 
ing point on which, in conditions of urgency — those, for 
example, involving the selection of subjects for various re- 
sponsible jobs, in cybernetics or management, for example, or 
when it is a question of training air-line pilots or train-drivers 
— some have pointed out that it was a question of concentrating 
the focusing of a rapid analysis, even of a lightning-analysis, 
even of the use of certain so called personality tests. 

We cannot avoid posing the question of the status of this 
internal object. Is it an object of perception? From what angle 
do we approach it ? Where does it come from ? Following this 
rectification, in what would the analysis of the transference 
consist ? 

I will present you with a model, which will have to be im- 
proved a great deal later, so take it as a problematic model. 
The schemata centred on the function of rectifying illusion 
have such adhesive power that I will never be able to launch 
anything too prematurely that, at the very least, acts as an 
obstacle to them. 

If the unconscious is what closes up again as soon as it has 
opened, in accordance with a temporal pulsation, if further- 
more repetition is not simply a stereotype of behaviour, but 
repetition in relation to something always missed, you see here 
and now that the transference — as it is represented to us, as a 
mode of access to what is hidden in the unconscious — could 
only be of itself a precarious way. If the transference is only 
repetition, it will always be repetition of the same missed 
encounter. If the transference is supposed, through this 
repetition, to restore the continuity of a history, it will do so 
only by reviving a relation that is, of its nature, syncopated. 
We see, then, that the transference, as operating mode, cannot 
be satisfied with being confused with the efficacity of repetition, 
with the restoration of what is concealed in the unconscious, 
even with the catharsis of the unconscious elements. 

When I speak to you of the unconscious as of that which 
appears in the temporal pulsation, you may picture it to 

H3 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

yourselves as a hoop net (nasse) which opens slightly at the neck 
and at the bottom of which the catch of fish will be found. 
Whereas according to the image of the double sack (besace), the 
unconscious is something kept in reserve, closed up inside, in 
which we have to penetrate from the outside. I therefore reverse 
the topology of the traditional imagery by presenting to you 
the following schema. 

You will have to superimpose it upon the optical model I 
gave in my article Remarque sur le rapport de Daniel Lagache, 1 
concerning the ideal ego and the ego ideal. You will then see 
that it is in the Other that the subject is constituted as ideal, 
that he has to regulate the completion of what comes as ego, or 
ideal ego — which is not the ego ideal — that is to say, to 
constitute himself in his imaginary reality. This schema makes 




Schema of the hoop net 

clear — I stress it in relation to the latest elements I have 
introduced around the scopic drive — that where the subject 
sees himself, namely, where that real, inverted image of his own 
body that is given in the schema of the ego is forged, it is not 
from there that he looks at himself. 

But, certainly, it is in the space of the Other that he sees 
himself and the point from which he looks at himself is also in 
that space. Now, this is also the point from which he speaks, 
since in so far as he speaks, it is in the locus of the Other that he 
begins to constitute that truthful lie by which is initiated that 
which participates in desire at the level of the unconscious. 

So we must consider the subject, in terms of the hoop net 
— especially in relation to its orifice, which constitutes its 
essential structure — as being inside. What matters is not what 
goes in there, as the Gospel has it, but what comes out. 

We can conceive of the closing of the unconscious through the 
effect of something that plays the role of obturator — the 

1 Jurits, p. 647. 

144 



ANALYSIS AND TRUTH 

objet a, sucked, breathed, into the orifice of the net. You can 
draw an image like those great balls in which the number to be 
drawn in a lottery are enclosed. What is concocted in this great 
roulette out of the first statements of free association emerges 
from it in the interval in which the object is not blocking the 
orifice. This brutal, elementary image enables you to restore 
the constitutive function of the symbolic in its reciprocal 
contraposition. It is the subject's game of odds and evens 
constituted by his renewed meetings with that which in the 




effective action of the analytic manoeuvre is made present in 
the subject. 

This schema is quite inadequate, but it is a bulldozer- 
schema which renders congruent the notion that the trans- 
ference is both an obstacle to remembering, and a making 
present of the closure of the unconscious, which is the act of 
missing the right meeting just at the right moment. 

I could illustrate all this from the variety and divergence of 
the definitions that analysts have given of the function of the 
transference. What is certain is that the transference is one 
thing, the therapeutic end another. Nor is the transference to 
be confused with a mere means. The two extremes of what 
has been formulated in analytic literature are situated here. 
How often will you read formulas that associate, for example, 
the transference with identification, whereas identification is 
merely a pause, a false termination of the analysis which is very 
frequently confused with its normal termination. Its relation 
with the transference is close, but precisely in that by which the 

145 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

transference has not been analysed. On the other hand, you 
will see the function of the transference formulated as a means 
of rectification from the standpoint of reality, to which every- 
thing I am saying today is opposed. 

It is impossible to situate the transference correctly in any of 
these references. Since it is a question of reality, it is on this 
plane that I wish to bring my criticism to bear. Today I will 
leave you with an aphorism by way of introduction to what I 
will say next time — the transference is not the enactment 
(mise en acte) of the illusion that seems to drive us to this aliena- 
ting identification that any conformity constitutes, even when 
it is with an ideal model, of which the analyst, in any case, 
cannot be the support — the transference is the enactment of 
the reality of the unconscious. 

I have left this in suspense in the concept of the unconscious 
— oddly enough, it is the very thing that is more and more 
forgotten that I have not recalled until now. I hope, later, to be 
able to explain why this is so. In discussing the unconscious, I 
have been concerned so far to remind you of the effects of the 
constitutive act of the subject, because this is my primary 
concern here. But let us not omit what is especially stressed by 
Freud as being strictly consubstantial with the dimension of the 
unconscious, namely, sexuality. Because it has increasingly 
forgotten what this relation of the unconscious to the sexual 
means, analysis has inherited a conception of reality that no 
longer has anything to do with reality as situated by Freud at 
the level of the secondary process. 

So it is by positing the transference as the enactment of the 
reality of the unconscious that I shall begin next time. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
Dr Rosolato : / would like to say what thoughts have occurred 
to me during your seminar. First an analogy — your schema is remarkably 
similar to an eye. To what extent does the petit a play the role of a 
crystalline lens? To what extent does this lens play the role of a cataract? 
I would also like you to say more about the ego ideal and the ideal ego 
specifically in relation to this schema. Lastly, what do you understand by 
enactment ? 

Lacan: Enactment is a promissory term. To define the 

146 



ANALYSIS AND TRUTH 

transference as enactment is necessary if it is not to be the locus 
of alibis, inadequate modes of operation, taken by indirect and 
roundabout ways that are not for that reason necessarily 
inoperant, and which take into account the limits of the 
analytic intervention. Today I have specifically pointed out 
false definitions that may be given of its termination, like that 
of Balint when he speaks of identification with the analyst. If 
you do not take the transference at the correct level, which, I 
must say, has not yet been illustrated today, but which will be 
the subject of the next seminar, you can never do more than 
grasp some of its partial effects. 

As for your other remarks, well it's funny. In everything 
concerning topology one must always be very careful to avoid 
attributing it with any kind of Gestalt function. This does not 
mean that certain living forms do not give us, sometimes, the 
sensation of being a kind of effort of the biological to forge 
something that resembles the portions of those fundamental 
topological objects that I developed for you in my seminar on 
Identification — for example, the mitre, you will remember, is a 
self-intersecting surface projected into three-dimensional space. 
I could very easily designate for you a particular point or plane 
of the anatomical configuration that seems to exemplify life's 
touching strivings after, topological configurations. 

It is certain that it is only these considerations that can 
provide us with the appropriate image when it is a question of 
something inside that is also outside. This is why such considera- 
tions are particularly necessary when it is a question of the 
unconscious, which I represent to you as that which is inside 
the subject, but which can be realized only outside, that is to 
say, in that locus of the Other in which alone it may assume 
its status. I cannot take for granted all that has been said in 
my previous seminars, for the good reason that part of my 
audience is new. So I have used the simple schema of the net, 
and I have simply introduced the notion of the obturator. The 
object is an obturator: we still do not know how. It is not that 
passive obturator, that cork which, by way of launching your 
thought on a certain scent, I wished to picture. I will give a 
more complete representation of it in which you may recognize 
certain affinities with the structure of the eye. 

It is certainly very odd that the structure of the eye presents 

147 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

us with a general form that so easily springs to mind whenever 
we try to figure chronologically the relations of the subject 
with the world. This is probably no accident. But we should not 
jump at it too precipitously and apply it in too narrow a way. 
However, since you have made this remark, I will take the 
opportunity of pointing out to you the difference between my 
schema and that in which Freud represents the ego as the lens 
through which the perception-consciousness operates on the 
amorphous mass of the Unbewusstsein. Whatever the value of 
Freud's schema, it is as limited in its scope as mine, in a way. 
But nevertheless you can see the difference — if I had wanted to 
put the ego somewhere, I would have written i(«). Whereas 
for me, here, it is the a that is in question. 

22 April 1964 



148 



12 

SEXUALITY IN THE DEFILES 
OF THE SIGNIFIER 

The reality of the unconscious is sexual • Of Chinese astronomy • Against 
Jung and against hermeneutics • Desexualizotion of reality • The en- 
trance into the unconscious • Anna 0. and Freud's desire 

Last time, I ended with a formula which, I later realized, was 
well received, which I can attribute only to the fact that it 
contains promises, since, in its aphoristic form, it was not yet 
developed. 

I said that we would be dealing with the following prop- 
osition — the transference is the enactment of the reality of the un- 
conscious. What is implied here is precisely what one tends most 
to avoid in the analysis of the transference. 



In advancing this proposition, I find myself in a problematic 
position — for what have I taught about the unconscious? The 
unconscious is constituted by the effects of speech on the sub- 
ject, it is the dimension in which the subject is determined in 
the development of the effects of speech, consequently the un- 
conscious is structured like a language. Such a direction seems 
well fitted to snatch any apprehension of the unconscious from 
an orientation to reality, other than that of the constitution of the 
subject. And yet this teaching has had, in its approach, an end 
that I have called transferential. In order to recentre those of 
my listeners with whom I was most concerned — the psycho- 
analysts — in a direction conforming with analytic experience, 
the very handling of the concept must, depending on the level 
at which the teacher's speech is placed, take into account the 
effects of the formulation on the listener. We are all such that 
we, the teacher included, are in a relation to the reality of the 
unconscious, which my intervention not only elucidates, but, 
to a certain point engenders. 

'49 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

Let us look at the facts. The reality of the unconscious is 
sexual reality — an untenable truth. At every opportunity, 
Freud defended his formula, if I may say so, with tooth and 
nail. Why is it an untenable reality? 

On the question of sex, we have, since the time when Freud 
articulated his discovery of the unconscious, that is to say, the 
igoos, or the last years of the nineteenth century, made some 
scientific progress. However integrated it may be in our mental 
imagery, it must not be thought that the knowledge we have 
obtained of sex since then has always been there. We now 
know a little more about sex. We know that sexual division, in 
so far as it reigns over most living beings, is that which ensures 
the survival of a species. 

Whether, with Plato, we place the species among the Ideas, 
or whether we say, with Aristotle, that it is to be found nowhere 
but in the individuals that support it, hardly matters here. Let 
us say that the species survives in the form of its individuals. 
Nevertheless, the survival of the horse as a species has a meaning 
— each horse is transitory and dies. So you see, the link be- 
tween sex and death, sex and the death of the individual, is 
fundamental. 

Existence, thanks to sexual division, rests upon copulation, 
accentuated in two poles that time-honoured tradition has tried 
to characterize as the male pole and the female pole. This is 
because the mainspring of reproduction is to be found there. 
Around this fundamental reality, there have always been 
grouped, harmonized, other characteristics, more or less bound 
up with the finality of reproduction. I can do no more than 
point out here, what, in the biological register, is associated 
with sexual differentiation, in the form of secondary sexual 
characteristics and functions. We know today how, in society, 
a whole distribution of functions in a play of alternation is 
grounded on this terrain. It is modern structuralism that has 
Drought this out best, by showing that it is at the level of matri- 
monial alliance, as opposed to natural generation, to biological 
lineal descent — at the level therefore of the signifier — that the 
fundamental exchanges take place and it is there that we find 
once again that the most elementary structures of social func- 
tioning are inscribed in the terms of a combinatory. 

The integration of this combinatory into sexual reality raises 

150 



SEXUALITY 

the question of whether it is not in this way that the signifier 
came into the world, into the world of man. 

What would make it legitimate to maintain that it is through 
sexual reality that the signifier came into the world — that man 
learnt to think — is the recent field of discoveries that begins by 
a more accurate study of mitosis. There are then revealed the 
modes according to which the maturation of sexual cells oper- 
ates, namely, the double process of reduction. What is involved, 
in this reduction, is the loss of a certain number of visible ele- 
ments, chromosomes. This, of course, brings us to genetics. And 
what emerges from this genetics if not the dominant function, 
in the determination of certain elements of the living organism, 
of a combinatory that operates at certain of its stages by the 
expulsion of remainders ? 

I am not rushing into analogical speculation by referring here 
to the function of the petit a — I am simply pointing out an 
affinity between the enigmas of sexuality and the play of the 
signifier. 

The only thing that I am bringing to the light of day at this 
point is the remark that, in fact, in history, primitive science 
has taken root in a mode of thinking which, playing on a com- 
binatory, on such oppositions as those of Yin and Yang, water 
and fire, hot and cold, make them lead the dance — the word 
is chosen for its more than metaphorical implications, for their 
dance is based on dance ritual profoundly motivated by the 
sexual divisions in society. 

This is not the place to embark on a lecture, even a short one, 
on Chinese astronomy. Amuse yourselves by opening the book by 
Leopold de Saussure — geniuses tend to pop up from time to 
time in that family. You will see there that Chinese astronomy 
is based on the play of the signifiers that reverberate from top 
to bottom in politics, the social structure, ethics, the regulation 
of the slightest acts, and that it is, nevertheless, a very fine 
astronomical science. It is true that, up to a certain point, 
all the reality of the heavens may be inscribed in nothing 
more than a vast constellation of signifiers. 

To carry the thing to its limit, one might say that primitive 
science is a sort of sexual technique. It is not possible to say 
where the limit occurs, for it is certainly a science. Their 
perfectly valid observations show us that the Chinese had a 

151 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

perfectly efficient system for predicting diurnal and nocturnal 
variations, for example, at a very early period — which because 
of their signifying plotting we can date, because it is far enough 
away for the precession of the equinoxes to be marked in it on the 
figure of the heavens, and because the pole star does not appear 
in it in the same place as in our time. This is not a line of 
demarcation between experimental collation which remains 
valid for all and the principles that have guided it. Any more, 
Claude LeVi-Strauss emphasizes, than one can say that every- 
thing in primitive magic is phantasy and mystification, since 
an enormous collation of quite usuable experiences is contained 
in it. 

But, nevertheless, there comes a moment, with the sexual 
initiation of the mechanism, when the moorings are broken. 
Paradoxical as it may seem, the break occurs all the later as the 
function of the signifier is more implicit, less mapped in this 
mechanism. 

I will illustrate what I mean. Well after the Cartesian rev- 
olution and the Newtonian revolution, we still see, at the 
heart of positivist doctrine, a religious theory of the earth as a 
great fetish, perfectly coherent with a statement to be found in 
Comte, namely, that we shall never know anything about the 
chemical composition of the stars, that the stars will continue 
to be stuck to their places, that is to say — if we can see it from 
another perspective — purely as signifiers. Tough luck! At 
almost that very moment, the analysis of light enabled us to see 
in the stars many things at once, including their chemical 
composition. The break was then consummated between 
astronomy and astrology — which does not mean that astrology 
is not alive for a great many people. 



Where is all this leading? It is leading us to the question as to 
whether we must regard the unconscious as a remanence of 
that archaic junction between thought and sexual reality. If 
sexuality is the reality of the unconscious — just think what this 
involves — the thing is so difficult of access that we may be able 
to elucidate it only by a consideration of history. 

The solution, which, in history, has taken form in the thought 
of Jung, where the relation between the psychical world of the 

152 



SEXUALITY 

subject and reality are embodied under the term archetype, is 
to restore the level at which man's thought follows those aspects 
of the sexual experience that have been reduced by the invasion 
of science. 

Now, Jungianism — in so far as it makes of the primitive 
modes of articulating the world something that survives, the 
kernel, he says, of the psyche itself — is necessarily accompanied 
by a repudiation of the term libido, by the neutralization of 
this function by recourse to a notion of psychical energy, a much 
more generalized notion of interest. 

What we have here is not some scholastic quibble, some 
small difference of opinion. For what Freud intends to make 
present in the function of this libido is not some archaic re- 
lation, some primitive mode of access of thoughts, some world 
that is there like some shade of an ancient world surviving in 
ours. The libido is the effective presence, as such, of desire. It 
is what now remains to indicate desire — which is not substance, 
but which is there at the level of the primary process, and which 
governs the very mode of our approach. 

I was recently rereading, in the context of an address I gave 
to a congress that took place in i960, what someone else said 
about the unconscious. This person — it was M. Ricceur in fact 
— was trying to remove himself as far as possible from bis own 
position in order to conceptualize our domain. He had cer- 
tainly gone a long way to reach what, for a philosopher, is the 
area most difficult of access, namely, the reality of the uncon- 
scious — that the unconscious is not an ambiguity of acts, 
future knowledge that is already known not to be known, but 
lacuna, cut, rupture inscribed in a certain lack. M. Ricceur con- 
cedes that there is something of this dimension to be retained. 
But, philosopher that he is, he monopolizes it for himself. 
He calls it hermeneutics. 

A lot of fuss is made nowadays of what is called hermeneutics. 
Hermeneutics not only objects to what I have called our 
analytic adventure, it objects to structuralism, as it appears in 
the works of Levi-Strauss. Now, what is hermeneutics, if it is 
not to read, in the succession of man's mutations, the progress 
of the signs according to which he constitutes his history, the 
progress of his history — a history that may also, at the fringes, 
extend into less definite times? And so M. Ricceur casts into 

153 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

the limbo of pure contingency what the analysts at every stage 
are dealing with. One has to admit that, from the outside, the 
corporation of analysts does not give him the impression of an 
agreement so fundamental as to impress him. But this is no 
reason to leave the field to him. 

I maintain that it is at the level of analysis — if we can take 
a few more steps forward — that the nodal point by which the 
pulsation of the unconscious is linked to sexual reality must be 
revealed. This nodal point is called desire, and the theoretical 
elaboration that I have pursued in recent years will show you, 
through each stage of clinical experience, how desire is situated 
in dependence on demand — which, by being articulated in 
signifiers, leaves a metonymic remainder that runs under it, an 
element that is not indeterminate, which is a condition both, 
absolute and unapprehensible, an element necessarily lacking, 
unsatisfied, impossible, misconstrued {miconnu), an element that 
is called desire. It is this that makes the junction with the field 
defined by Freud as that of the sexual agency at the level of the 
primary process. 

The function of desire is a last residuum of the effect of the 
signifier in the subject. Desidero is the Freudian cogito. It is 
necessarily there that the essential of the primary process is 
established. Note well what Freud says of this field, in which 
the impulse is satisfied essentially by hallucination. 

No mechanism-schema will ever be able to do justice to what 
is given as a regression on the reflex arc. What enters by the 
sensorium must leave by the motorium, and if the motorium does 
not work, it goes back. But if it goes back, how can we conceive 
that this constitutes a perception — if not by the image of some- 
thing which, from an arrested current, makes the energy flow 
back in the form of a lamp which lights up, but for whom? 
The dimension of the third party is essential in this supposed 
regression. It can only be conceived in a form strictly analogical 
with what, the other day, I drew on the blackboard in the form 
of the duplicity between the subject of the statement and the 
subject of the enunciation. Only the presence of the desiring 
and sexually desiring, subject, brings us that dimension of 
natural metaphor from which the supposed identity of per- 
ception is decided. 

Freud maintains the libido as the essential element of the 

154 



SEXUALITY 

primary process. This means — contrary to how it may seem in 
the texts in which he tries to illustrate his theory — that in 
hallucination, the simplest hallucination of the simplest of 
needs, the hallucination of food, as it occurred in the dream of 
little Anna when she speaks of tart, strawberries, eggs, and other 
delicacies, there is not purely and simply a making present of 
the objects of a need. It is only on account of the sexualization 
of these objects that the hallucination of the dream is possible 
— for, as you will notice, little Anna only hallucinates forbidden 
objects. One can argue over each case, but it is absolutely 
essential to map the dimension of signification in every halluci- 
nation if we are to grasp what the pleasure principle means. 
It is from the point at which the subject desires that the con- 
notation of reality is given in the hallucination. And if Freud 
contrasts the reality principle with the pleasure principle, it is 
precisely in so far as reality is defined as desexualized. 

A lot is said in the most recent analytic theories about de- 
sexualized functions. It is said, for example, that the ego ideal 
rests on the investment of a desexualized libido. It seems to me 
very difficult to speak of a desexualized libido. But the notion 
that the approach of reality involves a desexualization lies at 
the very principle of Freud's definition of the £«/«' Prinzipien 
des psychischen Geschehens, of the two principles into which psy- 
chical 'eventiality' is divided. 

What does this mean ? It means that in the transference we 
must see established the weight of sexual reality. Largely un- 
known and, up to a point, masked, it runs beneath what 
happens at the level of the analytic discourse, which is well and 
truly, as it takes form, that of demand — it is not for nothing 
that all experience leads us to throw it on to the side of the 
terms frustration and gratification. 

I tried to draw on the blackboard the topology of the subject 
according to a sign that I once called the inferior <9. This is certainly 
reminiscent of Euler's famous circles, except, as you will see, 
that Euler was concerned with a surface that could actually be 
made. The edge is continuous, except that at one point it does 
not proceed without being concealed by the surface that has 
previously unfolded itself. This drawing, seen from a certain 
perspective, may seem to represent two intersecting fields. 

I have placed the libido at the point at which the lobe defined 

»55 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

as field of the development of the unconscious covers and con- 
ceals the other lobe, that of sexual reality. The libido, then, 
would be that which belongs to both — the point of intersection, 
as one says in logic. But this is precisely what it does not mean. 
For this sector at which the fields appear to overlap is, if you 
see the true profile of the surface, a void. 

This surface belongs to another whose topology I have des- 
cribed to my pupils at various times, and which is called the 
cross-cap, in order words, the mitre. I have not drawn it here, 
but I would simply ask you to note what is its most obvious 
characteristic. You can obtain it from the interior 8. Bring the 
edges together two by two as they are presented here, by a 
complementary surface, and close it. In a way, it plays the 
same role as complement in relation to the initial 8 as a sphere 




The interior 8 



in relation to a circle, a sphere that would close what the circle 
would already offer itself as ready to contain. Well! This sur- 
face is a Maebius surface, and its outside continues its inside. 
There is a second necessity that emerges from this figure, that 
is, that it must, in order to close its curve, traverse at some point 
the preceding surface, at that point, according to the line that 
I have just reproduced here on the second model. 

This image enables us to figure desire as a locus of junction 
between the field of demand, in which the syncopes of the un- 
conscious are made present, and sexual reality. All this depends 
on a line that I will call the line of desire, linked to demand, 
and by which the effects of sexuality are made present in ex- 
perience. 

What is this desire? Do you think it is there that I designate 
the agency of the transference? Yes and no. You will see that 
the thing is not so simple, if I tell you that the desire we are 
concerned with here is the desire of the analyst. 

156 



SEXUALITY 

3 
In order not to leave you thunderstruck by an affirmation that 
might seem to you somewhat risky, I shall do no more than 
remind you how Freud sees the entrance into the unconscious. 

Anna O. — let us drop this story of O. and call her by her real 
name, Bertha Pappenheim, one of the great names in the world 
of social welfare in Germany — not long ago one of my pupils 
brought me a small German postage stamp bearing her face, 
so you see she left some mark in history. It was in the case of 
Anna O. that the transference was discovered. Breuer was quite 
delighted with the smooth way the operation was going. At that 
time, no one would have challenged the signifier, if it had been 
possible to restore this word to life from the Stoic vocabulary. 
The more Anna provided signifiers, the more she chattered on, 
the better it went. It was a case of the chimney-sweeping treat- 
ment. There was no trace, in all this, of the least embarrassing 
thing. Look again. No sexuality, either under the microscope 
or in the distance. 

Yet sexuality was nevertheless introduced by Breuer. Some- 
thing even began to come back to him, it came back to him 
from himself — You are rather preoccupied by it. Thereupon, the 
dear man, somewhat alarmed, good husband that he was, 
decided that things had gone quite far enough — in response 
to which, as you know, O. displayed the magnificent and dra- 
matic manifestations of what, in scientific language, is called 
pseudo-cyesis or, more familiarly, she blew up with what is called 
a nervous pregnancy. 

What did she show by this? One may speculate, but one 
must refrain from resorting too precipitously to the language of 
the body. Let us say simply that the domain of sexuality shows 
a natural functioning of signs. At this level, they are not signi- 
fiers, for the nervous pregnancy is a symptom, and, according 
to the definition of the sign, something intended for someone. 
The signifier, being something quite different, represents a sub- 
ject for another signifier. 

There is a great difference to be articulated here, for, and 
not without cause, there is a tendency to say quite simply that 
it was Bertha's fault. But I would beg you to suspend your 
thoughts on this matter for a moment — why is it that we do 

'57 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

not consider Bertha's pregnancy rather, according to my for- 
mula man's desire is the desire of the Other, as the manifestation of 
Breuer's desire ? Why do you not go as far as to think that it 
was Breuer who had a desire for a child ? I will give you the 
beginning of a proof; namely that Breuer, setting off for Italy 
with his wife, lost no time in giving her a child, as Ernest Jones 
reminds his interlocutor — a child which, from being born in 
these conditions, says the imperturbable Welshman, had just, 
at the moment when Jones was speaking, committed suicide. 

Let us leave to one side what we might in fact think of a desire 
to which even this outcome is not indifferent. But let us observe 
what Freud says to Breuer — What! The transference is the spon- 
taneity of the said Bertha's unconscious. It's not yours, not your desire, 
it's the desire of the Other. I think Freud treats Breuer as a hysteric 
here, since he says to him: Tour desire is the desire of the Other. The 
curious thing is, he does not make him feel less guilty, but he 
certainly makes him feel less anxious — those who know the 
difference that I am making between these two levels may take 
this as an instance of it. 

This brings us to the question of what Freud's desire decided, 
in diverting the whole apprehension of the transference in a 
direction that has now reached its final term of absurdity, to 
the point at which an analyst may say that the whole theory of 
the transference is merely a defence of the analyst. 

I swing this extreme term in another direction. Indeed, I 
show precisely the opposite side when I say that it is the desire 
of the analyst. You must follow my thinking here. It's not 
simply a matter of turning things upside-down. With this key, 
read some general account of the question of the transference, 
written by anybody — anyone who could write a Qjte sais-je? 1 
on psycho-analysis can just as easily give you a general account 
of the transference. So read his general account of the trans- 
ference, which I designate here adequately enough, and draw 
your own conclusions with this in mind. 

Is not the contribution that each individual, Freud apart, 
brings to the subject of the transference something in which his 
desire is perfectly legible ? I could do an analysis of Abraham 
for you simply on the basis of his theory of part-objects. It is 

1 A popular series of cheap books that sets out to provide an introduc- 
tion to a wide range of subjects. 

158 



SEXUALITY 

not only a question of what the analyst wants to do with his 
patient in the matter. It is also a question of what his patient 
wants to do with him. Abraham, we might say, wanted to be a 
complete mother. 

Then I might also amuse myself by punctuating the fringes 
of Ferenczi's theory with a famous song by Georgius Je suis 
JUs-pire ('I am son-father'). 

Nunberg, too, has his own intentions, and in his truly re- 
markable article on Love and Transference, he shows himself to 
be in the position of arbiter between the powers of life and 
death, in which one cannot fail to see an aspiration to the 
divine position. 

All this may be no more than a kind of game. But it is in the 
course of some such story that one can isolate functions like those 
that I wished to reproduce here on the blackboard. 

In order to conjugate the schema of the net with those I have 
made in response to a psychologizing theory of the psycho- 
analytic personality, you have only to turn the obturator I 
referred to earlier into a camera shutter, except that it would 
be a mirror. It is in this little mirror, which shuts out what is on 
the other side, that the subject sees emerge the game by means 
of which he may — according to the illusion of what is obtained 
in the experiment of the inverted bunch of flowers, that is to 
say, a real image — accommodate his own image around what 
appears, the petit a. It is in the sum of these accommodations of 
images that the subject must find the opportunity for an essen- 
tial integration. What do we know of all this? — if it is only at 
the mercy of fluctuations in the history of analysis, of the com- 
mitment of the desire of each analyst, we manage to add some 
small detail, some corroborating observation, some incidental 
addition or refinement, which enables us to define the presence, 
at the level of desire, of each of the analysts. This was the band, 
as Freud put it, that he left behind to follow him. 

After all, the people who followed Christ were not so brilliant. 
Freud was not Christ, but he was perhaps something like 
Viridiana. 2 The characters who are photographed, so ironically 



2 The allusion is to a film by Bunuel of the same name in which a group 
of peasants pose to be 'photographed' at a dinner-table. The characters are 
so arranged as to reproduce Leonardo's painting of the Last Supper. 

'59 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

in that film, with a small apparatus, sometimes remind me 
irresistibly of the group, also photographed innumerable times, 
of those who were Freud's apostles and epigones. Does this 
diminish them in any way? No more than the apostles. It is 
precisely at this level that they could bear the best witness. It 
is by virtue of a certain naivety, a certain poverty, a certain 
innocence that they have most instructed us. It is true that 
those around Socrates were more brilliant and that they teach 
us no less about the transference — those who remember my 
seminar on this subject will bear me out. 

I will take this up again next time, when I will try to artic- 
ulate for you the significance of the function of the analyst's 
desire. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
J. -A. Miller: The question arises of the specific relation between 
these two discourses, the scientific discourse and the discourse of the Other, 
that is, the unconscious. Unlike the discourses that preceded its arrival, 
science is not based on the unconscious combinatory. It sets out to establish 
with the unconscious a relation of non-relation. It is disconnected. Yet the 
unconscious does not disappear, and its effects continue to be felt. Perhaps 
to reflect on the scientificity of analysis, which you postulate, would lead 
to writing a new history of scientific thought. I would like to know what 
you have to say about this. 

Lac an : You see the emergence of a double questioning. If 
we can couple psycho-analysis to the train of modern science, 
despite the essential effect of the analyst's desire, we have a 
right to ask the question of the desire that lies behind modern 
science. There is certainly a disconnection between scientific 
discourse and the conditions of the discourse of the unconscious. 
We see this in set theory. At a time when the combinatory is 
coupled to the capture of sexuality, set theory cannot emerge. 
How is this disconnection possible ? It is at the level of desire 
that we will be able to find the answer. 

29 April 1964 

The 'photograph' is taken by one of the girls raising her skirt at the 
assembly — hence the reference to the 'small apparatus' [Tr.]. 



160 



*3 



THE DEGONSTRUGTION 
OF THE DRIVE 

I ended my last talk by pointing out the place where I had taken 
you with the topological schematization of a certain division, 
and of a perimeter involuted upon itself, which is that con- 
stituted by what is usually called, quite incorrectly, the analytic 
situation. 

This topology is intended to give you some notion of the 
location of the point of disjuncture and conjuncture, of union 
and frontier, that can be occupied only by the desire of the 
analyst. 

To go further, to show you how this mapping is necessitated 
by all the deviations, of concept and of practice, that a long 
experience of analysis and of its doctrinal statements enables one 
to accumulate, I must — for those who have not been able, for 
purely practical reasons, to follow my earlier seminars — put 
forward the fourth concept that I have proposed as essential to 
the analytic experience — that of drive. 



I can only write this introduction — this EinJUhrung, to use 
Freud's term — in the wake of Freud, in so far as this notion is 
absolutely new in Freud. 

The term Trieb certainly has a long history, not only in 
psychology or in physiology, but in physics itself and, of course, 
it is no accident that Freud chose this term. But he gave to 
Trieb so specific a use, and Trieb is so integrated into analytic 
practice itself, that its past is truly concealed. Just as the past 
of the term unconscious weights on the use of the term in 
analytic theory — so, as far as Trieb is concerned, everyone uses 
it as a designation of a sort of radical given of our experience. 

Sometimes, people even go so far as to invoke it against my 
doctrine of the unconscious, which they see as some kind of 

161 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

intellectualization — if they knew what I think of intelligence, 
they would certainly retract this criticism — as if I were ignoring 
what any analyst knows from experience, namely the domain 
of the drive. We will meet in experience something that has an 
irrepressible character even through repressions — indeed, if 
repression there must be, it is because there is something beyond 
that is pressing in. There is no need to go further in an adult 
analysis; one has only to be a child therapist to know the ele- 
ment that constitutes the clinical weight of each of the cases we 
have to deal with, namely, the drive. There seems to be here, 
therefore, a reference to some ultimate given, something archaic, 
primal. Such a recourse, which my teaching invites you to re- 
nounce if you are to understand the unconscious, seems in- 
evitable here. 

Now, is what we are dealing with in the drive essentially 
organic ? Is it thus that we should interpret what Freud says in 
a text belonging to Jenseits des Lustprinzips — that the drive, 
Trieb, represents the Ausserung der Tragheit, some manifestation 
of inertia in the organic life? Is it a simple notion, which might 
be completed with reference to some storing away of this 
inertia, namely, to fixation, Fixierung? 

Not only do I not think so, but I think that a serious examin- 
ation of Freud's elaboration of the notion of drive runs counter 
to it. 

Drive (pulsion) is not thrust (poussie). Trieb is not Drang, if 
only for the following reason. In an article written in 1915 
— that is, a year after the Einfiihrung zum Narzissmus, you will 
see the importance of this reminder soon — entitled Trieb und 
Triebschicksale — one should avoid translating it by avatar, 
Triebwandlungen would be avatar, Schicksal is adventure, vicissi- 
tude — in this article, then, Freud says that it is important to 
distinguish four terms in the drive: Drang, thrust; Quelle, the 
source; Objekt, the object; %iel, the aim. Of course, such a list 
may seem a quite natural one. My purpose is to prove to you 
that the whole text was written to show us that it is not as natural 
as that. 

First of all, it is essential to remember that Freud himself 
tells us at the beginning of this article that the drive is a Grund- 
begriff, a fundamental concept. He adds, and in doing so shows 
himself to be a good epistemologist, that, from the moment 

162 



THE DECONSTRUCTION OF THE DRIVE 

when he, Freud, introduced the drive into science, one was 
faced with a choice between two possibilities — either this con- 
cept would be preserved, or it would be rejected. It would be 
preserved if it functioned, as one would now say — I would say 
if it traced its way in the real that it set out to penetrate. This is 
the case with all the other Grundbegriffe in the scientific domain. 

What we see emerging here in Freud's mind are the funda- 
mental concepts of physics. His masters in physiology are those 
who strive to bring to realization, for example, the integration 
bf physiology with the fundamental concepts of modern physics, 
especially those connected with energy. How often, in the course 
of history, have the notions of energy and force been taken up 
and used again upon an increasingly totalized reality! 

This is certainly what Freud foresaw. The progress of know- 
ledge, he said, can bear no Starrheit, no fascination with definitions. 
Somewhere else, he says that the drive belongs to our myths. 
For my part, I will ignore this term myth — indeed, in the same 
text, in the first paragraph, Freud uses the word /Convention, 
convention, which is much closer to what we are talking about 
and to which I would apply the Benthamite term, fiction, which 
I have mapped for my followers. This term, I should say in 
passing, is much more preferable than that of model, which has 
been all too much abused. In any case, model is never a Grund- 
begriff, for, in a certain field, several models may function 
correlatively. This is not the case for a Grundbegriff, for a funda- 
mental concept, nor for a fundamental fiction. 



Now let us ask ourselves what appears first when we look more 
closely at the four terms laid down by Freud in relation to the 
drive. Let us say that these four terms cannot but appear dis- 
jointed. 

First, thrust will be identified with a mere tendency to dis- 
charge. This tendency is what is produced by the fact of a 
stimulus, namely, the transmission of the accepted portion, at 
the level of thestimulus, of the additional energy, the celebrated 
Qn quantity of the Entwurf But, on this matter, Freud makes, 
at the outset, a remark that has very far-reaching implications. 
Here, too, no doubt, there is stimulation, excitation, to use the 
term Freud uses at this level, Reiz, excitation. But the Reiz that 

163 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

is used when speaking of drive is different from any stimulation 
coming from the outside world, it is an internal Reiz. What 
does this mean? 

In order to explicitate it, we have the notion of need, as it is 
manifested in the organism at several levels and first of all at the 
level of hunger and thirst. This is what Freud seems to mean 
when he distinguishes internal excitement from external excite- 
ment. Well! It has to be said that, at the very outset, Freud 
posits, quite categorically, that there is absolutely no question 
in Trieb of the pressure of a need such as Hunger or Durst, thirst. 

What exactly does Freud mean by Trieb ? Is he referring to 
something whose agency is exercised at the level of the organ- 
ism in its totality? Does the real qua totality irrupt here? Are 
we concerned here with the living organism? No. It is always 
a question quite specifically of the Freudian field itself, in the 
most undifferentiated form that Freud gave it at the outset, 
which at this level, in the terms of the Sketch referred to above, 
that of the Ich, of the Real-Ich. The Real-Ich is conceived as sup- 
ported, not by the organism as a whole, but by the nervous 
system. It has the character of a planned, objectified subject. I 
am stressing the surface characteristics of this field by treating 
it topological!/, and in trying to show you how taking it in the 
form of a surface responds to all the needs of its handling. 

This point is essential for, when we examine it more closely, 
we shall see that the Triebreiz is that by which certain elements 
of this field are, says Freud, triebbesetzt, invested as drive. This 
investment places us on the terrain of an energy — and not any 
energy — a potential energy, for — Freud articulated it in the 
most pressing way — the characteristic of the drive is to be a 
konstante Kraft, a constant force. He cannot conceive of it as a 
momentane Stosskraft. 

What is meant by momentane Stosskraft? About this word 
Moment, we already have the example of a historical misunder- 
standing. During the siege of Paris in 1870, the Parisians made 
fun of Bismarck's psychologische Moment. This phrase struck them 
as being absurdly funny, for, until fairly recently, when they 
have had to get used to everything, the French have always 
been rather particular about the correct use of words. This 
quite new psychological moment struck them as being very 
funny indeed. All it meant was the psychological /actor. But 

164 



THE DECONSTRUCTION OF THE DRIVE 

this momentane Stosskrqfl is not perhaps to be taken quite in 
the sense of factor, but rather in the sense of moment as used in 
the cinema. I think that this Stosskrqfl, or shock force, is simply 
a reference to the life force, to kinetic energy. In the drive, 
there is no question of kinetic energy; it is not a question of 
something that will be regulated with movement. The dis- 
charge in question is of a quite different nature, and is on a 
quite different plane. 

The constancy of the thrust forbids any assimilation of the 
drive to a biological function, which always has a rhythm. The 
first thing Freud says about die drive is, if I may put it this way, 
that it has no day or night, no spring or autumn, no rise and fall. 
It is a constant force. All the same, one must take account 
of the texts, and also of experience. 

3 
At the other end of the chain, Freud refers to Befriedigung, satis- 
faction, which he writes out in full, but in inverted commas. 
What does he mean by satisfaction of the drive? Well, that's 
simple enough, you'll say. The satisfaction of the drive is reaching one's 
Ziel, one's aim. The wild animal emerges from its hole querens 
quern devoret, and when he has found what he has to eat, he is 
satisfied, he digests it. The very fact that a similar image may be 
invoked shows that one allows it to resonate in harmony with 
mythology, with, strictly speaking, the drive. 

One objection immediately springs to mind — it is rather odd 
that nobody should have noticed it, all the time it has been 
there, an enigma, which, like all Freud's enigmas, was sustained 
as a wager to the end of his life without Freud deigning to offer 
any further explanation — he probably left the work to those 
who could do it. You will remember that the third of the four 
fundamental vicissitudes of the drive that Freud posits at the 
outset — it is curious that there ate four vicissitudes as there are 
four elements of the drive — is sublimation. Well, in this article, 
Freud tells us repeatedly that sublimation is also satisfaction of 
the drive, whereas it is zielgehemmt, inhibited as to its aim — it 
does not attain it. Sublimation is nonetheless satisfaction of the 
drive, without repression. 

In other words — for the moment, I am not fucking, I am 
talking to you. Well! I can have exactly the same satisfaction 

165 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

as if I were fucking. That's what it means. Indeed, it raises the 
question of whether in fact I am not fucking at this moment. 
Between these two terms — drive and satisfaction — there is set 
up an extreme antinomy that reminds us that the use of the 
function of the drive has for me no other purpose than to put 
in question what is meant by satisfaction. 

All those here who are psycho-analysts must now feel to what 
extent I am introducing here the most essential level of accom- 
modation. It is clear that those with whom we deal, the 
patients, are not satisfied, as one says, with what they are. And 
yet, we know that everything they are, everything they experi- 
ence, even their symptoms, involves satisfaction. They satisfy 
something that no doubt runs counter to that with which they 
might be satisfied, or rather, perhaps, they give satisfaction to 
something. They are not content with their state, but all the 
same, being in a state that gives so little content, they are con- 
tent. The whole question boils down to the following — what is 
contented here ? 

On the whole, and as a first approximation, I would say that 
to which they give satisfaction by the ways of displeasure 
is nevertheless — and this is commonly accepted — the law of 
pleasure. Let us say that, for this sort of satisfaction, they give 
themselves too much trouble. Up to a point, it is this too much 
trouble that is the sole justification of our intervention. 

One cannot say, then, that the aim is not attained where 
satisfaction is concerned. It is. This is not a definitive ethical 
position. But, at a certain level, this is how we analysts approach 
the problem — though we know a little more than others about 
what is normal and abnormal. We know that the forms of 
arrangement that exist between what works well and what works 
badly constitute a continuous series. What we have before us 
in analysis is a system in which everything turns out all right, 
and which attains its own sort of satisfaction. If we interfere in 
this, it is in so far as we think that there are other ways, shorter 
ones for example. In any case, if I refer to the drive, it is in so 
far as it is at the level of the drive that the state of satisfaction 
is to be rectified. 

This satisfaction is paradoxical. When we look at it more 
closely, we see that something new comes into play — the cate- 
gory of the impossible. In the foundations of the Freudian 

1 66 



THE DECONSTRUCTION OF THE DRIVE 

conceptions, this category is an absolutely radical one. The 
path of the subject — to use the term in relation to which, alone, 
satisfaction may be situated — the path of the subject passes 
between the two walls of the impossible. 

This function of the impossible is not to be approached with- 
out prudence, like any function that is presented in a negative 
form. I would simply like to suggest to you that the best way of 
approaching these notions is not to take them by negation. 
This method would bring us here to the question of the possible, 
and the impossible is not necessarily the contrary of the possible, 
or, since the opposite of the possible is certainly the real, we 
would be lead to define the real as the impossible. 

Personally, I see nothing against this, especially as, in Freud, 
it is in this form that the real, namely, the obstacle to the 
pleasure principle, appears. The real is the impact with the 
obstacle; it is the fact that things do not turn out all right 
straight away, as the hand that is held out to external objects 
wishes. But I think this is a quite illusory and limited view of 
Freud's thought on this point. The real is distinguished, as I 
said last time, by its separation from the field of the pleasure 
principle, by its desexualization, by the fact that its economy, 
later, admits something new, which is precisely the impossible. 

But the impossible is also present in the other field, as an 
essential element. The pleasure principle is even characterized 
by the fact that the impossible is so present in it that it is never 
recognized in it as such. The idea that the function of the 
pleasure principle is to satisfy itself by hallucination is there 
to illustrate this — it is only an illustration. By snatching at its 
object, the drive learns in a sense that this is precisely not the 
way it will be satisfied. For if one distinguishes, at the outset of 
the dialectic of the drive, JVbf from Bediirfnis, need from the 
pressure of the drive — it is precisely because no object of any 
Not, need, can satisfy the drive. 

Even when you stuff the mouth — the mouth that opens in 
the register of the drive — it is not the food that satisfies it, it is, 
as one says, the pleasure of the mouth. That is why, in analytic 
experience, the oral drive is encountered at the final term, in a 
situation in which it does no more than order the menu. This 
is done no doubt with the mouth, which is fundamental to the 
satisfaction — what goes out from the mouth comes back to 

167 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

the mouth, and is exhausted in that pleasure that I have just 
called, by reference to the usual terms, the pleasure of the 
mouth. 

This is what Freud tells us. Let us look at what he says — As 
far as the object in the drive is concerned, let it be clear that it is, 
strictly speaking, of no importance. It is a matter of total indifference. 
One must never read Freud without one's ears cocked. When 
one reads such things, one really ought to prick up one's ears. 

How should one conceive of the object of the drive, so that 
one can say that, in the drive, whatever it may be, it is indif- 
ferent? As far as the oral drive is concerned, for example, it is 
obvious that it is not a question of food, nor of the memory of 
food, nor the echo of food, nor the mother's care, but of 
something that is called the breast, and which seems to go of 
its own accord because it belongs to the same series. If Freud 
makes a remark to the effect that the object in the drive is of no 
importance, it is probably because the breast, in its function as 
object, is to be revised in its entirety. 

To this breast in its function as object, objet a cause of desire, 
in the sense that I understand the term — we must give a function 
that will explain its place in the satisfaction of the drive. The 
best formula seems to me to be the following — that la pulsion en 
fait le tour. 1 I shall find other opportunities of applying it to 
other objects. Tour is to be understood here with the ambiguity 
it possesses in French, both turn, the limit around which one 
turns, and trick. 

4 
I have left the question of the source till last. If we wished at 
all costs to introduce vital regulation into the function of the 
drive, one would certainly say that examining the source is the 
right way to go about it. 

Why? Why are the so-called erogenous zones recognized 

1 AsLacan explains, he is playing on the double meaning, in French, of the 
word tour — so the formula is strictly untranslatable. In terms of idiomatic 
usage, the pun is rather forced, since the expression 'fain U tour de quelque 
chose' can only mean 'to walk, to drive, etc., round something*, though 
outside this expression 'tour' has also, of course, the sense of 'trick'. What the 
formula means, then, is a combination of (i) 'the drive moves around the 
object* and (a) 'the drive tricks the object* [Tr.]. 

1 68 



THE DECONSTRUCTION OF THE DRIVE 

only in those points that are differentiated for us by their rim- 
like structure? Why does one speak of the mouth and not of the 
oesophagus, or the stomach ? They participate just as much in 
the oral function. But at the erogenous level we speak of the 
mouth, of the lips and the teeth, of what Homer calls the en- 
closure of the teeth. 

The same goes for the anal drive. It is not enough to say that 
a certain vital function is integrated in a function of exchange 
with the world — excrement. There are other excremental 
functions, and there are other elements that participate in them 
other than the rim of the anus, which is however, specifically 
what, for us too, is defined as the source and departure of a 
certain drive. 

Let me say that if there is anything resembling a drive it is a 
montage. 

It is not a montage conceived in a perspective referring to 
finality. This perspective is the one that is established in modern 
theories of instinct, in which the presentation of an image 
derived from montage is quite striking. Such a montage, for ex- 
ample, is the specific form that will make the hen in the farm- 
yard run to ground if you place within a few yards of her the 
cardboard outline of a falcon, that is to say, something that 
sets off a more or less appropriate reaction, and where the trick 
is to show us that it is not necessarily an appropriate one. I am 
not speaking of this sort of montage. 

The montage of the drive is a montage which, first, is presented 
as having neither head nor tail — in the sense in which one 
speaks of montage in a surrealist collage. If we bring together 
the paradoxes that we just defined at the level of Drang, at that 
of the object, at that of the aim of the drive, I think that the 
resulting image would show the working of a dynamo con- 
nected up to a gas-tap, a peacock's feather emerges, and tickles 
the belly of a pretty woman, who is just lying there looking 
beautiful. Indeed, the thing begins to become interesting from 
this very fact, that the drive defines, according to Freud, all the 
forms of which one may reverse such a mechanism. This does 
not mean that one turns the dynamo upside-down — one un- 
rolls its wires, it is they that become the peacock's feather, the 
gas-tap goes into the lady's mouth, and the bird's rump emerges 
in the middle. 

169 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

This is what he shows as a developed example. Read this text 
of Freud's between now and next time, and you will see that it 
constantly jumps, without transition, between the most hetero- 
geneous images. All this occurs only by means of grammatical 
references, the artifice of which you will find easy to grasp next 
time. 

Incidentally, how can one say, just like that, as Freud goes on 
to do, that exhibitionism is the contrary of voyeurism, or that 
masochism is the contrary of sadism? He posits this simply for 
grammatical reasons, for reasons concerning the inversion of 
the subject and the object, as if the grammatical object and 
subject were real functions. It is easy to show that this is not the 
case, and we have only to refer to our structure of language for 
this deduction to become impossible. But what, by means of 
this game, he conveys to us about the essence of the drive is 
what, next time, I will define for you as the trace of the act. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
Dr Green : One point you have raised obviously seems quite crucial. 
This is the fact that the other qualities that specify the drive must be 
conceived as discontinuous elements. My question concerns the element 
of thrust that you have rather pushed to one side, in the course of your 
talk today, because, I think, it seemed to you one of the easiest ways of 
getting misled. But if, as you show, the drive is ultimately destined to 
the combinatory of the fact of discontinuity, it posits for itself the problem 
of the contradiction inherent in the energy of the system, which is conceived 
as a force that is both constant and subject to variation. It is this question 
that I would like you to develop in more detail if you can, in so far as it 
introduces the point of view that remains for me very important, and 
which I do not see very clearly in your teaching, namely, the economic 
point of view. 

Lacan : Yes, we shall come to it, and you will see from what 
angle. Indeed, it is easy to see how if you read my article. There 
is a reference that may put us on the right track, and which I 
did not wish to use, either because I did not have time, or be- 
cause it eliminates itself — most of the time I play it by ear, in 
contact with the audience. It is a reference to a certain chapter 
in energetics. 

In a limited system, there is a certain way of inscribing each 
defined point, as characterized in terms of potential energy 

170 



THE DECONSTRUCTION OF THE DRIVE 

between the closest points — one speaks of scale notation or 
index. One can now define each point by a certain derivation 
— you know that in infinitesimal calculus it is one of the ways 
of dimensioning infinitely small variations. For each point, then, 
there will be a derivation in relation to the slope immediately 
next to it, and this derivation will be noted for each point of 
the field. This derivation may be inscribed in the form of a 
vector and we can compose the set of vectors. There is, then, a 
law that seems odd at first sight, but which is certainly regarded 
as fundamental — that which, from a particular vector — which 
realizes the composition of these derivations connoted by each 
point of the field from the point of view of potential energy 
— that which, therefore, from a particular vector, crosses a 
certain surface — which is simply what I call the gap (Mance), 
from the fact that it is defined by a rim-like structure — is, for 
the same surface, a constant. The variations of the system being 
what they may be, what is potential at the level of the integration, 
what is called the flux, is therefore constant. 

What we seem to be dealing with, therefore, in the Drang of 
the drive is something that is, and is only, connotable in the 
relation to the Quelle, in so far as the Quelle inscribes in the 
economy of the drive this rim-like structure. 

Physiological variations, deep variations, those that are in- 
scribed in the totality of the organism, are subjected to all the 
rhythms, even to the very discharges that may occur as a result 
of the drive. On the other hand, what characterizes the Drang, 
the thrust of the drive, is the maintained constancy which, to 
take a fairly useful image, measures up to an opening that is, 
up to a certain individualized point, variable. That is to say, 
people have big mouths to a greater or lesser degree. Sometimes 
it might even be useful to take this into account, in the selection 
of analysts. But, anyway, that's something I shall be concerned 
with in another context. 

This has not exhausted the question you asked, but it provides 
the beginning of a rational solution to the antinomy that you 
raise, and which is precisely what I left in suspense. For I 
stressed what Freud stresses — that, when the system functions 
in contact with the Umwelt, it is a question of discharge, and 
when it is a question of Triebreiz, there is a barrier. This is a 
point that does not receive enough attention. But what can that 

171 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

mean ? There is no barrier, unless the investment is in the field 
itself. So, in fact, what we have to designate is this — in so far 
as the field itself involves this investment, there can be no ques- 
tion of the functioning of a barrier. 

Dr Mathis : One question concerning the rim-like structure. When 
it is a question of the mouth and the anal rim, do you locate the eroticization 
at both extremities? Where do you place what may occur at the level of the 
oesophagus, at the gastric level, in sniffing, in vomiting, at the level of 
the trachea? Is there something profoundly different there from what 
you have articulated at the level of the lips? 

Lac an : I confined myself to the two rims concerned in the 
digestive track. I could also have told you that the rheumy rim 
of our eyelids, our ears, our navels, are also rims, and that all 
this is part of this function of eroticism. In the analytic tradition, 
we always refer to the strictly focused image of zones reduced to 
their function as rim. This does not in the least mean that, in 
our symptomatology, other zones do not come into play. But 
we consider that they come into play in that fall-out zone that 
I call desexualization and function of reality. 

Let us take an example. It is in the function in which the 
sexual object moves towards the side of reality and presents 
itself as a parcel of meat that there emerges that form of de- 
sexualization that is so obvious that it is called in the case of the 
hysteric a reaction of disgust. This does not mean that we say 
that pleasure is located in these erogenous zones. Desire is 
concerned — thank God, we know only too well — with some- 
thing quite different, and even with something quite different 
from the organism, while involving the organism at various 
levels. But what satisfaction is the central function of the drive 
intended to produce? It is precisely to the extent that adjoining, 
connected zones are excluded that others take on their erog- 
enous function and become specific sources for the drive. You 
follow me? 

Of course, other zones than these erogenous zones are con- 
cerned in the economy of desire. But note well what happens 
whenever they emerge. It was no accident that I chose the func- 
tion of disgust. There are really two major aspects of desire 
as it may emerge in the fall of sexualization — on the one hand, 
disgust produced by the reduction of the sexual partner to a 
function of reality, whatever it may be, and, on the other hand, 

172 



THE DECONSTRUCTION OF THE DRIVE 

what I have called, in relation to the scopic function, invidia, 
envy. Envy is not the same thing as the scopic drive, nor is dis- 
gust the same thing as the oral drive. 

6 May 1964 



'73 



14 

THE PARTIAL DRIVE 
AND ITS CIRCUIT 

Die ganze Sexualstrebung • Every drive is partial • Drive, sex and 
death • The supposed stages • Schaulust • Sado-masochism 

rep rd£(j> Bvo/ia (Hog igyov d£ Q&voxq 

Heraclitus. B 48. 

When I read in the Psychoanalytic Quarterly an article like the 
one by Mr Edward Glover, entitled Freudian or Neo-Freudian, 
directed entirely against the constructions of Mr Alexander, I 
sense a sordid smell of stuffiness, at the sight of a construction 
like that of Mr Alexander being counter-attacked in the name 
of obsolete criteria. Good Heavens, I did not hesitate to attack 
it myself in the most categorical way fourteen years ago, at the 
1950 Congress of Psychiatry, but, it is the construction of a man 
of great talent and when I see at what level this construction is 
discussed, I can pay myself the complement that through all 
the misadventures that my discourse encounters, here and 
certainly elsewhere, one can say that this discourse provides an 
obstacle to the experience of analysis being served up to you in a 
completely cretinous way. 

At this point, I will resume my discourse on the drive. I was 
led to approach it after positing that the transference is what 
manifests in experience the enacting of the reality of the un- 
conscious, in so far as that reality is sexuality. I find that I must 
pause here and ask myself what this very affirmation involves. 

If we are sure that sexuality is present in action in the trans- 
ference, it is in so far as at certain moments it is manifested in 
the open in the form of love. That is what it is about. Does love 
represent the summit, the culminating point, the indisputable 
factor, that makes sexuality present for us in the here and now 
of the transference? 

Freud's text, not, certainly, any specific text, but the central 

174 



THE PARTIAL DRIVE AND ITS CIRCUIT 

import of those writings that deal with the drives and their 
vicissitudes, rejects such a view in the clearest possible way. 

It was this text that I began to approach last time, when I 
was trying to make you feel in what a problematic form, brist- 
ling with questions, the introduction of the drive presents itself. 
I hope that many of you will have been able to refer to this text 
in the meantime, whether you are able to read it in German, 
which seems to me eminently desirable, or whether, as second 
best, you will be able to read it, always more or less improperly 
translated, in the two other languages of culture, English or 
French — I certainly give the worst marks to the French trans- 
lation, but I will not waste time pointing out the veritable 
falsifications with which it swarms. 

Even on a first reading, you would have been able to see that 
this article falls entirely into two parts — first, the deconstruction 
of the drive; secondly, the examination of das Lieben, the act of 
love. We shall now approach this second point. 

I 

Freud says quite specifically that love can in no way be regarded 
as the representative of what he puts in question in the term 
die ganze Sexualstrebung, that, is to say, the tendency, the forms, 
the convergence of the striving of the sexual, in so far as it cul- 
minates in Ganze, in an apprehensible whole, that would sum 
up its essence and function. 

Kommt aber aufdamit nicht zuher, that's not at all how it happens, 
he cries, when answering this far-reaching suggestion. We 
analysts have rendered it by all sorts of misleading formulae. 
The whole point of the article is to show us that with regard to 
the biological finality of sexuality, namely, reproduction, the 
drives, as they present themselves in the process of psychicaT~ 
reality, are partial drives.) 

In their~structure, in the tension they establish, the drives 
are linked to an economic factor. This economic factor depends 
on the conditions in which the function of the pleasure principle 
is exercised at a level that I will take up again, at the right 
time, in the term Real-Ich. Let me say at once that we can con- 
ceptualize the Real-Ich as the central nervous system in so far 
as it functions, not as a system of relations, but as a system 
intended to ensure a certain homeostasis of the internal tensions. 

175 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

It is because of the reality of the homeostatic system that 
sexuality comes into play only in the form of partial drives. The 
drive is precisely that montage by which sexuality participates 
in the psychical life, in a way that must conform to the gap-like 
structure that is the structure of the unconscious. 

Let us place ourselves at the two extremes of the analytic 
experience. The primal repressed is a signifier, and we can 
always regard what is built on this as constituting the symptom 
qua a scaffolding of signifiers. Repressed and symptom are 
homogeneous, and reducible to the functions of signifiers. Al- 
though their structure is built up step by step like any edifice, 
it is nevertheless, in the end, inscribable in synchronic terms. 

At the other extreme, there is interpretation. Interpretation 
concerns the factor of a special temporal structure that I have 
tried to define in the term metonymy. As it draws to its end, 
interpretation is directed towards desire, with which, in a cer- 
tain sense, it is identical. Desire, in fact, is interpretation itself. 

In between, there is sexuality. If sexuality, in the form of the 
partial drives, had not manifested itself as dominating the whole 
economy of this interval, our experience would be reduced to 
a mantic, to which the neutral term psychical energy would 
then have been appropriate, but in which it would miss what 
constitutes in it the presence, the Dasein, of sexuality. 

The legibility of sex in the interpretation of the unconscious 
mechanisms is always retroactiv^. It would merely be of the 
nature of interpretation if, at each moment of the history, we 
could be certain only that the partial drives intervened effec- 
tively in time and place. And not, as one tended to believe at 
the beginning of the analytic experience, in an erratic form. 
That infantile sexuality is not a wandering block of ice snatched 
from the great ice-bank of adult sexuality, intervening as an 
attraction over an immature subject — this was proved at once 
in analysis and with what, later, might seem a surprising 
significance. 

In Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, Freud was able to 
posit sexuality as essentially polymorphous, aberrant. The spell 
of a supposed infantile innocence was broken. Because it was 
imposed so early, I would almost say too early, this sexuality 
made us pass too quickly over an examination of what it essen- 
tially represents. That is to say that, with regard to the agency 

176 



THE PARTIAL DRIVE AND ITS CIRCUIT 

of sexuality, all subjects are equal, from the child to the adult 
— that they deal only with that part of sexuality that passes into 
the networks of the constitution of the subject, into the networks 
of the signifier — that sexuality is realized only through the 
operation of the drives in so far as they are partial drives, partial 
with regard to the biological finality of sexuality. 

The integration of sexuality into the dialectic of desire passes 
through the bringing into play of what, in the body, deserves 
to be designated by the term apparatus — if you understand by 
this that with which the body, with regard to sexuality, may fit 
itself up (s'appareiller) as opposed to that with which bodies may 
be paired off (s'apparier). 

If all is confusion in the discussion of the sexual drives it is 
because one does not see that the drive represents no doubt, but 
merely represents, and partially at that, the curve of fulfilment 
of sexuality in the living being. Is it surprising that its final 
term should be death, when the presence of sex in the living 
being is bound up with death? 

Today I have copied out on the blackboard a fragment of 
Heraclitus, which I found in the monumental work in which 
Diels has gathered together for us the scattered remains of the 
pre-Socratic period. To the bow (Bids), he writes, and this 
emerges for us as one of his lessons in wisdom which, before all 
the circuit of scientific elaboration, went straight to the target, 
to the bow is given the name of life (Bios, the accent being this time 
on the first syllable) and its work is death. 

What the drive integrates at the outset in its very existence 
is a dialectic of the bow, I would even say of archery. In this 
way we can situate its place in the psychical economy. 

2 

Freud now introduces us to the drive by one of the most tra- 
ditional ways, using at, every: moment the resources of the 
language, and not hesitating to base himself on something that 
belongs only to certain linguistic systems, .the three voices, 
active, passive and reflexiye. But this is merely an envelope. We 
must see that this signifying reversion is something other, 
something other than what it dresses in. What is fundamental 
at the level of each drive is the movement outwards and 
back in which it is structured. 

177 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

It is remarkable that Freud can designate these two poles 
simply by using something that is the verb. Beschauen und 
beschaut warden, to see and to be seen, qudlen and gequalt warden, 
to torment and to be tormented. This is because, from the out- 
set, Freud takes it as understood that no part of this distance 
covered can be separated from its outwards-and-back move- 
ment, from its fundamental reversion, from the circular char- 
acter of the path of the drive. 

Similarly, it is remarkable that, in order to illustrate the 




Coal 

dimension of this Verkeknmg, he should choose Schaulust, the 
pleasure of seeing, and what he cannot designate other than by 
the combination of two terms in sado-masochism. When he speaks 
of these two drives, and especially of masochism, he is careful 
to observe that there are not two stages in these drives, but 
three. One must distinguish the return into the circuit of the 
drive of that which appears — but also does not appear — in a 
third stage. Namely, the appearance of ein neues Subjekt, to be 
understood as follows — not in the sense that there is already 
one, namely the subject of the drive, but in that what is new is 
the appearance of a subject. This subject, which is properly the 
other, appears in so far as the drive has been able to show its 
circular course. It is only with its appearance at the level of the 

178 



THE PARTIAL DRIVE AND ITS CIRCUIT 

other that what there is of the function of the drive may be 
realized. 

It is to this that I would now like to draw your attention. 
You see here, on the blackboard, a circuit formed by the curve 
of this rising and redescending arrow that crosses, Drang as it is 
in its origin, the surface constituted by what I denned last time 
as the rim, which is regarded in the theory as the source, the 
Quelle, that is to say, the so-called erogenous zone in the drive. 
The tension is always loop-shaped and cannot be separated 
from its return to the erogenous zone. 

Here we can clear up the mystery of the zielgekemmt, of that 
form that the drive may assume, in attaining its satisfaction 
without attaining its aim — in so far as it would be denned by a 
biological function, by the realization of reproductive coupling. 
For the partial drive does not lie there. What is it? 

Let us still suspend the answer, but let us concentrate on this 
term but, and on the two meanings it may present. In order to 
differentiate them, I have chosen to notate them here in a 
language in which they are particularly expressive, English. 
When you entrust someone with a mission, the aim is not what 
he brings back, but the itinerary he must take. The aim is the 
way taken. The French word but may be translated by another 
word in English, goal. In archery, the goal is not the but either, 
it is not the bird you shoot, it is having scored a hit and thereby 
attained your but. 

If the drive may be satisfied without attaining what, from the 
point of view of a biological totalization of function, would be 
the satisfaction of its end of reproduction, it is because it is a 
partial drive, and its aim is simply this return into circuit. 

This theory is present in Freud. He tells us somewhere that 
the ideal model for auto-eroticism would be a single mouth 
kissing itself — a brilliant, even dazzling metaphor, in this re- 
spect so typical of everything he writes, and which requires 
only to be completed by a question. In the drive, is not this mouth 
what might be called a mouth in the form of an arrow? — a 
mouth sewn up, in which, in analysis, we see indicating as 
clearly as possible, in certain silences, the pure agency of the 
oral drive, closing upon its own satisfaction. 

In any case, what makes us distinguish this satisfaction from 
the mere auto-eroticism of the erogenous zone is the object that 

»79 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

we confuse all too often with that upon which the drive closes 
— this object, which is in fact simply the presence of a hollow, 
a void, which can be occupied, Freud tells us, by any object, 
and whose agency we know only in the form of the lost object, 
the petit a. The objet petit a is not the origin of the oral drive. It 
is not introduced as the original food, it is introduced from the 
fact that no food will ever satisfy the oral drive, except by cir- 
cumventing the eternally lacking object. 

The question now confronting us is this — where is this cir- 
cuit plugged in and, to begin with, is it spiral in form, that is to 
say, is the circuit of the oral drive continued by the anal drive, 
which would then be the following stage ? Is it a case of dia- 
lectical progress being produced out of opposition ? Even for 
people who are used to us, it is already to carry the question 
rather far, in the name of some kind of mystery of development, 
to regard the thing as already acquired, inscribed in the 
organism. 

This conception seems to be sustained by the fact that as far 
as the emergence of sexuality in a so-called completed form is 
concerned, we are certainly dealing with an organic process. 
But there is no reason to extend this fact to the relation between 
the other partial drives. There is no relation of production 
between one of the partial drives and the next. 

The passage from the oral drive to the anal drive can be 
produced not by a process of maturation, but by the inter- 
vention of something that does not belong to the field of the 
drive — by the intervention, the overthrow, of the demand of 
the Other. If we introduce the other drives with which the 
series may be formed, and the number of which is fairly short, 
it is quite clear that you would find it very difficult indeed to 
situate in relation to the drives that I have just named, in a 
historical succession, the Schaulust, or scopic drive, or even what 
I will later distinguish as the invocatory drive (la pulsion in- 
vocante), and to establish between them the slightest relation of 
deduction or genesis. 

There is no natural metamorphosis of the oral drive into the 
anal drive. Whatever appearances may emerge to the contrary 
from the play of the symbol constituted, in other contexts, by 
the supposed anal object, namely, the faeces, in relation to tlir 
phallus in its negative effect, we can in no sense — expericne «■ 

1 80 



THE PARTIAL DRIVE AND ITS CIRCUIT 

shows us — consider that there is a continuity between the anal 
phase and the phallic phase, that there is a relation of natural 
metamorphosis. 

We must consider the drive under the heading of the kon- 
stante Kraft that sustains it as a stationary tension. Let us take a 
look at the metaphors that Freud gives us to express these 
outlets. Take Schub, for example, which he immediately trans- 
lates by the image that it bears in his mind, that of a spindle of 
lava, a material emission from the deflagration of energy that 
has occurred there in various successive stages, which complete, 
one after another, that form of return journey. Do we not see 
in the Freudian metaphor the embodiment of this fundamental 
structure — something that emerges from a rim, which re- 
doubles its enclosed structure, following a course that returns, 
and of which nothing else ensures the consistency except the 
object, as something that must be circumvented. 

This articulation leads us to make of the manifestation of 
the drive the mode of a headless subject, for everything is 
articulated in it in terms of tension, and has no relation to the 
subject other than one of topological community. I have been 
able to articulate the unconscious for you as being situated in 
the gaps that the distribution of the signifying investments sets 
up in the subject, and which figure in the algorithm in the form 
of a losange [01> which I place at the centre of any relation of 
the unconscious between reality and the subject. Well ! It is in 
so far as something in the apparatus of the body is structured 
in the same way, it is because of the topological unity of the gaps 
in play, that the drive assumes its role in the functioning of the 
unconscious. 

3 
Let us now follow Freud when he talks to us about Schaulust, 
iceing, being seen. Is it the same thing? How can it even be 
sustained that it can be that, except by inscribing it in terms 
of signifiers? Or is there, then, some other mystery? There is a 
quite different one, and, in order to introduce you to it, I have 
only to point out that Schaulust is manifested in perversion. I 
mress that the drive is not perversion. What constitutes the 
enigmatic character of Freud's presentation derives precisely 
from the fact that he wishes to give us a radical structure — in 

181 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

which the subject is not yet placed. On the contrary, what 
defines perversion is precisely the way in which the subject is 
placed in it. 

We must read Freud's text very attentively here. The value 
of Freud's texts on this matter, in which he is breaking new 
ground, is that like a good archaeologist, he leaves the work of 
the dig in place — so that, even if it is incomplete, we are able 
to discover what the excavated objects mean. When Mr 
Fenichel passes by the same ground, he does as one used to do, 
he gathers everything up, puts it in his pockets and in glass 
cases, without any kind of order, or at least in a completely 
arbitrary order, so that nothing can be found again. 

What occurs in voyeurism ? At the moment of the act of the 
voyeur, where is the subject, where is the object? I have told 
you that the subject is not there in the sense of seeing, at the 
level of the scopic drive. He is there as pervert and he is situated 
only at the culmination of the loop. As for the object — this is 
what my topology on the blackboard cannot show you, but can 
allow you to admit — the loop turns around itself, it is a missile, 
and it is with it, in perversion, that the target is reached. 

The object, here, is the gaze — the gaze that is the subject, 
which attains it, which hits the bull's eye in target-shooting. I 
have only to remind you what I said of Sartre's analysis. Al- 
though this analysis brings out the agency of the gaze, it is not 
at the level of the other whose gaze surprises the subject looking 
through the keyhole. It is that the other surprises him, the sub- 
ject, as entirely hidden gaze. 

You grasp here the ambiguity of what is at issue when we 
speak of the scopic drive. The gaze is this object lost and sud- 
denly refound in the conflagration of shame, by the introduction 
of the other. Up to that point, what is the subject trying to sec :' 
What he is trying to see, make no mistake, is the object as 
absence. What the voyeur is looking for and finds is merely a 
shadow, a shadow behind the curtain. There he will phantasi/i 
any magic of presence, the most graceful of girls, for example , 
even if on the other side there is only a hairy athlete. What Ik 
is looking for is not, as one says, the phallus — but precisely ii •• 
absence, hence the pre-eminence of certain forms as objects <>l 
his search. 

What one looks at is what cannot be seen. If, thanks to ili< 

182 



THE PARTIAL DRIVE AND ITS CIRCUIT 

introduction of the other, the structure of the drive appears, 
it is really completed only in its reversed form, in its return 
form, which is the true active drive. In exhibitionism what is 
intended by the subject is what is realized in the other. The 
true aim of desire is the other, as constrained, beyond his in- 
volvement in the scene. It is not only the victim who is con- 
cerned in exhibitionism, it is the victim as referred to some 
other who is looking at him. 

Thus in this text, we have the key, the nodus, of what has 
been so much an obstacle to the understanding of masochism. 
Freud articulated in the most categorical way that at the outset 
of the sado-masochistic drive, pain has nothing to do with it. 
It is a question of a Herrschqft, of Bewdltigung, violence done to 
what? — to something that is so unspeakable that Freud arrives 
at the conclusion, and at the same time recoils from it, that its 
first model, in accordance with everything I have told you, is 
to be found in a violence that the subject commits, with a view to 
mastery, upon himself. 

He recoils from it. And with good reason. The ascetic who 
flagellates himself does it for a third party. Now, this is not 
what he is trying to convey. He wishes only to designate the 
return, the insertion on one's own body, of the departure and 
the end of the drive. 

At what moment, says Freud, do we see the possibility of pain in- 
troduced into the sado-masochistic drive? — the possibility of pain 
undergone by him who has become, at that moment, the sub- 
ject of the drive. It is, he tells us, at the moment when the loop 
is closed, when it is from one pole to the other that there has 
been a reversal, when the other has come into play, when the 
subject has taken himself as the end, the terminus of the drive. 
At this moment, pain comes into play in so far as the subject 
experiences it from the other. He will become, will be able to 
become, in his theoretical deduction, a sadistic subject, in so 
far as the completed loop of the drive will have brought into play 
the action of the other. What is at issue in the drive is finally 
revealed here — the course of the drive is the only form of 
transgression that is permitted to the subject in relation to the 
pleasure principle. 

The subject will realize that his desire is merely a vain detour 
with the aim of catching the jouissance of the other — in so far 

183 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

as the other intervenes, he will realize that there is a jouissance 
beyond the pleasure principle. 

The forcing of the pleasure principle by the effect of the 
partial drive — it is by this that we may conceive that the partial, 
ambiguous drives are installed at the limit of an Erkaltungstrieb, 
of the maintenance of a homeostasis, of its capture by the veiled 
face that is that of sexuality. 

It is in so far as the drive is evidence of the forcing of the 
pleasure principle that it provides us with evidence that beyond 
the Real'Ich, another reality intervenes, and we shall see by 
what return it is this other reality, in the last resort, that has 
given to this Real-Ich its structure and diversification. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

J. -A. Miller: The question concerns the relation between the 
drive and the real, and the differences between the object of the drive, that 
of phantasy and that of desire. 

Lac an : The object of the drive is to be situated at the level 
of what I have metaphorically called a headless subjectification, 
asubjectificationwithoutsubject, a bone, a structure, an outline, 
which represents one side of the topology. The other side is that 
which is responsible for the fact that a subject, through his 
relations with the signifier, is a subject-with-holes (sujet troud) . 
These holes came from somewhere. 

In his first constructions, his first networks of signifying 
crossroads to become stabilized, Freud was reaching towards 
something that, in the subject, is intended to maintain to the 
greatest possible degree what I have called homeostasis. This 
does not simply mean the crossing of a certain threshold of 
excitement, but also a distribution of ways. Freud even uses 
metaphors that assign a diameter to these ways, which permit 
the maintenance, the ever equal dispersal, of a certain invest- 
ment. 

Somewhere Freud says quite categorically that it is the pres- 
sure of what, in sexuality, has to be repressed in order to main- 
tain the pleasure principle — namely, the libido — that has 
made possible the progress of the mental apparatus itself, as 
such and, for example, the establishment in the mental apparatus 
of that possibility of investment that we call Aufmerksamkeit, the 
possibility of attention. The determination of the functioning 

184 



THE PARTIAL DRIVE AND ITS CIRCUIT 

of the Real-Ich, which both satisfies the pleasure principle and, 
at the same time, is invested without defence by the upsurge of 
sexuality — this is what is responsible for its structure. 

At this level, we are not even forced to take into account any 
subjectification of the subject. The subject is an apparatus. 
This apparatus is something lacunary, and it is in the lacuna 
that the subject establishes the function of a certain object, qua 
lost object. It is the status of the objet a in so far as it is present 
in the drive. 

In the phantasy, the subject is frequently unperceived, but 
he is always there, whether in the dream or in any of the more 
or less developed forms of day-dreaming. The subject situates 
himself as determined by the phantasy. 

The phantasy is the support of desire; it is not the object that 
is the support of desire. The subject sustains himself as desiring 
in relation to an ever more complex signifying ensemble. This 
is apparent enough in the form of the scenario it assumes, in 
which the subject, more or less recognizable, is somewhere, 
split, divided, generally double, in his relation to the object, 
which usually does not show its true face either. 

Next time, I shall come back to what I have called the structure 
of perversion. Strictly speaking, it is an inverted effect of the 
phantasy. It is the subject who determines himself as object, in 
his encounter with the division of subjectivity. 

I will show you — I must stop here today because of the time, 
I am very sorry to say — that the subject assuming this role of 
the object is precisely what sustains the reality of the situation 
of what is called the sado-masochistic drive, and which is only 
a single point, in the masochistic situation itself. It is in so far 
as the subject makes himself the object of another will that the 
sado-masochistic drive not only closes up, but constitutes itself. 

It is only in a second stage, as Freud shows us in this text, 
that the sadistic desire is possible in relation to a phantasy. The 
sadistic desire exists in a crowd of configurations, and also in 
the neuroses, but it is not yet sadism in the strict sense. 

I will ask you to look at my article Kant avec Sade, where you 
will see that the sadist himself occupies the place of the object, 
but without knowing it, to the benefit of another, for whose 
puissance he exercises his action as sadistic pervert. 

You see, then, several possibilities here for the function of the 

185 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

objet a, which is never found in the position of being the aim 
of desire. It is either pre-subjective, or the foundation of an 
identification of the subject, or the foundation of an identification 
disavowed by the subject. In this sense, sadism is merely the 
disavowal of masochism. This formula will make it possible to 
illuminate many things concerning the true nature of sadism. 

But the object of desire, in the usual sense, is either a phantasy 
that is in reality the support of desire, or a lure. 

On this subject of the lure, which poses at the same time all 
the previous quesions that you put forward just now concerning 
the relation of the subject to the real, the analysis that Freud 
gives of love enables us to make some progress. 

The need Freud feels to refer to the relation of the Ich to the 
real in order to introduce the dialectic of love — whereas, 
strictly speaking, the neutral real is the desexualized real — is 
not introduced at the level of the drive. It is there that is to be 
found what, for us, will prove most valuable concerning how 
we should conceive of the function of love — namely, its funda- 
mentally narcissistic structure. 

There can be absolutely no doubt that there is a real. That 
the subject has a constructive relation with this real only within 
the narrow confines of the pleasure principle, of the pleasure 
principle unforced by the drive, this is — as we shall see next 
time — the point of emergence of the love object. The whole 
question is to discover how this love object may come to fulfill 
a role analogous with the object of desire — upon what equiv- 
ocations does the possibility for the love object of becoming an 
object of desire rest? 

Have I thrown some light on your question ? 

J. -A. Miller : Some light and some shadow. 

13 May 1964 



186 



15 



FROM LOVE TO THE LIBIDO 

The subject and the Other • The narcissistic field • Sexual difference 

The field of the drive: making oneself. . . seen, heard, sucked, shitted 

The myth of the lamella 



Today I intend — this does not mean that I will have the time 
to do so — to take you from love, at the threshold of which I left 
things last time, to the libido. 

I will say at the outset what will be the burden of this 
elucidation by saving that the libido is not something fleeting 
or fluid, it cannot be divided up, or accumulated, like magnet- 
ism, in the centres of focusing offered it by the subject. The 




The unconscious 
(field of the Other) 



libido is to be conceived as an organ, in both senses of the term, 
as organ-part of the organism and as organ-instrument. 

I apologize if, as someone remarked last time, there are some 
obscurities along the way I take you. I believe that obscurity is 
characteristic of our field. Let us not forget that it is usual to 
represent the unconscious as a cellar, even as a cave, by way of 
allusion to Plato's cave. But it is not a good comparison. The 
unconscious is much more like the bladder, and this bladder 

187 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

can be seen only if one places a little light inside it. Why should 
one be surprised if it sometimes takes a little time for the light 
to come on ? 

In the subject who, alternately, reveals himself and conceals 
himself by means of the pulsation of the unconscious, we 
apprehend only partial drives. The ganze Sexualstrebung, the 
representation of the totality of the sexual drive, is not to be 
found there, Freud tells us. Following Freud, I will lead you 
along the path of this conclusion, and I would state quite 
clearly that everything I have learnt from my experience 
accords with it. I cannot expect everybody here to agree with 
it fully, since some of you do not have this experience, but your 
presence here is evidence of a certain trust in what we shall 
call — in the role in which I am in relation to you, that of the 
Other — good faith. This good faith is no doubt always a pre- 
carious assumption — for where, in the end, does this relation 
of the subject to the Other end? 

What I, Lacan, following the traces of the Freudian excava- 
tion, am telling you is that the subject as such is uncertain 
because he is divided by the effects of language. Through the 
effects of speech, the subject always realizes himself more in the 
Other, but he is already pursuing there more than half of 
himself. He will simply find his desire ever more divided, 
pulverized, in the circumscribable metonymy of speech. The 
effects of language are always mixed with the fact, which is the 
basis of the analytic experience, that the subject is subject only 
from being subjected to the field of the Other, the subject 
proceeds from his synchronic subjection in the field of the 
Other. That is why he must get out, get himself out, and in 
the getting-himself-out, in the end, he will know that the real 
Other has, just as much as himself, to get himself out, to pull 
himself free. It is here that the need for good faith becomes 
imperative, a good faith based on the certainty that the same 
implication of difficulty in relation to the ways of desire is also 
in the Other. 

The truth, in this sense, is that which runs after truth — and 
that is where I am running, where I am taking you, like 
Actaeon's hounds, after me. When I find the goddess's hiding 
place, I will no doubt be changed into a stag, and you can 
devour me, but we still have a litde way to go yet. 

1 88 



FROM LOVE TO THE LIBIDO 



Did I perhaps represent Freud to you last time as some such 
figure as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob? In his Le Salutpourlesjuifs, 
Lion Bloy depicts them as three equally old men who are there, 
according to one of the forms of Israel's vocation, squatting 
around some piece of canvas on the ground, engrossed in that 
eternal occupation of dealing in second-hand goods. They are 
sorting out the various objects on the canvas. Some things they 
put on one side, others on the other. On one side, Freud puts 
the partial drives and on the other love. He says — They're not 
the same. 

The drives necessitate us in the sexual order — they come 
from the heart. To our great surprise, he tells us that love, on the 
other hand, comes from l^ie bellyyfrom the world of yum-yum. 

It may come as a surprise, but it elucidates for us something 
fundamental to analytic experience, namely, that the genital 
drive, if it exists, is not at all articulated like the other drives 
— in spite of the love-hate ambivalence. In his premises, and in 
his own texts, Freud completely contradicts himself when he 
tells us that ambivalence may be regarded as one of the 
characteristics of the reversal of the Verkehrung of the drive. 
But when he examines it, he tells us quite clearly that ambiv- 
alence and reversion are not at all the same thing. 

If, therefore, the genital drive does not exist, then it can get 
f . . . formed somewhere else, on the other side from the one in 
which the drive is to be found, on the left of my schema on the 
blackboard. You will have noticed already that it is on the 
right, in the field of the Other, that the genital drive has to 
find its form. 

Well ! This is precisely borne out by what we learn in the 
analytic experience, namely, that the genital drive is subjected 
to the circulation of the Oedipus complex, to the elementary 
and other structures of kinship. This is what is designated as the 
field of culture — somewhat inadequately, because this field is 
supposed to be based on a no man's land in which genitality as 
such subsists, whereas it is in fact dissolved, not re-assembled, for 
the ganze Sexualstrebung is nowhere apprehensible in the subject. 

Yet because it is nowhere, it is nevertheless diffused, and it 
is this that Freud is trying to convey to us in this article. 

189 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

Everything he says about love tends to emphasise the fact 
that, in order to conceive of love, we must necessarily refer to 
another sort of structure than that of the drive. He divides this 
structure into three, three levels — the level of the real, the level 
of the economic and the level of the biological. 

To these levels correspond three oppositions. To the level 
of the real corresponds the that-which-interests/that-which- 
is-indifferent opposition. To the level of the economic, that- 
which-gives-pleasure/that-which-displeases. It is only at the 
level of the biological that the activity /passivity opposition 
presents itself, in its own form, the only valid one in its gram- 
matical sense, the loving/being loved-position^ 

We are invited by Freud to consi der that love, in its essence, 
can be judged only as a sexual passion of the gesamt Ich. Now, 
in Freud, gesamt Ich is a hapax, whlchTis to be understood in the 
sense suggested in his account of the pleasure principle. The 
gesamt Ich is the field that I have invited you to regard as a 
surface andr~a fairly limited sur face so that the blackboard is 
able to represent it, and so that everything may be included in 
it on paper. I am referring to the network that is represented 
by arcs, lines Unking points of convergence, of which the closed 
circle marks whatever is to be preserved in tensional homeo- 
stasis, in lower tension, in necessary diversion, in diffusion of 
excitement into innumerable channels — whenever it might be 
too intense in any one of them. 

The filtering from stimulation to discharge is the apparatus, 
the dome, to be circumscribed on a sphere, in which is defined 
at first what he calls the stage of the Real-Ich. And it is to this 
that, later in his discourse, he attributes the qualification 
autoerotisch. 

Analysts have concluded from this that — as it must be 
situated somewhere in what is called development, and since 
what Freud says is gospel — the infant must regard everything 
around him as indifferent. One wonders how things can go on, 
in a field of observers for whom articles of faith have such 
overwhelming value in relation to observation. For, after all, 
if there is one thing that cannot be said about the infant it is 
that he shows no interest in what enters his field of perception. 

There can be no doubt that there are objects deriving from 
the earliest period of the neo-natal phase. Autoerotisch can in no 

190 



FROM LOVE TO THE LIBIDO 

way mean a lack of interest in them. If you read Freud on this, 
you will see that the second stage, the economic stage, consists 
precisely in that the second Ich — the second in a de jure sense, 
the second in logical sequence — is the Lust-Ich, which he calls 
purifiziert, the purified Lust-Ich, which is established in the field 
exterior to the dome in which I designate the first Real-left of 
Freud's explanation. 

The autoerotisch consists in the fact — and Freud himself 
stresses this — that there would be no emergence of objects if 
there were no objects of use to me. This is the criterion of the 
emergence and distribution of objects. 

Here, then, is constituted the Lust-Ich, and also the field of 
the Unlust, of die object as remainder, as alien. The object that 
one needs to know, and with good reason, is that which is 
defined in the field of Unlust, whereas the objects of the field of 
the Lust-Ich are lovable. The hassen, with its profound link with 
knowledge, is the other field. 

At this level, there is no trace of drive functions, except those 
that are not true drives, and which Freud calls in his text the 
Ichtriebe. The level of the Ich is not that of the drive, and it is 
there — I would ask you to read the text very attentively — that 
Freud grounds love. Everything that is defined in this way at the 
level of the Ich assumes sexual value, passes from the Erhal- 
tungstrieb, from preservation, to the Sexualtrieb, only in terms of 
the appropriation of each of these fields, its seizure, by one of 
the partial drives. Freud says quite clearly that Vorhangung its 
Wesentlichen, to bring out the essential here, it is in ajmrejy 
pasgiyg,. non-drive, way that the subject records the dusseren 
Reize, that which comes from the external world. Its activity 
comes only durch seine eigene Triebe, from its own drives. It is a 
question here of the diversity of the partial drives. In this way, 
we are brought to the third level that he introduces, that of 
activity /passivity. , 

Before noting the consequences of this, I would simply like to 
draw your attention to the classic character of this conception 
of love. Is there any need to stress that se vouloir son bien, to wish 
oneself one's own well being, is exactly the equivalent of what is 
traditionally called the physical theory of love, St Thomas's 
velle bonum alicui, which, for us, on account of the function of 
narcissism has exactly the same value. I have long stressed the 

'9' 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

specious character of this supposed altruism, which is pleased 
to preserve whose well being? — of him who, precisely, is 
necessary to us. 



It is there, then, that Freud intends to set up the bases of love. 
It is only with activity /passivity that the sexual relation really 
comes into play. 

Now, is the activity /passivity relation identical with the 
sexual relation? I would ask you to refer to a passage in the 
Wolf-Man, for example, or to various others scattered through- 
out the Five Psycho-analyses. There Freud explains in short that 
the polar reference activity /passivity is there in order to name, 
to cover, to metaphorize that which remains unfathomable in 
sexual difference. Nowhere does he ever say that, psycho- 
logically, the masculine/feminine relation is apprehensible 
otherwise than by the representative of the activity /passivity 
opposition. As such, the masculine/feminine opposition is never 
attained. This is sufficient indication of the importance of what 
is repeated here, in the form of a verb particularly appropriate 
in expressing what is at issue — this passivity /activity opposition 
is poured, moulded, injected. It is an arteriography, and even 
the masculine/feminine relations do no exhaust it. 

Of course, it is well known that the activity /passivity 
opposition may account for many things in the domain of love. 
But what we are dealing with here is precisely this injection, 
one might say, of sado-masochism, which is not at all to be 
understood, as far as its properly sexual realization is concerned, 
as ready money. 

Certainly, all the intervals of desire come into play in the 
sexual relation. What value has my desire for you? the eternal 
question that is posed in theHIalogue of lovers i But the supposed 
value, for example, of feminine masochism, as it is called, should 
be subjected, parenthetically, to serious scrutiny. It belongs to 
a dialogue that may be defined, in many respects, as a mascu- 
line phantasy. There is every reason to believe that to sustain 
this phantasy would be an act of complicity on our part. In 
order not to deliver ourselves up completely to the results of 
Anglo-Saxon research, which is not worth very much on this 
subject, even if there is a certain amount of consent on the 

192 



FROM LOVE TO THE LIBIDO 

part of women in it, which means nothing — we analysts will 
confine ourselves, more legitimately, to the women in our own 
group. It is quite striking to see that the representatives of this 
sex in the analytic circle are particularly disposed to maintain 
the fundamental belief in feminine masochism. It may be that 
there is a veil here, concerning the interests of the sex, that 
should not be lifted too quickly. In any case, this is an excursion 
from our subject, but an excursion profoundly linked to it, as 
you will see, for we shall have to come back to a consideration 
of this link. 

However, at this level, we can learn nothing from the field 
of love, that is to say, from the framework of narcissism, which, 
as Freud shows quite clearly in this article, is made up of the 
insertion of the autoerotisch in the organized interests of the ego. 

Within this framework, there may well be a representation 
of the objects of the external world, choice and discernment, 
the possibility of knowledge, in short the whole field with which 
classical psychology concerned itself is included in it. But 
nothing — and that is why all psychology of the affections has, 
up to Freud, failed — nothing represents in it the Other, the 
radical Other, the Other as such. 

This representation of the Other is lacking, specifically, 
between the two opposed worlds that sexuality designates for 
us in the masculine and the feminine. Carrying things as far as 
they will go, one might even say that the masculine ideal and 
the feminine ideal are represented in the psyche by something 
other than this activity /passivity opposition of which I spoke 
earlier. Strictly speaking, they spring from a term that I have 
not introduced, but of which one female psycho-analyst has 
pin-pointed the feminine sexual attitude — the term masquerade. 

Masquerade is not that which comes into play in the display 
necessary, at the level of the animals, to coupling, and in any 
case display is usually to be seen on the side of the male. 
Masquerade has another meaning in the human domain, and 
that is precisely to play not at the imaginary, but at the symbolic, 
level. 

It is on this basis that it now remains to us to show that 
sexuality as such comes into play, exercises its proper activity, 
through the mediation — paradoxical as that may seem — of 
the partial drives. 

'93 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

3 
Everything Freud spells out about the partial drives shows us 
the movement that I outlined for you on the blackboard last 
time, that circular movement of the thrust that emerges 
through the erogenous rim only to return to it as its target, 
after having encircled something I call the objet a. I suggest 
— and a punctilious examination of this whole text is a test of 
the truth of what I propose — that it is in this way that the 
subject attains what is, strictly speaking, the dimension of the 
capital Other. 

I suggest that there is a radical distinction between loving 
oneself through the other — which, in the narcissistic field of the 
object, allows no transcendence to the object included — and 
the circularity of the drive, in which the heterogeneity of the 
movement out and back shows a gap in its interval. 

What have seeing and being seen in common ? Let us take the 
Sehaulust, the scopic drive. Freud certainly makes a distinction 
between beschauen, to look at an alien object, an object in the 
strict sense, and beschaut werden, being looked at by an alien 
person. 

This is because an object and a person are not the same. At 
the end of the circle, let us say that they lose touch — or that 
the dotted line eludes us to some extent. Indeed, in order to 
link them together, it is at the base — where origin and point 
converge — that Freud must bring them together and try to 
forge a union between them — precisely at the point of return. 
He brings them together by saying that the root of the scopic 
drive is to be found entirely in the subject, in the fact that the 
subject sees himself. 

But, because he is Freud, he does not fall into error here. It 
is not seeing oneself in the mirror, it is Selbst tin Sexualglied 
beschauen — he looks at himself, I would say, in his sexual 



But, be careful! That's not right either. Because this state- 
ment is identified with its opposite — which is curious enough, 
and I am surprised that nobody has noticed the humorous 
side of it. This gives — Sexualglied von eigener Person beschaut 
werden. In a way, just as the number two delights at being odd, 
the sex, or widdler, delights at being looked at. Who has ever 

194 



FROM LOVE TO THE LIBIDO 

really grasped the truly subject-making (subjectivable) character 
of such a sentiment? 

In fact, the articulation of the loop formed by the outward 
and return movement of the drive is obtained very well by 
changing only one of the terms in Freud's statement. I do not 
change eigetus Objekt, the object in the strict sense, which is in 
fact what the subject is reduced to and I do not change von 
fremder Person, the other, of course, nor beschaut, but in place of 
werden I put machen — what is involved in the drive is making 
oneself seen (sefaire voir). The activity of the drive is concentrated 
in this making oneself (sefaire), and it is by relating it to the field 
of the other drives that we may be able to throw some light 
upon it. 

Unfortunately, I must move fairly quickly, and not only am I 
cutting short, but I am filling in the gaps that Freud, surpris- 
ingly, left in his enumeration of the drives. 

After making oneself seen, I will introduce another, making 
oneself heard, of which Freud says nothing. 

I must, very quickly, point out to you the difference between c 
making oneself heard and making oneself seen. I q the field of t he, 
uncons cious the ears are the only orifice that cannot he closed . 
Whereas making oneself seen is indicated ^ by an arr ow that r eally 
comes back towards the subject, making oneself heard _gQes 
towards_dieotner. The reason for this is a structural one — it 
was important that I should mentionitin passing. 

Let us turn to the oral drive. What is it? One speaks of 
phantasies of devouring, of being gobbled up. Indeed, everyone 
knows that this, verging on all the resonances of masochism, is 
the altrified term of the oral drive. But why do we not get a 
definite answer? Since we refer to the infant and the breast, 
and since suckling is sucking, let us say that the oral drive is 
getting sucked, it is the vampire. 

Indeed, this throws some light on that singular object — which 
I am trying to unstick in your minds from the food metaphor 
— the breast. The breast is also something superimposed, who 
sucks what? — the organism of the mother. Thus we see clearly 
enough, at this level, the nature of the subject's claim to some- 
thing that is separated from him, but belongs to him and which 
he needs to complete himself. 

At the level of the anal drive — you can now relax a bit — 

195 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

things don't seem to work out like that at all. And yet, sefaire 
chier has a meaning! When one says here, on sefait rudement chier, 
one has the emmerdmr iternel in mind. 1 It is quite wrong simply 
to identify the celebrated scybala with the function given it in 
the metabolism of obsessional neurosis. It is quite wrong to 
separate it from what it represents, a gift, as it happens, and 
from the relation it has with soiling, purification, catharsis. It is 
wrong not to see that it is from here that the function of obla- 
tivity emerges. In short, the object, here, is not very far from 
the domain that is called that of the soul. 

What does this brief survey tell us? Does it not seem that the 
drive, in this turning inside out represented by its pocket, 
invaginating through the erogenous zone, is given the task of 
seeking something that, each time, responds in the Other? I will 
not go over the series again. Let us say that at the level of the 
Sckaulust, it is the gaze. I point this out only to deal later with 
the effects on the Other of this movement of appeal. 

4 
I wish to note here the relation between the polarity of the drive 
cycle and something that is always at the centre. It is an organ, 
in the sense of an instrument, of the drive — in another sense, 
therefore, than that attributed to it earlier in the sphere of the 
induction of the Ich. We must now turn our attention to this 
ungraspable organ, this object that we can only circumvent, 
in short, this false organ. 

The organ of the drive is situated in relation to the true 
organ. In order to make this clear to you and in order to show 
that this is the only pole that, in the domain of sexuality, is 
within our grasp, capable of being apprehended, I will take the 
liberty of setting a myth before you — and in doing so I shall 
take as my starting-point what is put into the mouth of Aris- 
tophanes on the subject of love in Plato's Symposium. 

This usage presupposes of course that we give ourselves 
permission to use, in this judo with truth, the apparatus that I 
have always avoided using before my audiences. 

i This sentence is strictly untranslatable on account of the play on words. 
Sefaire chier means literally 'to get oneself shitted*. 'Tu mefais chier' has the 
sense of 'you make me sick*. 'On sefait rudement chier' means 'we were bored to 
death*. An 'emmerdeur' (literally, a 'shitter') is a 'bore* [Tr.]. 

196 



FROM LOVE TO THE LIBIDO 

I have given my listeners ancient models, particularly those 
drawn from Plato, but I have merely given them the machinery 
to dig this field. I am not one of those who say — Children, there is 
treasure buried here — and leave them to get on with their digging. 
I have given them the plough share and the plough, namely, 
that the unconscious was made out of language, and at one 
point in time, approximately three and a half years ago, and 
three very good pieces of work have resulted from it. But we 
must now say — You can only find the treasure in the way J tell you. 

There is something comical about this way. This is absolutely 
essential in understanding any of Plato's dialogues, and especi- 
ally when one is dealing with the Symposium. This dialogue is 
even, one might say, a practical joke. The starting-point, on 
course, is Aristophanes' fable. This fable is a defiance to the 
centuries, for it traverses them without anyone trying to do 
better. I shall try. 

In an attempt to establish what was said at the Congres de 
Bonneval I managed to come up with something like the 
following — / am going to talk to you about the lamella. 

If you want to stress its joky side, you can call it I'hommelette. 
This hommelette, as you will see, is easier to animate than 
primal man, in whose head one always had to place a homun- 
culous to get it working. 

Whenever the membranes of the egg in which the foetus 
emerges on its way to becoming a new-born are broken, 
imagine for a moment that something flies off, and that one can 
do it with an egg as easily as with a man, namely the hommelette, 
or the lamella. 

The lamella is something extra-flat, which moves like the 
amoeba. It is just a little more complicated. But it goes every- 
where. And as it is something — I will tell you shortly why 
— that is related to what the sexed being loses in sexuality, it is, 
like the amoeba in relation to sexed beings, immortal — be- 
cause it survives any division, any scissiparous intervention. 
And it can run around. 

Well ! This is not very reassuring. But suppose it comes and 
envelopes your face while you are quietly asleep . . . 

I can't see how we would not join battle with a being capable 
of these properties. But it would not be a very convenient 
battle. This lamella, this organ, whose characteristic is not to 

197 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

exist, but which is nevertheless an organ — I can give you more 
details as to its zoological place — is the libido. 

It is the libido, qua pure life instinct, that is to say, immortal 
life, or irrepressible life, life that has need of no organ, simpli- 
fied, indestructible life. It is precisely what is subtracted from 
the living being by virtue of the fact that it is subject to the 
cycle of sexed reproduction. And it is of this that all the forms 
of the objet a that can be enumerated are the representatives, the 
equivalents. The objets a are merely its representatives, its 
figures. The breast — as equivocal, as an element characteristic 
of the mammiferous organization, the placenta for example 
— certainly represents that part of himself that the individual 
loses at birth, and which may serve to symbolize the most 
profound lost object. I could make the same kind of reference 
for all the other objects. 

The relation between the subject and the field of the Other 
becomes clearer. Take a look at what I have drawn in the lower 
part of the table. I will explain. 



S t 



Sg 



In the world of the Real-Ich, of the ego, of knowledge, every- 
thing may exist as now, including you and consciousness, with- 
out there being any need, whatever may be thought to the 
contrary, for anything in the way of a subject. If the subject is 
what I say it is, namely the subject determined by language 
and speech, it follows that the subject, in initio, begins in the 
locus of the Other, in so far as it is there that the first signifier 
emerges. 

Now, what is a signifier? I have been drumming it into you 
long enough not to have to articulate it once again here. A 
signifier is that which represents a subject. For whom? — not 
for another subject, but for another signifier. In order to 

198 



FROM LOVE TO THE LIBIDO 

illustrate this axiom, suppose that in the desert you find a stone 
covered with hieroglyphics. You do not doubt for a moment that, 
behind them, there was a subject who wrote them. But it is an 
error to believe that each signifier is addressed to you — this is 
proved by the fact that you cannot understand any of it. On the 
other hand you define them as signifiers, by the fact that you 
are sure that each of these signifiers is related to each of the 
others. And it is this that is at issue with the relation between 
the subject and the field of the Other. 

The subject is born in so far as the signifier emerges in the 
field of the Other. But, by this very fact, this subject — which, 
was previously nothing if not a subject coming into being 
— solidifies into a signifier. 

The relation to the Other is precisely that which, for us, 
brings out what is represented by the lamella — not sexed 
polarity, the relation between masculine and feminine, but the 
relation between the living subject and that which he loses by 
having to pass, for his reproduction, through the sexual cycle. 

In this way I explain the essential affinity of every drive with 
the zone of death, and reconcile the two sides of the drive 
— which, at one and the same time, makes present sexuality in 
the unconscious and represents, in its essence, death. 

You will also understand that, if I have spoken to you of the 
unconscious as of something that opens and closes, it is because 
its essence is to mark that time by which, from the fact of being 
born with the signifier, the subject is born divided. The subject 
is this emergence which, just before, as subject, was nothing, 
but which, having scarcely appeared, solidifies into a signifier. 

On this conjunction between the subject in the field of the 
drive and the subject as he appears in the field of the Other, on 
this effort to join oneself together, depends the fact that there 
is a support for the ganze Sexualstrebung. There is no other. Only 
there is the relation of the sexes represented at the level of the 
unconscious. 

As for the rest, the sexuaLrelation is handed ov er to the 
hazards of the field of the Othen It is handed over to the 
explanations that are given of it. It is handed over to the old 
woman of whom — it is not a pointless fable — Daphnis must 
learn what one must do to make love. 



199 



THE TRANSFERENCE AND THE DRIVE 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

F. Wahl: The question concerns the loss that the sexed living 
being is subjected to, then the activity /passivity articulation. 

Lac an : In fact, you have stressed one of the things lacking 
in what I have said. The lamella has a rim, it inserts itself into 
the erogenous zone, that is to say, in one of the orifices of the 
body, in so far as these orifices — all our experience shows this 
— are linked to the opening/closing of the gap of the un- 
conscious. 

The erogenous zones are linked to the unconscious because 
it is there that the presence of the living being becomes fixed. 
We have discovered that it is precisely the organ of the libido, 
the lamella, which links to the unconscious the so-called oral 
and anal drives, to which I would add the scopic drive and 
what one ought almost to call the invocatory drive, which has, 
as I told you in passing — nothing of what I say is mere joking 
— the privilege of not being able to close. 

As to the relation between the drive and activity /passivity, 
I think I will be well enough understood if I say that at the 
level of the drive it is purely grammatical. It is support, artifice, 
which Freud uses in order to enable us to understand the out- 
ward-return movement of the drive. But I have repeated four 
or five times that we cannot reduce it purely and simply to a 
reciprocity. Today I have shown in the most articulated way 
possible that each of the three stages, a, b, c, with which Freud 
articulates each drive, must be replaced by the formula of 
making oneself seen, heard and the rest of the list I have given. 
This implies fundamentally activity, in which respect I come 
close to what Freud himself articulates when he distinguishes 
between the two fields, the field of the drives on the one hand, 
and the narcissistic field of love on the other, and stresses that 
at the level of love, there is a reciprocity of loving and being 
loved, and that, in the other field, it is a question of a pure 
activity durch seine eigene Triebe, for the subject. Do you follow 
me ? In fact, it is obvious that, even in their supposedly passive 
phase, the exercise of a drive, a masochistic drive, for example, 
requires that the masochist give himself, if I may be permitted 
to put it in this way, a devil of a job. 

29 May 1964 

200 



The Field of the Other 
and back to the Transference 



This page intentionally left blan 



i6 

THE SUBJECT AND THE OTHER: 
ALIENATION 

Sexual dynamics • Aphanisis • The Piagetic error • Vel - Tour money 
or your lifel • The why? 

If psycho-analysis is to be constituted as the science of the 
unconscious, one must set out from the notion that the uncon- 
scious is structured like a language. 

From this I have deduced a topology intended to account for 
the constitution of the subject. 

At a time that I hope we have now put behind us, it was 
objected that in giving dominance to structure I was neglecting 
the dynamics so evident in our experience. It was even said that 
I went so far as to ignore the principle affirmed in Freudian 
doctrine that this dynamics is, in its essence, through and 
through, sexual. 

I hope my seminar for this year, especially at the point at 
which it reached its oilmen last time, has shown you that this 
dynamics is far from being ignored in my thinking. 



I would remind you, for the benefit of those who were absent 
last time, that I added a quite new element to this dynamics, 
the use of which will become apparent later. 

First, I stressed the division that I make by opposing, in 
relation to the entrance of the unconscious, the two fields of the 
subject and the Other. The Other is the locus in which is 
situated the chain of the signifier that governs whatever may be 
made present of the subject — it is the field of that living being 
in which the subject has to appear. And I said that it was on the 
side of this living being, called to subjectivity, that the drive is 
essentially manifested. 

Every drive being, by its essence as drive, a partial drive, no 

203 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

drive represents — a notion that Freud raises for a moment 
when he asks himself whether it is love that realizes it — the 
totality of the Sexualstrebung, of the sexual tendency, as it might 
be conceived as making present in the psyche the function of 
Fortpflanzung, of reproduction, if this function entered thepsyche 
at all. 

Who would not accept this function on the biological plane ? 
What I am saying, following Freud, who provides abundant 
evidence of it, is that this function is not represented as such in 
the psyche. In the psyche, there is nothing by which the subject 
may situate himself as a male or female being. 

In his psyche, the subject situates only equivalents of the 
function of reproduction — activity and passivity, which by no 
means represent it in an exhaustive way. Freud even adds a 
touch of irony to this by stressing that this representation is not 
as constricting or as exhaustive as that — durchgreifend aussch- 
lieblich — the polarity of the male and the female being is 
represented only by the polarity of activity, which is manifested 
through the Triebe, and of passivity, which is passivity only in 
relation to the exterior, gegen die dusseren Reize. 

Only this division — and it is here that I left off last time — 
makes necessary what was first revealed by analytic experience, 
namely, that the ways of what one must do as man or as woman 
are entirely abandoned to the drama, to the scenario, which is 
placed in the field of the Other — which, strictly speaking, is 
the Oedipus complex. 

I stressed this last time, when I told you that the human being 
has always to learn from scratch from the Other what he has to 
do, as man or as woman. I referred to the old woman in the 
story of Daphnis and Ghloe, which shows us that there is an 
ultimate field, the field of sexual fulfilment, in which, in the 
last resort, the innocent does not know the way. 

Whether it is the drive, the partial drive, that orientates him 
to it, or whether the partial drive alone is the representative in 
the psyche of the consequences of sexuality, this is a sign that 
sexuality is represented in the psyche by a relation of the subject 
that is deduced from something other than sexuality itself. 
Sexuality is established in the field of the subject by a way that 
is that of lack. 

Two lacks overlaps here. The first emerges from the central 

204 



ALIENATION 

defect around which the dialectic of the advent of the subject 
to his own being in the relation to the Other turns — by the fact 
that the subject depends on the signifier and that the signifier 
is first of all in the field of the Other. This lack takes up the 
other lack, which is the real, earlier lack, to be situated at the 
advent of the living being, that is to say, at sexed reproduction. 
The real lack is what the living being loses, that part of himself 
qua living being, in reproducing himself through the way of sex. 
This lack is real because it relates to something real, namely, 
that the living being, by being subject to sex, has fallen under 
the blow of individual death. 

Aristophanes' myth pictures the pursuit of the complement 
for us in a moving, and misleading, way, by articulating that it 
is the other, one's sexual other half, that the living being seeks 
in love. To this mythical representation of the mystery of love, 
analytic experience substitutes the search by the subject, not of 
the sexual complement, but of the part of himself, lost forever, 
that is constituted by the fact that he is only a sexed living being, 
and that he is no longer immortal. 

You will now understand that — for the same reason that it 
is through the lure that the sexed living being is induced into 
his sexual realization — the drive, the partial drive, is pro- 
foundly a death drive and represents in itself the portion of 
death in the sexed living being. 

Thus defying, perhaps for the first time in history, a myth 
that has acquired so much prestige, and which last time I placed 
under the same heading as Plato places that of Aristophanes, I 
substituted the myth intended to embody the missing part, 
which I called the myth of the lamella. 

This is new and it is important because it designates the 
libido not as a field offerees, but as an organ. 

The libido is the essential organ in understanding the nature 
of the drive. This organ is unreal. Unreal is not imaginary. 
The unreal is defined by articulating itself on the real in a way 
that eludes us, and it is precisely this that requires that its 
representation should be mythical, as I have made it. But the 
fact that it is unreal does not prevent an organ from embodying 
itself. 

I will give you its materialization at once. One of the most 
ancient forms in which this unreal organ is incarnated in the 

205 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

body, is tattooing, scarification. The tattoo certainly has the 
function of being for the Other, of situating the subject in it, 
marking his place in the field of the group's relations, between 
each individual and all the others. And, at the same time, it 
obviously has an erotic function, which all those who have 
approached it in reality have perceived. 

I have also shown that, in the profound relation of the drive, 
what is essential is that the movement by which the arrow that 
sets out towards the target fulfills its function only by really re- 
emerging from it, and returning on to the subject. In this sense, 
the pervert is he who, in short circuit, more directly than any 
other, succeeds in his aim, by integrating in the most profound 
way his function as subject with his existence as desire. Here 
the reversal of the drive is something quite different from the 
variation of ambivalence that makes the object oscillate from 
the field of hate to that of love and vice versa, depending on 
whether or not it benefits the well-being of the subject. It is not 
when the object in one's sights is not good that one becomes a 
masochist. It is not because her father disappointed her that 
Freud's female patient (known as 'the homosexual') becomes 
homosexual — she could have taken a lover. Whenever we are 
in the dialectic of the drive, something else takes charge. The 
dialectic of the drive is profoundly different both from that 
which belongs to the order of love and from that which belongs 
to the well-being of the subject. 

That is why today I wish to stress the operation of the 
realization of the subject in his signifying dependence in the 
locus of the Other. 



Everything emerges from the structure of the signifier. This 
structure is based on what I first called the function of the cut 
and which is now articulated, in the development of my dis- 
course, as the topological function of the rim. 

The relation of the subject to the Other is entirely produced 
in a process of gap. Without this, anything could be there. The 
relations between beings in the real, including all of you 
animated beings out there, might be produced in terms of 
inversely reciprocal relations. This is what psychology, and a 
whole area of sociology, is trying to do, and may succeed in 

206 



ALIENATION 

doing as far as the mere animal kingdom is concerned, for the 
capture of the imaginary is enough to motivate all sorts of be- 
haviour in the living being. Psycho-analysis reminds us that 
human psychology belongs to another dimension. 

To maintain this dimension, philosophical analysis might 
have sufficed, but it has proved itself to be inadequate, for lack 
of any adequate definition of the unconscious. Psycho-analysis, 
then, reminds us that the facts of human psychology cannot be 
conceived in the absence of the function of the subject denned as 
the effect of the signifier. 

Here the processes are to be articulated, of course, as circular 
between the subject and the Other — from the subject called 
to the Other, to the subject of that which he has himself seen 
appear in the field of the Other, from the Other coming back. 
This process is circular, but, of its nature, without reciprocity. 
Because it is circular, it is disymmetrical. 

You will realize that today I am taking you on to the terrain 
of a logic whose essential importance I hope to stress. 

The whole ambiguity of the sign derives from the fact that it 
represents something for someone. This someone may be many 
things, it may be the entire universe, in as much as we have 
known for some time that information circulates in it, as a 
negative of entropy. Any node in which signs are concentrated, 
in so far as they represent something, may be taken for a some- 
one. What must be stressed at the outset is that a signifier is that 
which represents a subject for another signifier. 

The signifier, producing itself in the field of the Other, makes 
manifest the subject of its signification. But it functions as a 
signifier only to reduce the subject in question to being no more 
than a signifier, to petrify the subject in the same movement in 
which it calls the subject to function, to speak, as subject. There, 
strictly speaking, is the temporal pulsation in which is established 
that which is the characteristic of the departure of the uncon- 
scious as such — the closing. 

One analyst felt this at another level and tried to signify it 
in a term that was new, and which has never been exploited 
since in the field of analysis — apkanisis, disappearance. Ernest 
Jones, who invented it, mistook it for something rather absurd, 
the fear of seeing desire disappear. Now, apkanisis is to be 
situated in a more radical way at the level at which the subject 

207 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

manifests himself in this movement of disappearance that I 
have described as lethal. In a quite different way, I have called 
this movement the fading of the subject. 

I wish to dwell on this for a moment in order to convey to 
you to what extent it is always possible to find oneself again in 
concrete experience, and even in observation, on condition that 
this key is used to lift the veil of blindness. I will show you this 
by means of an example. 

The Piagetic error — for those who might think that this is 
a neologism, I would stress that I am referring to Monsieur 
Piaget — is an error that lies in the notion of what is called the 
egocentric discourse of the child, defined as he stage at which he 
lacks what this Alpine psychology calls reciprocity. Reciprocity 
is very far from the horizon of what we mean at that particular 
moment, and the notion of egocentric discourse is a misunder- 
standing. The child, in this discourse, which may be tape- 
recorded, does not speak for himself, as one says. No doubt, he 
does not address the other, if one uses here the theoretical dis- 
tinction derived from the function of the /and thej>o«. But there 
must be others there — it is while all these little fellows are there, 
indulging all together, for example, in little games of oper- 
ations, as they are provided with in certain methods of so-called 
active education, it is there that they speak — they don't speak 
to a particular person, they just speak, if you'll pardon the 
expression, a la cantonade. 1 

This egocentric discourse is a case of hail to the good listener I 

What we find once again here is the constitution of the sub- 
ject in the field of the Other, as I have designated it for you in 
this little arrow on the blackboard. If he is apprehended at his 
birth in the field of the Other, the characteristic of the subject 
of the unconscious is that of being, beneath the signifier that 
develops its networks, its chains and its history, at an indeter- 
minate place. 

More than one dream element, indeed almost all, may be the 
point at which we will variously situate him in interpretation. 
If one thinks that one may make him say whatever one wishes, 
one has understood nothing — but one must admit that psycho- 

1 To speak 'a la cantonade' is to speak to nobody in particular, to the 
company at large. By stressing the first letters of the phrase, Lacan is 
punning on his own name [Tr.]. 

208 



ALIENATION 

analysts do not explain themselves very well. Interpretation 
cannot be bent to any meaning. It designates only a single 
series of signifiers. But the subject may in effect occupy various 
places, depending on whether one places him under one or 
other of these signifiers. 

I now come to the two operations that I intend to articulate 
today in the relation between the subject and the Other. 

3 
The rim process, the circular process, the relation in question 
is to be supported by the small losange that I used as algorithm 
in my graph precisely because it is necessary in integrating 
some of the finished products of this dialectic. 

It is impossible not to integrate it, for example, in phantasy 
itself — itis$ a [barred S, punch, petit a]. It is impossible not to 
integrate it also in that radical node in which are conjoined 
demand and drive, designated by the $QD [barred S, punch, 
capital D], which might be called the cry. 

Let us keep with this little losange. It is a rim, a functioning 
rim. One has only to provide it with a vectorial direction, here 
anti-clockwise — this is governed by the fact that, at least in 
our writing, you read things from left to right. 



A 
V 



Be careful ! They are supports for your thought that are not 
without artifice, but there is no topology that does not have to be 
supported by some artifice — it is precisely the result of the fact 
that the subject depends on the signifier, in other words, on a 
certain impotence in your thinking. 

The small V of the lower half of the losange, let us say here 
that it is the vel constituted by the first operation, where I 
wish to leave you for a moment. 

Indeed, you may find that these things are all rather silly. 
But logic always is a bit silly. If one does not go to the root of 
the childish, one is inevitably precipitated into stupidity, as can 
be shown by innumerable examples, such as the supposed 

209 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

antinomies of reason, for example, the catalogue of all the 
catalogues that do not include themselves, and one arrives at 
an impasse, which, I can't think why, gives logicians vertigo. 
Yet the solution is very simple, it is that the signifier with which 
one designates the same signifier is evidently not the same 
signifier as the one with which one designates the other — this 
is obvious enough. The word obsolete, in so far as it may signify 
that the word obsolete is itself an obsolete word, is not the same 
word obsolete in each case. This ought to encourage us to develop 
this pel that I have introduced to you. 

The subject is grounded in the vel of the first essential oper- 
ation. To be sure, it is not at all without interest to develop it 
here, before so vast an audience, since it is a question of nothing 
less than that operation that we call alienation. 

One has to admit that there is a lot of this alienation about 
nowadays. Whatever one does, one is always a bit more 
alienated, whether in economics, politics, psycho-pathology, 
aesthetics, and so on. It may be no bad thing to see what the 
root of this celebrated alienation really is. 

Does it mean, as I seem to be saying, that the subject is con- 
demned to seeing himself emerge, in initio, only in the field of 
the Other? Could it be that? Well, it isn't. Not at all— not at 
all — not at all. 

Alienation consists in this vel, which — if you do not object 
to the word condemned, I will use it — condemns the subject to 
appearing only in that division which, it seems to me, I have 
just articulated sufficiently by saying that, if it appears on one 
side as meaning, produced by the signifier, it appears on the 
other as aphanisis. 

There is a vel that is worth illustrating, in order to differ- 
entiate it from the other uses of the vel, of the or. There are two 
of them. You know, from your earliest lessons in logic, that 
there is the exclusive vel — I go either there or there — if I go 
there, I do not go there, I have to choose. There is another way 
of using vel — I go to one side or the other, I don't care, one's 
as good as the other. These two vels are not alike. Well, there 
is a third, and in order not to mislead you, I will tell you 
straight away what it is intended for. 

Symbolic logic, which is very useful in bringing a little light 
into so tricky a domain, teaches us to distinguish the impli- 

sio 



ALIENATION 

cations of the operation that we call joining. To speak as one 
speaks when it is a question of sets, adding two collections 
together is not identical to joining them. If in this circle, that 
on the left, there are five objects, and if, in the other, there are 
also five — adding them together makes ten. But some of them 
may belong to both circles. If there are two that belong to each 
of the two circles, joining them together will in this instance 
consist not in doubling their number — there will be in all only 
eight objects. I apologize if I am being naive in reminding you 
of this, but it is in order to give you the notion that this vel that 
I will try to articulate for you is supported only on the logical 
form of joining. 

The vel of alienation is defined by a choice whose properties 




Alienation 



depend on this, that there is, in the joining, one element that, 
whatever the choice operating may be, has as its consequence 
a neither one, nor the other. The choice, then, is a matter of knowing 
whether one wishes to preserve one of the parts, the other dis- 
appearing in any case. 

Let us illustrate this with what we are dealing with here, 
namely, the being of the subject, that which is there beneath 
the meaning. If we choose being, the subjectdisappears.it eludes 
us, it falls into non-meaning. If we choose meaning, the meaning 
survives only deprived of that part of non-meaning that is, 
strictly speaking, that which constitutes in the realization of 
the subject, the unconscious. In other words, it is of the nature 
of this meaning, as it emerges in the field of the Other, to be in 
a large part of its field, eclipsed by the disappearance of being, 
induced by the very function of the signifier. 

211 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

This, as I have said, has a quite direct implication that passes 
all too often unperceived — when I tell you what it is, you will 
see that it is obvious, but for all that it is not usually noticed. 
One of the consequences is that interpretation is not limited to 
providing us with the significations of the way taken by the 
psyche that we have before us. This implication is no more 
than a prelude. Interpretation is directed not so much at the 
meaning as towards reducing the non-meaning of the signifiers, 
so that we may rediscover the determinants of the subject's entire 
behaviour. 

I would ask you to refer to what my pupil Leclaire contri- 
buted, at the Congres de Bonneval, by way of an application of 
my theses. You will see in his contribution that he isolated the 
sequence of the unicorn, not, as was thought in the discussion, 




in its significatory dependence, but precisely in its irreducible 
and senseless character qua chain of signifiers. 

One cannot emphasise too strongly the importance of some 
such thing as I have just described for you here. This alienating 
or is not an arbitrary invention, nor is it a matter of how one sees 
things. It is a part of language itself. This or exists. It is so much 
a part of language that one should distinguish it when one is 
dealing with linguistics. I will give you an example at once. 

Tour money or your life! If I choose the money, I lose both. If I 
choose life, I have life without the money, namely, a life de- 
prived of something. I think I have made myself clear. 

It is in Hegel that I have found a legitimate justification for 
the term alienating vel. What does Hegel mean by it? To cut a 
long story short, it concerns the production of the primary 
alienation, that by which man enters into the way of slavery. 
Your freedom or your life! If he chooses freedom, he loses both 
immediately — if he chooses life, he has life deprived of freedom. 

There must be something special about this. This something 

212 



ALIENATION 

special we shall call the lethal factor. This factor is present in 
certain divisions shown us by the play of signifiers that we some- 
times see at play at the heart of life itself — these are called 
chromosomes, and it sometimes happens that there is one 
among them that has a lethal function. We shall find a parallel 
to this function in a rather peculiar statement, by introducing 
death itself into one of these fields. 

For example, freedom or death! There, because death comes 
into play, there occurs an effect with a rather different structure. 
This is because, in both cases, I will have both. Freedom, after 
all, as you know, is like the celebrated freedom to work, for 
which the French Revolution, it seems, was fought. It can also 
be the freedom to die of hunger — in fact, that's what it 
amounted to throughout the nineteenth century, which is why, 
since then, certain principles have had to be revised. You 
choose freedom. Well! You've got freedom to die. Curiously 
enough, in the conditions in which someone says to you, freedom 
or death!, the only proof of freedom that you can have in the 
conditions laid out before you is precisely to choose death, for 
there, you show that you have freedom of choice. 

At this moment, which is also a Hegelian moment, for it is 
what is called the Terror, this quite different division is in- 
tended to make clear for you what is, in this field, the essence 
of the alienating vel, the lethal factor. 

4 
Given the time, I can do no more here than introduce the 
second operation. It completes the circularity of the relation of 
the subject to the Other, but an essential twist is revealed in it. 

Whereas the first phase is based on the sub-structure of 
joining, the second is based on the sub-structure that is called 
intersection or product. It is situated precisely in that same 
lunula in which you find the form of the gap, the rim. 

The intersection of two sets is constituted by the elements 
that belong to the two sets. It is here that the second operation in 
which the subject is led by this dialectic takes place. It is as 
essential to define the second operation as the first, because it 
is there that we shall see the emergence of the field of the trans- 
ference. I shall call it — introducing my second new term here 
— separation. 

213 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

Separare, to separate — I would point out at once the equivo- 
cation of the separare, of the separer, in all the fluctuating mean- 
ings it has in French. It means not only to dress oneself, but 
also to defend oneself, to provide oneself with what one needs 
to be on one's guard, and I will go further still, and Latinists 
will bear me out, to the se parere, the s'engendrer, the to be en- 
gendered, which is involved here. How, at this level, has the sub- 
ject to procure himself? For that is the origin of the word that 
designates in Latin to engender. It is juridical, as indeed, curiously 
enough, are all the words in Indo-European that designate to 
put into the world. The word parturition itself originates in a word 
which, in its root, simply means to procure a child from the 
husband — a juridical and, it should be said, social operation. 

Next time, I shall try to show how, like the function of the 
alienating vel, so different from the other vels defined so far, use 
is to be made of this notion of intersection. We shall see how it 
emerges from the superimposition of two lacks. 

A lack is encountered by the subject in the Other, in the very 
intimation that the Other makes to him by his discourse. In the 
intervals of the discourse of the Other, there emerges in the 
experience of the child something that is radically mappable, 
namely, He is saying this to me, but what does he want? 

In this interval intersecting the signifiers, which forms part 
of the very structure of the signifier, is the locus of what, in 
other registers of my exposition, I have called metonymy. It is 
there that what we call desire crawls, slips, escapes, like the 
ferret. The desire of the Other is apprehended by the subject 
in that which does not work, in the lacks of the discourse of the 
Other, and all the child's whys reveal not so much an avidity 
for the reason of things, as a testing of the adult, a Why are you 
telling me this? ever-resuscitated from its base, which is the 
enigma of the adult's desire. 

Now, to reply to this hold, the subject, like Gribouille, brings 
the answer of the previous lack, of his own disappearance, 
which he situates here at the point of lack perceived in the Other. 
The first object he proposes for this parental desire whose object 
is unknown is his own loss — Can he lose me? The phantasy of 
one's death, of one's disappearance, is the first object that the 
subject has to bring into play in this dialectic, and he does 
indeed bring it into play — as we know from innumerable cases, 

214 



ALIENATION 

such as in anorexia nervosa. We also know that the phantasy 
of one's death is usually manipulated by the child in his love 
relations with his parents. 

One lack is superimposed upon the other. The dialectic of the 
objects of desire, in so far as it creates the link between the desire 
of the subject and the desire of the Other — I have been telling 
you for a long time now that it is one and the same — this 
dialectic now passes through the fact that the desire is not 
replied to directly. It is a lack engendered from the previous 
time that serves to reply to the lack raised by the following 
time. 

I think I have sufficiently stressed the two elements that I 
have tried to present today, in this new and fundamental 
logical argument — non-reciprocity and the twist in the return. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
J. -A. Miller : Do you not wish to show, all the same, that the 
alienation of a subject who has received the definition of being born in, 
constituted by, and ordered in a field that is exterior to him, is to be dis- 
tinguished radically from the alienation of a consciousness-of-self? In 
short, are we to understand — Lacan against Hegel? 

Lacan : What you have just said is very good, it's exacdy 
the opposite of what Green just said to me — he came up to me, 
shook my paw, at least morally, and said, The death of structural- 
ism, you are the son of Hegel. I don't agree. I think that in saying 
Lacan against Hegel, you are much closer to the truth, though 
of course it is not at all a philosophical debate. 
Dr. Green: The sons kill the fathers! 

27 May 1964 



2'5 



i7 



THE SUBJECT AND THE OTHER: 
APHANISIS 

The question of the Vorstellungsreprasentanz • Freedom • Repre- 
sentation and the Hegelian lure • Descartes' desire • Scepticism, certainty 
and the subject who is supposed to know • Small letters • The value of 
the Pavlovian experiment 

Whenlsaid, at the beginning of these talks — Ido not seek, I find, 
I meant that, in Freud's field, one has only to bend down 
and pick up what is to be found. The real implication of the 
nachtraglich, for example, has been ignored, though it was there 
all the time and had only to be picked up. I also remember the 
surprise of someone who was on the same track as I, seeing one 
day what could be done with the einziger Z u i> the single stroke. 
Today I would like to show you the importance, already 
designated by my schema last time, of what Freud calls, at the 
level of repression, the Vorstellungsreprasentanz. 



Vorstellung invoves a sort of defect that leads the German 
language to put unwarranted ss, which cannot be attached to 
the normal declension of the determinate, but which are neces- 
sary to it when forming composite words. There are therefore 
two terms — Vorstellung, Reprasentanz. 

I spoke to you last time about the form of alienation, which I 
illustrated with several examples, and which I told you could 
be articulated in a vel of a very special nature. Today we might 
try to articulate it in some other ways. For example — not 
something . . . without something else. The dialectic of the slave 
is obviously no freedom without life, but there will be no life for 
him without freedom. From one to the other there is a necessary 
condition. This necessary condition becomes precisely the ade- 
quate reasons that, causes the loss of the original requirement. 

216 



APHANISIS 

Perhaps this is something like what also happens among some 
of my followers. There is no way of following me without passing 
through my signifiers, but to pass through my signifiers involves 
this feeling of alienation that incites them to seek, according to 
Freud's formula the small difference. Unfortunately, this small 
difference makes them lose the full significance of the direction 
I pointed out to them. Heavens, I am not so touchy, I leave 
everyone to go his own way in the direction that I point out 
— but I could have done without having to take note of what 
seemed to a particular individual so worthy of rectification in 
the translation that I had first given of this Vorstellungsreprdsentanz. 

I had noted that Freud stresses the fact that repression bears 
on something that is of the order of representation that he calls 
the Vorstellungsreprdsentanz. 

As soon as I introduced this remark several years ago — 
which was also a way of reading what Freud writes under the 
heading of Verdrdngung, the article that follows the one on the 
unconscious in the series of texts collected together under the 
term metapsychological — I insisted on the fact that Freud em- 
phasizes that it is not the affect that is repressed. The affect 
— and we shall see what this means in our theory — goes off 
somewhere else, as best it can. There will always be enough 
professors of psychology to justify with the patient that its 
meaning is to be found precisely where it is no longer in its 
place. So I inisited on the fact that what is repressed is not the 
represented of desire, the signification, but the representative 
{le reprisentant) — I translated literally — of the representation {de la 
representation). 

Here the function of alienation intervenes for this or that 
individual, who, more or less animated by a care for the privi- 
leges of university authority, and anxious to enter the lists, 
claims to correct the translation that I have given. The Vor- 
stellungsreprdsentanz is the representative representative (le reprisentant 
reprisentatif), let us say. 

This doesn't seem to amount to very much. But in a little book 
on psycho-somatics that has just appeared, one finds a whole 
passage arguing that there is some misunderstanding in some- 
thing that must be called my theory of desire and, in a small 
note referring to some inaccessible passage taken from the text 
offered by two of my pupils, it is stressed that, following me, 

217 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

they make desire the representative representative of need. 
I'm not questioning whether in fact my pupils wrote that — we 
have been unable to find the passage in question — the im- 
portant thing is that the only pertinent remark in this extremely 
slight book is as follows — we would say rather that desire is the non- 
representative representative. 

Now, that is precisely what I mean, and say — for what I 
mean, I say — in translating Vorstellungsreprasentanz by repre- 
sentative of the representation. 

We can locate this Vorstellungsreprasentanz in our schema of 
the original mechanisms of alienation in that first signifying 
coupling that enables us to conceive that the subject appears 
first in the Other, in so far as the first signifier, the unary 
signifier, emerges in the field of the Other and represents the 
subject for another signifier, which other signifier has as its 
effect the apkanisis of the subject. Hence the division of the 
subject — when the subject appears somewhere as meaning, he 
is manifested elsewhere as 'fading', as disappearance. There is, 
then, one might say, a matter of life and death between the 
unary signifier and the subject, qua binary signifier, cause of his 
disappearance. The Vorstellungsreprasentanz is the binary signi- 
fier. 

This signifier constitutes the central point of the Urver- 
drdngung — of what, from having passed into the unconscious, 
will be, as Freud indicates in his theory, the point of Anziehung, 
the point of attraction, through which all the other repressions 
will be possible, all the other similar passages in the locus of the 
Unterdruckt, of what has passed underneath as signifier. This is 
what is involved in the term Vorstellungsreprasentanz. 

That by which the subject finds the return way of the vel of 
alienation is the operation I called, the other day, separation. 
By separation, the subject finds, one might say, the weak point 
of the primal dyad of the signifying articulation, in so far as it is 
alienating in essence. It is in the interval between these two 
signifiers that resides the desire offered to the mapping of the 
subject in the experience of the discourse of the Other, of the 
first Other he has to deal with, let us say, by way of illustration, 
the mother. It is in so far as his desire is beyond or falls short of 
what she says, of what she hints at, of what she brings out as 
meaning, it is in so far as his desire is unknown, it is in this 

218 



APHANISIS 

point of lack, that the desire of the subject is constituted. The 
subject — by a process that is not without deception, which is 
not without presenting that fundamental twist by which what 
the subject rediscovers is not that which animates his move- 
ment of rediscovery — comes back, then, to the initial point, 
which is that of his lack as such, of the lack of his apkanisis. 

We will come back in greater detail to the consequences that 
flow from it for the analytic treatment itself, and we shall see 
that this twist effect is essential in integrating the emergence 
phase of the transference. For the moment, I would like to 
dwell on what is essential in the function of desire, namely, that 
it is in as much as the subject plays his part in separation that 
the binary signifier, the Vorstellungsreprasentanz, is unterdriickt, 
sunk underneath. 

The thing is essential if we are to articulate properly — it 
immediately throws some light on very different regions — what 
is the sign of interpretation. 

It might be useful in passing to bring out — however meta- 
physical it may seem, but in any case our technique often makes 
use, as if it were self-evident, of the expression to free something 
— it might be useful to remark that it is there that the whole 
business of this term freedom, which certainly merits the des- 
cription of phantom, is played out. What the subject has to free 
himself of is the aphanisic effect of the binary signifier and, if 
we look at it more closely, we shall see that in fact it is a ques- 
tion of nothing else in the function of freedom. 

It is not for nothing that having had to justify the term vel of 
alienation at the level of our experience, the two most obvious 
supports to occur to us were those two choices which, by their 
formula, structure, firstly, the position of the slave and, secondly, 
the position of the master. When the slave is confronted with the 
choice of his freedom or his life, he decides, no freedom without 
life — life remains forever deprived of freedom. And, when we 
stand back to look at things, we will see that the alienation of 
the master is structured in exactly the same way. For if Hegel 
shows us that the status of the master is established in the struggle 
to the death of pure prestige, it is because it is to bring his 
choice through death that the master also constitutes his funda- 
mental alienation. 

Certainly, one can say that the master is no more spared by 

219 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

death than is his slave, that he will always die in the end, and 
that this is the limit of his freedom. But to say this is insufficient 
for this death is not the death that constitutes the alienating 
choice of the master, the death of the struggle to the death of 
pure prestige. The revelation of the essence of the master is 
manifested at the moment of terror, when it is to him that one 
says freedom or death, and then he has obviously only death to 
choose in order to have freedom. The supreme image of the 
master is that character in Glaudelian tragedy, Sygne de 
Coufontaine, of whom I have spoken at length in one of my 
seminars. It is she who wished to abandon nothing of her 
register, the register of the master, and the values to which she 
sacrifices bring her, over and above her sacrifice, no more 
than the need to renounce, in all its depths, her very being. 
It is in so far as, through the sacrifice of these values, she is 
forced to renounce her essence, her very being, her most intimate 
being, that she illustrates, in the end, how much radical aliena- 
tion of freedom there is in the master himself. 



Do I need to stress that we must understand Reprasentanz here 
in the sense in which things happens at the real level, where 
communication takes place in every human domain. 

We mean by representatives what we understand when we 
use the phrase, for example, the representative of France. What 
do diplomats do when they address one another ? They simply 
exercise, in relation to one another, that function of being pure 
representatives and, above all, their own signification must not 
intervene. When diplomats are addressing one another, they 
are supposed to represent something whose signification, while 
constantly changing, is, beyond their own persons, France, 
Britain, etc. In the very exchange of views, each must record 
only what the other transmits in his pure function as signifier, 
he must not take into account what the other is, qua presence, 
as a man who is likable to a greater or lesser degree. Inter- 
psychology is an impurity in this exchange. 

The term Reprasentanz is to be taken in this sense. The signifier 
has to be understood in this way, it is at the opposite pole from 
signification. Signification, on die other hand, comes into play 
in the Vorstellung. 

220 



APHANISIS 

It is with the Vorstellung that we are dealing in psychology, 
when the objects of the world are taken in charge, in some way, 
under the parenthesis of a subject in which a whole series of a, 
a', a", etc., unfolds. Here is situated the subjectivity on which 
the theory of knowledge is suspended. Of course, every repre- 
sentation requires a subject, but this subject is never a pure 
subject. If one believes that each subject is sustained in the world 
with his original — in both senses of the word (originate ou 
originelle) — Weltanschauung, then the path of truth passes — as a 
backward psychology or psycho-sociology is still showing us 
— through the inquiry, the totalization, the statistics of dif- 
ferent Weltanschauung. And things might be thus, were there in 
the world subjects, each entrusted with the task of representing 
certain conceptions of the world. 

Indeed, this is the essential flaw in philosophical idealism 
which, in any case, cannot be sustained and has never been 
radically sustained. There is no subject without, somewhere, 
aphanisis of the subject, and it is in this alienation, in this funda- 
mental division, that the dialectic of the subject is established. 

In order to answer the question I was asked last time con- 
cerning my adhesion to the Hegelian dialectic, is it not enough 
that I should answer that, because of the vel, the sensitive point, 
point of balance, there is an emergence of the subject at the level 
of meaning only from its aphanisis in the Other locus, which is 
that of the unconscious ? Furthermore, this involves no media- 
tion, and I promise, if I am provoked into doing so, to show that 
the effective experience that has been established in the per- 
spective of an absolute knowledge never leads us to anything 
that may, in any way, illustrate the Hegelian vision of succes- 
sive syntheses, nothing that provides even so much as a hint of 
the moment that Hegel in some obscure way links to this stage, 
and which someone has been pleased to illustrate by the tide of 
Dimanche de la vie — when no opening remains in the heart of 
the subject. 

I should indicate here where the Hegelian lure proceeds 
from. It is included in the approach of the Cartesian I think, in 
which I designated the inaugural point that introduces, in 
history, in our experience, in our necessity, the vel of alienation, 
which prevents us for ever from misunderstanding it. It is in 
the Cartesian approach that the vel was taken for the first time 

221 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

as the constituent of the dialectic of the subject, which now 
cannot be eliminated in his radical foundation. 

This reference will be useful to me in characterizing the 
experience of the transference, so I shall be returning to it later 
in order to articulate certain of its features. 

3 

What distinguishes the Cartesian approach from the ancient 
search of the episteme, what distinguishes it from the scepticism 
that has been one of its terms, is what we shall try to articulate 
on the basis of the double function of alienation and separation. 

What is Descartes looking for? He is looking for certainty. 
I have, he says, an extreme desire to learn to distinguish the true from the 
false — note the word desire — in order to see clearly — in what? — 
in my actions, and to walk with assurance in this life. 

Is not this something quite different from the aim of know- 
ledge ? This approach is not that of a dialectician or a pro- 
fessor, still less that of a cavalier. It has been stressed that 
Descartes' biography is marked above all by his wanderings in 
the world, his encounters and, after all, his secret ambition — 
Larvatus prodeo. If I point this out, although I am one of those 
who regard concern for biography as secondary to the meaning 
of a work, it is because Descartes himself stresses that his biog- 
raphy, his approach, is essential to the communication of his 
method, of the way he has found to truth. 

He makes it quite clear that what he has given is not — as 
Bacon tried to do some years earlier — the general means of 
conducting one's reason correctly, without abdicating it, for 
example, to experience. It is his own method, in so far as he set 
out in this direction with the desire to learn to distinguish the 
true from the false in order to see clearly — in what? — in my 
actions. This example, then, is a particular one, and Descartes 
goes so far as to add that if what was for me, at a particular 
moment, my way, does not seem right for others, that is their 
affair, that they should gather from my experience what they 
think is worth gathering. This forms part of the introduction 
by Descartes of his own way to science. 

Does this mean that no knowledge is aimed at? Does it mean 
that knowledge weighs lightly in Descartes? Not at all, it is 
with this that he begins — there's enough knowledge around 

222 



APHANISIS 

and to spare, there always has been, there still is. It is not I who 
have imposed this allusion here, but Descartes' own text. He 
was trained by the best teachers, he was a pupil of the Jesuits 
at the College de La Fleche and there was no lack of knowledge, 
or of sapience, there. 

Shall I go so far as to say that it is not for nothing, that it is 
precisely a result of his Jesuit education, that he acquired his 
acute feeling of the superabundance of knowledge? Is there not 
at the heart of what is transmitted through a certain humanist 
wisdom something like a hidden perinde ac cadaver, which is not 
where it is usually placed, namely, in the supposed death that 
the rule of St Ignatius seems to require? Personally, I don't feel 
very close to it, and these Jesuits, as I myself see them, from the 
outside, always seem to me to be very much there, not to say 
full of life — they make their presence felt, and with a diversity 
that is far from suggesting that of death. No, the death referred 
to here is that which is hidden behind the very notion of 
humanism, at the heart of any humanist consideration. And 
even when an attempt is made to animate the term as in the 
phrase the human sciences, there is something that we shall call a 
skeleton in the cupboard. 

It is here that Descartes finds a new way. His aim is not to 
refute uncertain knowledge. He is happy to let such knowledge 
run around quite freely, and with it all the rules of social life. 
Indeed, like everyone at this historical moment at the be- 
ginning of the seventeenth century, in that inaugural moment 
of the emergence of the subject, he has present all around him 
a profusion of libertines who serve as the other term of the 
vel of alienation. They are in reality Pyrrhonians, sceptics, 
and Pascal calls them by their name, except that he does 
not stress in a sufficiently free way its meaning and implications. 
Scepticism does not mean the successive doubting, item by 
item, of all opinions or of all the pathways that accede to know- 
ledge. It is holding the subjective position that one can know 
nothing. There is something here that deserves to be illustrated 
by the range, the substance, of those who have been its historical 
embodiments. I would show you that Montaigne is truly the 
one who has centred himself, not around scepticism but around 
the living moment of the aphanisis of the subject. And it is in 
this that he is fruitful, that he is an eternal guide, who goes 

223 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

beyond whatever may be represented of the moment to be 
denned as a historical turning-point. But this is not scepticism. 
Scepticism is something that we no longer know. Scepticism is 
an ethic. Scepticism is a mode of sustaining man in life, which 
implies a position so difficult, so heroic, that we can no longer 
even imagine it — precisely perhaps because of this passage 
found by Descartes, which led the search for the path of cer- 
tainty to this very point of the vel of alienation, to which there 
is only one exit — the way of desire. 

This desire for certainty led Descartes only to doubt — the 
choice of this way led him to operate a rather strange separation. 
I would simply like to touch on a few points, which will serve as 
reference points in grasping an essential function, masked 
though it may be, which is still vital, present and directive in 
our method of investigating the unconscious. 

4 
Certainty, for Descartes, is not a moment that one may regard 
as acquired, once it has been crossed. Each time and by each 
person it has to be repeated. It is an ascesis. It is a point of 
orientation that is particularly difficult to sustain in the in- 
cisiveness that makes its value. It is, strictly speaking, the estab- 
lishment of something separate. 

When Descartes introduces the concept of a certainty that 
holds entirely in the / think of cogitation, marked by this point 
of non-exit that exists between the annihilation of knowledge 
and scepticism, which are not the same thing — one might say 
that his mistake is to believe that this is knowledge. To say that 
he knows something of this certainty. Not to make of the I think 
a mere point of fading. But it is because he has done something 
quite different, which concerns the field, which he does not 
name, in which all this knowledge wanders about — all this 
knowledge which he had said should be placed in a radical 
suspension. He puts the field of this knowledge at the level of 
this vaster subject, the subject who is supposed to know, God. 
You know that Descartes could not help reintroducing the pres- 
ence of God. But in what a strange way! 

It is here that the question of the eternal verities arises. In 
order to assure himself that he is not confronted by a deceiving 
God, he has to pass through the medium of a God — indeed, in 

224 



APHANISIS 

his register, it is a question not so much of a perfect, as of an 
infinite being. Does Descartes, then, remain caught, as everyone 
up to him did, on the need to guarantee all scientific research 
on the fact that actual science exists somewhere, in an existing 
being, called God? — that is to say, on the fact that God is 
supposed to know ? 

It may seem that I am taking you a long way from the field 
of our experience, and yet — I would remind you, both by way 
of an apology and in order to maintain your attention at the 
level of our experience — the subject who is supposed to know, 
in analysis, is the analyst. 

Next time, we shall discuss, in terms of the function of the 
transference, how it is that we have no need of the idea of a 
perfect, infinite being — who would dream of attributing these 
qualities to his analyst? — to introduce the function of the sub- 
ject who is supposed to know. 

Let us go back to our Descartes, and to his subject who is 
supposed to know. How does he get rid of it? Well, as you know, 
by his voluntarism, by the primacy given to the will of God. 
This is certainly one of the most extraordinary sleights of hand 
that has ever been carried off in the history of the mind — the 
eternal verities are eternal because God wishes them to be. 

I think you will appreciate the elegance of such a solution, 
which leaves a whole portion of the truths, in particular the 
eternal truths, in God's charge. Let us be quite clear about this, 
what Descartes means, and says, is that if two and two make 
four it is, quite simply, because God wishes it so. It is his busi- 
ness. 

Now, it is true that it is his business and that two and two 
make four is not something that can be taken for granted with- 
out his presence. 

I'm going to try to illustrate what I mean here. When 
Descartes speaks to us of his process, of his method, of clear ideas 
and confused ideas, simple ideas and complex ideas, he places 
the order to be followed between these two terms of his method. 
It is very possible after all that one plus one plus one plus one do 
not make four and I must tell you that what I am articulating 
the vel of alienation on is a good example of it. For, in the cardinal 
order, this would give more or less something like the following: 

i +(i +(i +(, + (...)))). 
225 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

Whenever a new term is introduced, one always runs the risk 
of letting one or several of the others slip between one's fingers. 
In order to reach four, what matters is not the cardinal but the 
ordinal. There is a first mental operation to be carried out and 
then a second, then a third, then a fourth. If you do not do them 
in the right order, you fail. To know whether, in the last resort, 
it makes three, or four, or two, is of secondary importance. 
That's God's business. 

What Descartes now introduces, and which is illustrated at 
once, for, at the same time as his discourse on method he intro- 
duces his geometry and his dioptrics, is this — he substitutes the 
small letters, a, b, c, etc., of his algebra for the capital letters. 
The capital letters, if you will, are the letters of the Hebrew 
alphabet with which God created the world and to each of 
which, as you know, there corresponds a number. The differ- 
ence between Descartes' small letters and the capital letters is 
that Descartes' small letters do not have a number — they are 
interchangeable and only the order of the commutations will 
define their process. 

To show you that the presence of the Other is already im- 
plied in number, I need only point out to you that the series of 
numbers can only be figured by introducing the zero, in a more 
or less masked way. Now, the zero is the presence of the subject 
who, at this level, totalizes. We cannot extract it from the 
dialectic of the subject and the Other. The apparent neutrality 
of this field conceals the presence of desire as such. I will illus- 
trate this simply by a return effect. However, we should take a 
few more steps forward in the function of desire. 

In effect, Descartes inaugurates the initial bases of a science 
in which God has nothing to do. For the characteristic of our 
science, and its difference with the ancient sciences, is that 
nobody even dares, without incurring ridicule, to wonder 
whether God knows anything about it, whether God leafs 
through modern treatises on mathematics to keep up to 
date. 

I have gone far enough today, and I apologize for not going 
further. I will leave you at this point, and do no more than 
indicate for you the last aim of my discourse for this year — 
namely, to pose the question of the position of psycho-analysis 
in science. Can psycho-analysis be situated in our science, in 

226 



APHANISIS 

so far as this science is considered as that in which God has 
nothing to do? 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

Dr Green : Is there not a way of articulating the question of the 
Vorstellungsreprasentanz in what you said later — in particular, on 
the basis of the relation between the subject and the mirror, in so far as 
this relation refers the subject to the subject who is supposed to know, 
who is in the mirror? 

Lacan : Mmm . . . Well ... I cannot follow you in this 
direction — because I think it's a short circuit. 

The point at which the plug of the Vorstellungsreprasentanz is 
connected — and this is of great importance to what I have said 
today — is the point that I told you was the virtual point of the 
function of freedom, in as much as the choice, the vtl, is mani- 
fested there between the signifier and the subject. I illustrated 
it with an opening on what might be called the avatars of this 
freedom, which, in the final resort, is never, of course, discovered 
by any serious individual. I then passed on to Descartes, who 
is scarcely concerned with it at all, except in act. His own par- 
ticular freedom takes the form of action, of the way in Which he 
finds his certainty. This does not mean that he leaves it to us 
like a bank account. 

Next time, I must return again to the locus of the Vor- 
stellungsreprasentanz, before I introduce, at the level of the trans- 
ference, the terms that I was forced to introduce today concern- 
ing the function of the Other. They seem to be things very far 
removed from our domain. I am referring to the psycho- 
somatic. 

The psycho-somatic is something that is not a signifier, but 
which, nevertheless, is conceivable in so far as the signifying 
induction at the level of the subject has occurred in a way that 
does not bring into play the aphanisis of the subject. 

In the small work I referred to earlier, and you can sample 
for yourselves how much useless chatter it contains, is to be 
found nevertheless an important little remark — though it 
claims to refute, not me, I, thank God, am not involved, but 
those who speak in my name — to the effect that desire is not 
representative of need. In this place, the Vorstellungsreprasentanz 
will considerably limit the play of our interpretation for the 

227 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

reason that the subject, qua aphanisis, is not concerned in it. It 
is in so far as a need will come to be concerned in the function 
of desire that the psycho-somatic may be conceived as some- 
thing other than the mere chatter that consists in saying that 
there is a psychical lining to whatever happens in the somatic 
field. We have known this for a long time now. If we speak of 
the psycho-somatic, it is in so far as desire must intervene in it. 
It is in so far as the link known as desire is preserved here, even 
if we can no longer take account of the aphanisis function of the 
subject. 

I would like to convey to you, since I am on this terrain, 
what is in question in the conditioned reflex. It is not sufficiently 
stressed that the Pavlovian experiment is possible only in as 
much as the exercise of a biological function, that is to say, that 
to which we can attach the unifying, totalizing function of need, 
can be broken down. It can be broken down because more than 
one organ is involved in it. Once you have made your dog 
salivate at the sight of a piece of meat, your next job is to 
interrupt the process at the point of secretion, and to show that 
this point is articulable with something that functions as a 
signifier, since it is made by the experimenter. In other words, 
the Other is there. 

But this proves absolutely nothing about the supposed psyche 
of the unfortunate animal. Even the supposed effects of neurosis 
that are obtained are not effects of neurosis, for one simple 
reason — they cannot be analysed by speech. The majorjn- 
terest of these conditioned reflexes is to show us what the animal 
may perceive. We use the signifier — which is not a signifier for 
the animal, but which, in order to see what possible differ- 
ential there is at the level of its perceptum, which, however, does 
not at all mean that it will be the percipiens of that signifier in 
the subjective sense of the word. The main interest of these 
experiments is to show us that differential range of the animal 
at the level of a perception that cannot in any sense be a repre- 
sentation, for there is no other subject here than the subject of 
the experimenter. And this goes much further still. In fact, we 
interrogate the animal about our own perception. This way 
of limiting the scope of the Pavlovian experiments restores 
to them, at the same time, it can be seen, their very great 
importance. 

228 



APHANISIS 

Its effective, scientific benefits are those I have described, and 
they have no other practical use. 

Ultimately, their interest may be to reveal the question that 
is posed to us by the fact that we discover in the animal that 
signifiers — which are ours, since it is we, the experimenters, who 
order them in perception — express among themselves a sort of 
equivalence. 

I am not saying that I have resolved this question by for- 
mulating it. 

Indeed, this sort of equivalence enables us to indicate the 
problem of the realism of number, in a form that is certainly 
not that referred to earlier, when I showed you what question 
is implied in all use of number, which means that arithmetic is 
a science that has been literally barred by the intrusion of alge- 
brism. Here number intervenes as pure frequency, in what we 
can call, by putting things back in place, the Pavlovian signal. 
That is to say, an animal conditioned to a hundred visual 
stimuli a second reacts to a hundred auditory stimuli a second. 
A new question in thus introduced into experimentation. It is 
not yet a question, perhaps, of something to which we might 
give the full status of signifier, except for those of us who are 
counting the frequencies. But, all the same, the fact that the 
animal, without training, passes from a hundred frequencies in 
one register to a hundred frequencies in another, allows us 
perhaps to go a little further concerning the strictly perceptual 
structure. 

I have taken advantage of the question asked to say things 
that I wanted to say and hadn't done so. Let's leave it at that. 

3 June 1964 



229 



i8 

OF THE SUBJECT 

WHO IS SUPPOSED TO KNOW, 

OF THE FIRST DYAD, 

AND OF THE GOOD 



The trust placed in the analyst • Science itself • As soon as there is a 
subject who is supposed to know, there is transference • Belief- Aliena- 
tion apprehended in the fort-da • Alienation in pleasure 

The aim of my teaching has been and still is the training of 
analysts. 

The training of analysts is a subject that is well to the fore- 
front of analytic research. Nevertheless — I have already given 
you evidence of this — in the analytic literature, its principles 
are lost sight of. 

It is clear, in the experience of all those who have passed 
through this training, that in the absence of adequate criteria, 
something that is of the order of ceremony is put in their place 
and — since for the psycho-analyst there is no beyond, no-sub- 
stantial beyond, by which to justify his conviction that he is 
qualified to exercise his function — the substitution, in this 
instance, can be interpreted in only one way — as simulation. 

Yet what he obtains is of incalculable value — the trust of a 
subject as such, and the results that this involves by virtue of a 
certain technique. Now, he does not present himself as a god, 
he is not God for his patient. So what does this trust signify ? 
Around what does it turn ? 

For him who places the trust, and who receives its reward, 
the question can no doubt be ignored. It cannot be for the 
psycho-analyst. The training of the psycho-analyst requires 
that he should know, in the process through which he guides his 
patient, what it is around which the movement turns. He must 
know, to him must be transmitted, through actual experience, 

230 



OF THE SUBJECT WHO IS SUPPOSED TO KNOW 

what it is all about. This pivotal point is what I designate — in 
a way, which, I think, will seem to you sufficiently justified, 
but which, I hope, as we progress, will appear more and more 
clear to you, more and more necessary — it is what I designate 
under the term the desire of the psycho-analyst. 

Last time, I showed you the point of application of the 
Cartesian approach, which, in its origin and in its end, is 
directed essentially not towards science, but towards its own 
certainty. It is at the heart of something that is not science in 
the sense in which, since Plato and before him, it has been the 
object of the meditation of philosophers, but Science itself. 1 
The science in which we are caught up, which forms the 
context of the action of all of us in the time in which we are 
living, and which the psycho-analyst himself cannot escape, 
because it forms part of his conditions too, is Science itself. 

It is in relation to this second science, Science itself, that we 
must situate psycho-analysis. We can do so only by articulating 
upon the phenomenon of the unconscious the revision that we 
have made of the foundation of the Cartesian subject. First, 
today, I shall say something about the phenomenology of the 
transference. 



The transference is a phenomenon in which subject and 
psycho-analyst are both included. To divide it in terms of 
transference and counter-transference — however bold, how- 
ever confident what is said on this theme may be — is never 
more than a way of avoiding the essence of the matter. 

The transference is an essential phenomenon, bound up with 
desire as the nodal phenomenon of the human being — and it 
was discovered long before Freud. It was perfectly articu- 
lated — I took up a large part of a year devoted to the trans- 
ference to showing this — with the most extreme rigour, in a 
text in which the subject of love is discussed, namely, Plato's 
Symposium. 

It is possible that this text was written for the character of 
Socrates, who, nevertheless, is depicted in it in a particularly 

1 Lacan distinguishes between 'science' and 'La science', in which the stress 
is placed on the article. I have translated 'La science' by 'Science itself [Tr]. 

231 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

discreet way. The essential, initial moment that is of particular 
relevance to the question we must ask ourselves about the 
action of the analyst, is that in which it is said that Socrates 
never claimed to know anything, except on the subject of Eros, 
that is to say, desire. By this fact alone, and because, in the 
Symposium, he goes further than anywhere else in showing us 
the signification of comedy in his dialogues, carrying it even to 
the point of farce, Plato could not fail to show us, in the most 
precise way, the place of the transference. 

As soon as the subject who is supposed to know exists some- 
where — I have abbreviated it for you today at the top of the 
blackboard as S.S.S. (sujet suppose" savoir) there is transference. 

What does an organization of psycho-analysts mean when it 
confers certificates of ability, if not that it indicates to whom 
one may apply to represent this subject who is supposed to 
know? 

Now, it is quite certain, as everyone knows, that no psycho- 
analyst can claim to represent, in however slight a way, a 
corpus of absolute knowledge. That is why, in a sense, it can be 
said that if there is someone to whom one can apply there can 
be only one such person. This one was Freud, while he was alive. 
The fact that Freud, on the subject of the unconscious, was 
legitimately the subject that one could presume to know, sets 
aside anything that had to do with the analytic relation, when 
it was initiated, by his patients, with him. 

He was not only the subject who was supposed to know^ He 
did know, and he gave us this knowledge in terms that may be 
said to be indestructible, in as much as, since they were first 
communicated, they support an interrogation which, up to the 
present day, has never been exhausted. No progress has been 
made, however small, that has not deviated whenever one of 
the terms around which Freud ordered the ways that he traced, 
and the paths of the unconscious, has been neglected. This 
shows us clearly enough what the function of the subject who is 
supposed to know is all about. 

The function, and by the same token, the consequence, the 
prestige, I would say, of Freud are on the horizon of every 
position of the analyst. They constitute the drama of the social, 
communal organization of psycho-analysts. 

Who can feel himself fully invested by this subject who is 

232 



OF THE SUBJECT WHO IS SUPPOSED TO KNOW 

supposed to know? This is not the question. The question is 
first, for each subject, where he takes his bearings from when 
applying to the subject who is supposed to know. Whenever 
this function may be, for the subject, embodied in some indi- 
vidual, whether or not an analyst, the transference, according 
to the definition I have given you of it, is established. 

If things reach the point that this is already, on the part of 
the patient, determined for someone nameable, for a figure 
accessible to him, there will result from this, for whoever 
assumes responsibility for him in analysis, a quite special 
difficulty, concerning the enacting of the transference. And it 
can happen that even the most stupid analyst — I don't know 
whether this extreme term exists, it is a function that I designate 
here only in the way one designates that sort of mythical number 
in logic which is, for example, the greatest number that may be 
expressed in so many words — even the most stupid analyst 
realizes it, recognizes it and directs the analysis towards what 
remains for him the subject who is supposed to know. This is a 
mere detail, and almost an anecdote. Let us now begin the 
examination of what is really at issue. 

The analyst, I said, occupies this place in as much as he is the 
object of the transference. Experience shows us that when the 
subject enters analysis, he is far from giving the analyst this 
place. 

For the moment let us leave the Cartesian hypothesis that the 
psycho-analyst is a deceiver. This hypothesis is not to be 
excluded absolutely from the phenomenological context of 
certain entries into analysis. But psycho-analysis shows us that 
what, above all in the initial phase, most limits the confidence 
of the patient, his abandonment to the analytic rule, is the 
threat that the psycho-analyst may be deceived by him. 

How often in our experience does it happen that we dis- 
cover only very late some important biographical detail? 
Suppose, for example, that at a particular moment in his life, 
the subject contracted a venereal disease. But why didrityou tell 
me earlier? one might ask, if one is still naive enough. Because, 
the analysand may reply, if I had told you earlier, you might have 
regarded it as responsible, in part at least, perhaps even wholly, for my 
disorders and I am not here for you to find an organic cause for them. 

This is an example that is unlimited in its implications, and 

233 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

which may be understood in a number of different ways — from 
the angle of social prejudice, of scientific discussion, of the 
confusion that remains around the very principle of analysis. I 
quote it here only as an illustration of the fact that the patient 
may think that the analyst may be misled if he gives him certain 
facts. He holds back certain facts so that the analyst may not go 
too quickly. I could give you other, better examples of this. 
Should not he who may be misled (Sire trompi) be a fortiori under 
suspicion of being capable, quite simply, of being mistaken (se 
tromper) ? 

Now, that certainly is the limit. It is around this being 
mistaken (ce se tromper) that the balance lies of that subtle, 
infinitesimal point that I wish to mark. 

Given that analysis may, on the part of certain subjects, be 
put in question at its very outset, and suspected of being a lure 
— how is it that around this being mistaken something stops? 
Even the psycho-analyst put in question is credited at some 
point with a certain infallibility, which means that certain 
intentions, betrayed, perhaps, by some chance gesture, will 
sometimes be attributed even to the analyst put in question, 
You did that to test me! 

The Socratic discussion introduced the following theme 
— that the recognition of the conditions for the good in itself 
would have something irresistible for man. This is the paradox 
of the teaching, if not of Socrates himself — what do we know 
about him other than through the Platonic comedy? — I will 
not even say Plato's comedy — for Plato develops in the terrain 
of the comic dialogue and leaves all the questions open — but 
of a certain exploitation of Platonism, which may be said to 
perpetuate itself in general derision. For, as we all know, the 
most perfect recognition of the conditions of the good will never 
prevent anyone from dashing into its opposite. So what is it all 
about, this trust placed in the analyst? How are we to know 
that he wishes this good, let alone for another? Let me explain. 

Who does not know from experience that it is possible not to 
want to ejaculate? Who does not know from experience, 
knowing the recoil imposed on everyone, in so far as it involves 
terrible promises, by the approach of jouissance as such? Who 
does not know that one may not wish to think? — the entire 
universal college of professors is there as evidence. 

234 



OF THE SUBJECT WHO IS SUPPOSED TO KNOW 

But what does not wanting to desire mean? The whole of 
analytic experience — which merely gives form to what is for 
each individual at the very root of his experience — shows us 
that not to want to desire and to desire are the same thing. 

To desire involves a defensive phase that makes it identical 
with not wanting to desire. Not wanting to desire is wanting 
not to desire. This discipline which, in order to find a way out 
of the impasse of the Socratic interrogation, was practised by 
people who were not only specifically philosophers, but, 
in their own way, some kind of practitioners of religion — the 
Stoics and the Epicureans. The subjectknows that not to want to 
desire has in itself something as irrefutable as that Moebius strip 
that has no underside, that is to say, that in following it, one will 
come back mathematically to the surface that is supposed to be 
its other side. 

It is at this point of meeting that the analyst is awaited. In 
so far as the analyst is supposed to know, he is also supposed to 
set out in search of unconscious desire. This is why I say — I will 
illustrate it for you next time with a small topological drawing 
that has already been on the blackboard — that desire is the 
axis, the pivot, the handle, the hammer, by which is applied 
the force-element, the inertia, that lies behind what is formu- 
lated at first, in the discourse of the patient, as demand, namely, 
the transference. The axis, the common point of this two-edged 
axe, is the desire of the analyst, which I designate here as an 
essential function. And let no one tell me that I do not name 
this desire, for it is precisely this point that can be articulated 
only in the relation of desire to desire. 

This relation is internal. Man's desire is the desire of the 
Other. 

Is there not, reproduced here, the element of alienation that I 
designated for you in the foundation of the subject as such ? If 
it is merely at the level of the desire of the Other that man can 
recognize his desire, as desire of the Other, is there not some- 
thing here that must appear to him to be an obstacle to his 
fading, which is a point at which his desire can never be 
recognized ? This obstacle is never lifted, nor ever to be lifted, 
for analytic experience shows us that it is in seeing a whole 
chain come into play at the level of the desire of the Other that 
the subject's desire is constituted. 

235 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

In the relation of desire to desire, something of alienation is 
preserved, not with the same elements — not with the Si and 
Sa of the first dyad of signifiers, from which I deduced the 
formula of the alienation of the subject in my last but one 
lecture — but with, on the one hand, what has been constituted 
on the basis of primal repression, of the fall, of the Unter- 
driickung, of the binary signifier, and, on the other hand, what 
appears first as lack in what is signified by the dyad of signifiers, 
in the interval that links them, namely, die desire of the Other. 



I will now re-articulate a number of formulae to be preserved 
as link points, without which thought wili stumble and slip. 
Alienation is linked in an essential way to the function of the 
dyad of signifiers. It is, indeed, essentially different, whether 
there are two or three of them. 

If we wish to grasp where the function of the subject resides 
in this signifying articulation, we must operate with two, 
because it is only with two that he can be cornered in alienation. 
As soon as there are three, the sliding becomes circular. When 
passed from the second to the third, it comes back to the first 
— but not from the second. The effect of aphanisis that is 
produced under one of the two signifiers is linked to the 
definition — let us say, to use the language of modern mathe- 
matics — of a set of signifiers. It is a set of elements such that, 
if there exist — as one says in the theory, with a capital £ 
inverted for notation — only two, the phenomenon of alienation 
is produced, in other words, the signifier is that which represents 
the subject for the other signifier. Hence there results that, at 
the level of the other signifier, the subject fades away. 

This is also why I pointed out to you the mistake that occurs 
in a certain translation of this Vorstellungsreprasentanz, which is, 
as I told you, the signifying Sg of the dyad. 

I must articulate here what is involved and what, in the text 
of one of my pupils of whom I have spoken, was sensed, but 
expressed in a way that misses the point, and which may lead to 
error, because it specifically omits the fundamental character 
of the function of the subject. There is constant reference to the 
relation of the signifier and the signified, which has to do witli 
what I will call the a,b,c, of the question. Of course, it had to 

236 



OF THE SUBJECT WHO IS SUPPOSED TO KNOW 

happen that one day I would put on the blackboard something 
that had already been formulated at the roots of the Saussurian 
development, in order to show my starting point. But I im- 
mediately showed that it was effective and manageable only to 
include in it the function of the subject at the original stage. It is 
not a question of reducing the function of the subject to nomina- 
tion, namely, to a label stuck on something. This would be to 
miss the whole essence of language. I must say that this text, 
which I described last time as providing proof of infatuation, 
also provides proof of crass ignorance, in letting it be understood 
that this is what is involved at the level of the Pavlovian 
experiment. 

If there is something that is situated at the level of the 
experiment of the conditioned reflex, it is certainly not the 
association of a sign with a thing. 

Whether or not Pavlov recognizes this, the characteristic of 
every experimental condition is strictly to associate a signifier, in 
so far as the experiment is instituted with the cut that may be 
made in the organic organization of a need — which is desig- 
nated by a manifestation at the level of a cycle of interrupted 
needs, and which we find here again, at the level of the Pav- 
lovian experiment, as being the cut of desire. And — rather as 
one says, that's why your daughter is dumb — that is why the animal 
will never learn to speak. At least in this way. Because, obviously, 
the animal is one step behind. The experiment may cause in 
him all sorts of disorders, all sorts of disturbances, but, not yet 
being a speaking creature, he is not called to put in question 
the desire of the experimenter, who, indeed, if one interrogated 
him, would be hard put to reply. 

Nevertheless, when articulated in this way, this experiment 
is interesting, indeed is essential, in enabling us to situate our 
conception of the psycho-somatic effect. I will go so far as to 
formulate that, when there is no interval between Si and Sa, 
when the first dyad of signifiers become solidified, holophrased, 
we have the model for a whole series of cases — even though, in 
each case, the subject does not occupy the same place. 

In as much, for example, as the child, the mentally-deficient 
child, takes the place, on the blackboard, at the bottom right, 
of this S, with regard to this something to which the mother 
reduces him, in being no more than the support of her desire 

237 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

in an obscure term, which is introduced into the education of 
the mentally-deficient child by the psychotic dimension. It is 
precisely what our colleague Maud Mannoni, in a book that 
has just come out and which I would recommend you to read, 
tries to indicate to those who, in one way or another, may be 
entrusted with the task of releasing its hold. 1 

It is certainly something of the same order that is involved in 
psychosis. This solidity, this mass seizure of the primitive 
signifying chain, is what forbids the dialectical opening that is 
manifested in the phenomenon of belief. 

At the basis of paranoia itself, which nevertheless seems to 
us to be animated by belief, there reigns the phenomenon of 

X Si 

O. s, s', s", s'",... S (» (a, a', a", a'",...)) 

S 2 

O. s, s', s", s'",... : series of meanings. 
i(a, a', a", a'",...) : series of identifications. 

the Unglauben. This is not the not believing in it, but the absence 
of one of the terms of belief, of the term in which is designated 
the division of the subject. If, indeed, there is no belief that is 
full and entire, it is because there is no belief that does not 
presuppose in its basis that the ultimate dimension that it has 
to reveal is strictly correlative with the moment when its mean- 
ing is about to fade away. 

There are all kinds of experiences that bear this out. One of 
them, concerning one of Casanova's misadventures, was told 
me in a very humourous way by Mannoni, who is with us 
today, and whose commentary on it is most amusing and 
revealing. At the end of a practical joke that succeeded to the 
point of moving the celestial forces and unleashing around him 
a storm which, in actual fact, terrified him, Casanova — who 
had been pursuing a cynical adventure with some silly goose 

1 L' enfant arrieri el sa mire, Paris, Editions du Seuil, 1964; The Retarded 
Child and the Mother, trans. Alan Sheridan; London, Tavistock, 1973; 
New York, Pantheon Books, 1973. 

238 



OF THE SUBJECT WHO IS SUPPOSED TO KNOW 

of a girl, who was the object of the prank, which gathered 
round him a whole circle of idiots — Casanova, seeing his 
practical joke begin to work, become real, was so deeply 
affected — in a surprisingly comic way for a Casanova who 
defied earth and heaven at the level of his desire — that he was 
struck with impotence, as if he had really been stopped at the 
sight of God's face. 

Take another look at the text I was talking about earlier. In 
this text, for example, the fort-da is presented as something 
rather old hat — it is almost as if this individual were apologiz- 
ing for mentioning once again this fort-da, which everyone had 
wiped his feet on. It is treated as an example of primal sym- 
bolization, while apologizing for mentioning it as if it were 
something that had now passed into the public domain. Well ! 
This is just as big a mistake, for it is not from a simple opposition 
of the fort and the da that it derives the inaugural force that its 
repetitive essence explains. To say that it is simply a question 
for the subject of instituting himself in a function of mastery 
is idiotic. In the two phonemes are embodied the very mechan- 
isms of alienation — which are expressed, paradoxical as it may 
seem, at the level of the fort. 

There can be no fort without da and, one might say, without 
Dasein. But, contrary to the whole tendency of the phenomen- 
ology of Daseinanalyse, there is no Dasein with the fort. That is to 
say, there is no choice. If the young subject can practise this 
game of fort-da, it is precisely because he does not practise it 
at all, for no subject can grasp this radical articulation. He 
practises it with the help of a small bobbin, that is to say, with 
the objet a. The function of the exercise with this object refers 
to an alienation, and not to some supposed mastery, which is 
difficult to imagine being increased in an endless repetition, 
whereas the endless repetition that is in question reveals the 
radical vacillation of the subject. 

3 
As usual, I must break off a train of thought in order to keep 
things within certain limits. However, I wish to say something, 
however briefly, about what I hope to discuss next time. I have 
illustrated the essential difference on the blackboard, in the 
form of two schemata. 

239 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

In his text on the Triebe and the Triebschicksale, the drives 
and the vicissitudes of the drive, Freud places love at once at the 
level of the real, at the level of narcissism, at the level of the 
pleasure principle in its correlation with the reality principle, 
and deduces from this that the function of ambivalence is 
absolutely different from what occurs in the Verkehrung, in the 
circular movement. At the level at which love is in question, 
we have a schema, which, Freud tells us, is spread over two 
stages. 

First there is an Ich, an Ich defined objectively by the com- 
bined functioning of the apparatus of the central nervous 
system and the condition of homeostasis, to preserve the ten- 
sions at the lowest possible level. 

We can conceive that what there is outside this, if one can 
speak of an outside, is merely indifference. And, at this level, 
since it is a question of tension, indifference simply means 
non-existence. Freud tells us however that the rule of auto- 
eroticism is not the non-existence of objects, but the functioning 
of objects solely in relation to pleasure. In the zone of indiffer- 
ence a distinction is made between that which brings Lust and 
that which brings Unlust, pleasure or displeasure. In any case, 
did not the ambiguity of the term Lustpiinzip become obvious 
to everyone long ago? — since some people also write it Un- 
lustprinzip- 

The next problem, then, is how this stage is to be repre- 
sented — how are homeostasis and pleasure to be articulated? 
For, the fact that something brings pleasure is still too much 
for the equilibrium. What is the closest and most accurate 
schema that can be given of this hypothetical Ich, in which is 
motivated the first construction of an apparatus functioning as a 
psyche? I propose the following. 




The proof by the objet a 
840 



OF THE SUBJECT WHO IS SUPPOSED TO KNOW 

You see, indicated by the capital letters IGH, the Ich as 
apparatus tending to a certain homeostasis — which cannot be 
the lowest because that would be death and, indeed, this was 
envisaged by Freud in a second stage. As for Lust, this is not a 
field strictly speaking, it is always an object, an object of 
pleasure, which, as such, is mirrored in the ego. This mirror- 
image, this bi-univocal correlate of the object, is here the puri- 
fied Lust-Ich of which Freud speaks, namely, that which, in the 
Ich, is satisfied with the object qua Lust. 

Unlust, on the other hand, is what remains unassimilable, 
irreducible to the pleasure principle. It is out of this, Freud 
tells us, that the non-ego will be constituted. It is situated — note 
well — within the circle of the original ego, it bites into it, 
without the homeostatic functioning ever managing to re- 
absorb it. You see here the origin of what we shall find again 
later in the so-called functioning of the bad object. 

You will notice especially that what structures the level of 
pleasure already gives the beginning of a possible articulation 
of alienation. 

In the external zone, Lust says to itself, more or less — Ah! 
the Ich is really something I must concern myself with. And as soon as 
it does concern itself with it, the perfect tranquillity of the Ich 
disappears. The Lust-Ich stands out and, by the same token, 
Unlust, the foundation of the non-ego, falls back. This does not 
imply the disappearance of the apparatus, quite the contrary. 
You simply see being produced at a primitive level that 
breaking-off, that splitting-off, which I indicated in the dia- 
lectic of the subject with the Other, but here in the opposite 
direction. 

This is expressed in the expression, No good without evil, no good 
without pain, which preserves in this good and in this evil a 
character of alternation, of a possible calibration, in which the 
articulation that I gave earlier of a dyad of signifiers will be 
reduced, and incorrectly. For, to return things at the level of 
good and evil, everyone knows that hedonism is unable to 
explain the mechanism of desire. This is because in passing over 
to the other register, to the alienating articulation, it is expressed 
quite differently. I almost blush to repeat here such catch- 
phrases as beyond good and evil, which idiots have been playing 
around with for so long without knowing exactly what they 

241 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

were doing. Nevertheless, we must articulate what occurs at the 
level of the alienating articulation thus — no evil without there 
resulting some good from it, and when the good is there, there 
is no good that holds with evil. 

That is why, by situating itself purely and simply in the 
register of pleasure, ethics fails and why, quite legitimately, 
Kant objects to it that the sovereign good can in no way be 
conceived as some small good carried to infinity. For there is 
no possible law to be given of what might be the good in 
objects. 

The sovereign good, if this confusing term must be retained, 
can be found again only at the level of the law, and in Kant 
avec Sade 1 1 showed that this means that, at the level of desire, 
passivity, narcissism and ambivalence are the characteristics 
that govern the dialectic of pleasure at the level of the table on 
the left. Its term is, strictly speaking, what is called identification. 

It is the recognition of the drive that enables us to construct, 
with the greatest certainty, the functioning that I call the 
functioning of the division of the subject, or alienation. And 
how has the drive itself been recognized ? It has been recognized 
in this that, far from the dialectic of what occurs in the sub- 
ject's unconscious being able to be limited to the reference to 
the field of Lust, to the images of beneficent, favourable objects, 
wehavefound a certain type of objects which, in the final resort, 
can serve no function. These are the objets a — the breasts, the 
faeces, the gaze, the voice. It is in this new term that resides the 
point that introduces the dialectic of the subject qua subject of 
the unconscious. 

Next time, I shall continue to develop the theme of the . 
subject of the transference. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

M. Safouan: I always find it difficult to understand the difference 
between the object in the drive and the object in desire. Now we are asked 
to see the difference between the id and the object in drive — I'm lost. 

Lac an : Look, it's simply a question of terminology. It is 
very kind of you to ask a question, even if it springs from a 
certain confusion, because this may help everybody else. 

There are a lot of very pleasant things that we think we 

1 Merits, Paris, Editions du Seuil, 1966, pp. 765-90. 

242 



OF THE SUBJECT WHO IS SUPPOSED TO KNOW 

desire, in as much as we are healthy, but all we can say about 
them is this — we think we desire them. These things are on a 
quite transmissible level, it seems to me, but this is nothing to 
do with psycho-analytic theory. 

The objects that are in the field of Lust have so fundamentally 
narcissistic a relation with the subject that in the last resort the 
mystery of the supposed regression of love in identification has 
its reason in the symmetry of these two fields, which I have 
designated as Lust and Lust-Ich. What one cannot keep outside, 
one always keeps an image of inside. Identification with the 
object of love is as silly as that. And I do not see why that 
should create so many difficulties, even to Freud himself. That, 
mon cker, is the object of love. 

And, indeed, you see this very clearly when you speak of 
objects that do not have the individual value that attaches to 
the object of the drive. You then say, as Freud observed, / love 
mutton stew. It's precisely the same thing when you say, Hove Mrs 
X, except that you say it to her, which makes all the difference. 
You say it to her for reasons that I will explain to you next 
time. 

You love mutton stew. You're not sure you desire it. Take the 
experience of the beautiful butcher's wife. She loves caviar, but 
she doesn't want any. That's why she desires it. You see, the 
object of desire is the cause of the desire, and this object that is 
the cause of desire is the object of the drive — that is to say, the 
object around which the drive turns. Since I am here in a 
dialogue with someone who has worked on my texts, I may 
express myself in some rather concentrated formulae. It is not 
that desire clings to the object of the drive — desire moves 
around it, in so far as it is agitated in the drive. But all desire is 
not necessarily agitated in the drive. There are empty desires or 
mad desires that are based on nothing more than the fact that 
the thing in question has been forbidden you. By virtue of the 
very fact that it has been forbidden you, you cannot do other- 
wise, for a time, than think about it. That, too, is desire. But 
whenever you are dealing with a good object, we designate it 
— it's a question of terminology, but a justified terminology 
— as an object of love. Next time, I will justify this by articulat- 
ing the relation between love, the transference and desire. 

i o June 1964 

243 



*9 

FROM INTERPRETATION 
TO THE TRANSFERENCE 

Field of the ego and field of the Other • Metaphor • Interpretation is not 
open to all meanings • Indetermination and determination of the subject • 
Love, transference, desire • The slave • The ego ideal and the petit a 

As far as vocabulary is concerned, what I am going to introduce 
today will, unfortunately, not be very familiar to you. 

We shall be dealing with the most ordinary terms, such as 
identification, idealization, projection, introjection. These are 
not easy terms to handle and it is not made any easier by the 
fact that they already have meanings. 

What could be more ordinary than to identify? It even seems 
like the essential operation of thought. To idealize, that too 
might prove useful when the psychologistic position becomes 
more experimental. To project and to introject are seen by 
some people as reciprocal terms. Yet I pointed out long ago 
— perhaps this fact should be realized — that one of these 
terms refers to a field in which the symbolic is dominant, the 
other to a field in which the imaginary is dominant, which must 
mean that, in a certain dimension at least, they never meet. 

The intuitive use of these terms, on the basis of the feeling 
that one has of understanding them, and of understanding 
them in an isolated way as revealing their dimension in the 
common understanding, is obviously at the source of all the 
misapprehensions and confusions. It is the common fate of 
anything to do with discourse. In common discourse, he who 
speaks, at least in his native language, expresses himself with 
such ease, with such evident familiarity, that it is to the most 
common user of a language, to the uneducated man, that one 
has recourse if one wishes to know the correct usage of a term. 

As soon as he wishes to speak, man is orientated in the funda- 
mental topology of language, which is very different from the 

244 



FROM INTERPRETATION TO THE TRANSFERENCE 

simplistic realism in which he who thinks that he is at ease in 
the domain of science all too often confines himself. The 
natural use of such expressions — let us select some at random 
— as t» one's own heart (a part soi),for good or ill (bon gri mal gri), 
a business (une affaire), which is different from a thing to be done 
(une chose a f aire), implies the enveloping topology in which the 
subject recognizes himself when he speaks spontaneously. 

If I can speak to psycho-analysts and try to locate to which 
implicit topology they are referring when using each of the 
terms I have just listed, it is obviously because, on the whole 
— however incapable they may often be, for lack of teaching, 
of articulating them — they frequently make adequate use of 
them, with the same spontaneity as the ordinary man uses 
ordinary speech. Of course, if they are determined to force the 
results of a case, and to understand where they do not under- 
stand, they will inevitably make a forced use of these results. In 
such instances, there will be few people to develop them. 

Today, then, I'm referring to this tact in the psycho-analytic 
use of certain words, in order to be able to harmonize them with 
the evidence of a topology that I have already introduced here 
and which is, for example, embodied on the blackboard in the 
schema which shows you the field of the original Ich, the objecti- 
fiable Ich, in the last resort, in the nervous system, the Ich of the 
homeostatic field, in relation to which the field of Lust, of 
pleasure, is distinguished from the field of Unlust. 

I have already pointed out that Freud distinguishes clearly 
between the level of the Ich, for example in the article on the 
Triebe, when stressing both that it is manifested as organized, 
which is a narcissistic sign, and that it is precisely to this extent 
that it is strictly articulated in the field of the real. In the real, it 
distinguishes, it privileges only that which is reflected in its 
field by an effect of Lust, as return to homeostasis. 

But that which does not favour homeostasis and is maintained 
at all costs as Unlust bites still more into its field. Thus, what is 
of the order of Unlust is inscribed in the ego as non-ego, nega- 
tion, splitting-off of the ego. The non-ego is not to be confused 
with what surrounds it, the vastness of the real. Non-ego is 
distinguised as a foreign body, fremde Objekt. It is there, situated 
in the lunula constituted by the two small Euler-type circles. 
Look at the blackboard. In the register of pleasure, then, we 

245 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

can make for ourselves an objectifiable foundation, just as the 
scientist is foreign to the object whose functioning he observes. 

But we are not simply that, and even if we were, we would 
also have to be the subject who thinks. And in so far as we are 
the subject who thinks, we are implicated in a quite different 
way, in as much as we depend on the field of the Other, which 
was there long before we came into the world, and whose 
circulating structures determine us as subjects. 

It is a question, then, of knowing in what field the different 
things with which we deal in the field of analysis occur. Some 
occur at the level of the first field, of the Ich, and others — which 
should be distinguished from the first, because if one confuses 
them, one is lost — in the other field, the field of the Other. I 
have already shown you the essential articulations of this other 
field in the two functions that I have defined and articulated as 
alienation and separation. 

The rest of my discourse today presupposes that you have 
thought about these two functions since I introduced them to 
you — in other words, that you have tried to make them function 
at different levels, to put them to the test. 

I have already tried to embody certain consequences of the 
very particular vel that constitutes alienation — the placing in 
suspense of the subject, its vacillation, the collapse of meaning 
— in such familiar forms as your money or your life, or freedom or 
death, which are reproduced from a being or meaning — terms 
that I do not propose without some reluctance. I would ask you 
not to be too hasty in overloading them with meanings, for if 
you do you will only succeed in sinking them. So I feel that it is 
incumbent upon me to warn you of this at the outset. 

Nevertheless, I am introducing here what my discourse will 
try to articulate, if possible, next year. It is a question of some- 
thing that ought to be entitled the subjective positions. For all this 
preparation, concerning the fundamentals of analysis, should 
normally serve to show — since nothing can be properly centred 
except the position of the subject — what the articulation of 
analysis, on the basis of desire, makes it possible to illustrate 
about these fundamentals. 

Subjective positions, then, of what ? If I relied on what is 
available, I would say — the subjective positions of existence, with 
all the advantages that this term may possess from being already 

246 



FROM INTERPRETATION TO THE TRANSFERENCE 

much in the air. Unfortunately, this term would allow us a 
rigorous application only at the level of the neurotic — which, 
indeed, would be no small matter. That is why I will say 
the subjective positions of being. I am not committing myself in 
advance to my title, I may find a better one, but, in any case, 
that's what it's about. 



Let us move on. In an article, to which I have already referred 
in order to correct what seemed to me its dangers, an attempt 
has been made, in an effort that is not without merit, to give 
form to certain notions I have introduced concerning the 
structure of language inherent in the unconscious. What 
emerged was a formula that consists, in short, in translating 
the formula that I gave of the metaphor. This formula was 
essential and usable, since it manifests the dimension in which 
the unconscious appears, in as much as the operation of signi- 
fying condensation is fundamental to it. 

Of course, signifying condensation, with its metaphorical 
effect, can be observed quite openly in any poetic metaphor. 
That is why I took my example from Booz endormi. Go back to 
my article, L' Instance de la lettre dans Vinconscient, published in 
La Psychanalyse. 1 Of all poems, I have taken the one that, in 
French, may be said to echo in more people's memories than 
any other. Who did not learn when a child to recite Boozendormil 
It isn't a bad example to be used by analysts, especially at the 
point I introduced it, that is to say, when introducing at the 
same time the paternal metaphor. 

I won't go over again what I said, but my reason for intro- 
ducing it now is obviously to show you what is contributed to 
the creation of meaning by the fact of designating the character 
who is in question, Booz — in that position both of divine 
father and instrument of God — by the metaphor — Sa gerbe 
riitait pas avare ni haineuse ('His sheaf was neither miserly nor 
spiteful'). The dimension of meaning opened up by this meta- 
phor is nothing less than what appears to us in the final image, 
that of the golden sickle carelessly thrown into the field of 

1 And republished in Merits, op. cit. A selection of the Merits, including this 
article, appears in Merits: a selection, trans. Alan Sheridan; London, Tavistock 
Publications; New York, Norton; 1977. 

247 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

stars. It is the very dimension hidden in this poem. More hidden 
than you think, because it is not enough to refer to the sickle 
which Jupiter used to flood the world with the blood of Chronos. 
The dimension of castration that is involved here is, in the 
Biblical perspective, of a quite different order, and is at work 
there, present with all the echoes of history, including Booz's 
invocations to the Lord — Comment surgira-t-il de moi, vieil homme, 
une descendance? (How will there ever be offspring for such an 
old man as I.) 

I don't know whether you have noticed — you would have 
been much more capable of doing so if this year I had done the 
seminar I intended doing on the Names-of-the-Father — but the 
Lord with the unpronounceable name is precisely he who 
sends children to barren women and old men. The funda- 
mentally transbiological character of paternity, introduced by 

§.' L L 

f(!>~s(+), sX '"4 

Transformed formula 
Formula of At metaphor in the article in question 

the tradition of the destiny of the chosen people, has something 
that is originally repressed there, and which always re-emerges 
in the ambiguity of lameness, the impediment and the symptom, 
of non-encounter, dustuchia, with the meaning that remains 
hidden. 

This is a dimension that we find again and again and which, 
if we wish to formalize it, as the author I referred to just now 
tried to do, deserves to be handled with more prudence than is 
in fact the case — relying, in a way, on the formalism of fraction 
that results from marking the link that exists between the 
signifier and the signified by an intermediary bar. It is not 
absolutely illegitimate to consider that, at certain moments, 
this bar marks, in the relation of the signifier to the signified, 
the indication of a value that is strictly what is expressed in its 
use as fraction in the mathematical sense of the term. But, of 
course, it is not the only use. There is between the signifier and 
the signified, another relation which is that of the effect of 
meaning. Precisely at the point at which it is a question, in 

248 



FROM INTERPRETATION TO THE TRANSFERENCE 

metaphor, of marking the effect of meaning, one can absolutely 
not, therefore, without taking certain precautions, and in as 
bold a way as has been done, manipulate this bar in a fractional 
transformation — which one could do if it were a question of a 
relation of proportion. 

When it is a question of fractions, one may transform the 
product 

A 

AC B 

5" x t\ into a four-storeyed formula, as in the following : ?c * 



It was thought to be very clever to do this with metaphor, 
arguing from the following — to that which carries the weight, 
in the unconscious, of an articulation of the last signifier to 
embody the metaphor with the new meaning created by its 
use, should correspond some kind of pinning out, from one to 
the other, of two signifiers in the unconscious. 

Such a formula is quite definitely unsatisfactory. First, because 
one ought to know that there can be no relations between the 
signifier and itself, the peculiarity of the signifier being the fact 
that it is unable to signify itself, without producing some error 
in logic. 

To be convinced of this, one has only to refer to the anti- 
nomies that have intervened as soon as an attempt has been 
made to produce an exhaustive logical formulation of mathe- 
matics. The catalogue of catalogues that do not contain them- 
selves is obviously not the same catalogue that does not contain 
itself — when it is the one that is introduced in the definition 
and when it is the one that will be inscribed in the catalogue. 

It is so much easier to realize that what is happening is that a 
substitutive signifier has been put in the place of another 
signifier to constitute the effect of metaphor. It refers the signi- 
fier that it has usurped elsewhere. If, in fact, one wished to 
preserve the possibility of a handling of a fractional type, one 
would place the signifier that has disappeared, the repressed 
signifier, below the principal bar, in the denominator, 
unterdriickt. 

Consequently, it is false to say, as has been said, that inter- 
pretation is open to all meanings under the pretext that it is a 

249 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

question only of the connection of a signifier to a signifier, and 
consequently of an uncontrollable connection. Interpretation 
is not open to any meaning. This would be to concede to those 
who rise up against the character of uncertainty in analytic 
interpretation that, in effect, all interpretations are possible, 
which is patently absurd. The fact that I have said that the 
effect of interpretation is to isolate in the subject a kernel, a 
kern, to use Freud's own term, of non-sense, does not mean that 
interpretation is in itself nonsense. 

Interpretation is a signification that is not just any significa- 
tion. It comes here in the place of the s and reverses the relation 
by which the signifier has the effect, in language, of the signi- 
fied. It has the effect of bringing out an irreducible signifier. 
One must interpret at the level of the s, which is not open to all 




S(i(a',a",a'",...)). 



meanings, which cannot be just anything, which is a significa- 
tion, though no doubt only an approximate one. What is there 
is rich and complex, when it is a question of the unconscious 
of the subject, and intended to bring out irreducible, non- 
sensical — composed of non-meanings — signifying elements. In 
this same article, Leclaire's work illustrates particularly well 
the crossing of significant interpretation towards signifying 
non-sense, when he proposes, on the subject of his obsessional 
neurotic patient, the so-called Poordjeli formula, which links 
the two syllables of the word licorne (unicorn), thus enabling 
him to introduce into his sequence a whole chain in which his 
desire is animated. Indeed, you will see in what he will publish 
later that things go much further still. 

Interpretation is not open to all meanings. It is not just any 
interpretation. It is a significant interpretation, one that must 
not be missed. This does not mean that it is not this signification 
that is essential to the advent of the subject. What is essential is 

250 



FROM INTERPRETATION TO THE TRANSFERENCE 

that he should see, beyond this signification, to what signifier 
— to what irreducible, traumatic, non-meaning — he is, as a 
subject, subjected. 

This enables us to conceive what is materialized in the 
experience. I would ask you to take up one of Freud's great 
psycho-analytic cases, the greatest of all, the most sensational 
— because one sees in it, more clearly than anywhere else, 
where the problem of the conversion of phantasy and reality 
converge, namely, in something irreducible, nonsensical, that 
functions as an originally repressed signifier — I mean the case 
of the Wolf Man. In The Wolf Man, I would say, to give you 
the thread that will guide you through your reading, that the 
sudden appearance of the wolves in the window in the dream 
plays the function of the s, as representative of the loss of the 
subject. 

It is not only that the subject is fascinated by the sight of 
these wolves, which number seven, and which, in fact, in his 
drawing of them perched on the tree number only five. It is 
that their fascinated gaze is the subject himself. 

What does the whole case show ? It shows that at each stage 
in the life of the subject, something always arrived to reshape 
the value of the determining index represented by this original 
signifier. Thus the dialectic of the subject's desire as con- 
stituting itself from the desire of the Other is correctly grasped. 
Remember the adventure of the father, the sister, the mother 
and the servant-woman Groucha. So many different stages 
that enrich the unconscious desire of the subject with some- 
thing that is to be put, as signification constituted in the 
relation to the desire of the Other, in the numerator. 

Note what happens then. I would ask you to consider the 
logical necessity of that moment in which the subject as X can 
be constituted only from the Urverdrangung, from the necessary 
fall of this first signifier. He is constituted around the Urverd- 
rdngung, but he cannot substitute anything for it as such 
— since this would require the representation of one signifier 
for another, whereas here there is only one, the first. In this X, 
we must consider two sides — that constituent moment that 
sees the collapse of significance, which we articulate in a place 
in its function at the level of the unconscious, but also the 
return effect, which operates from this relation that may be 

251 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

conceived on the basis of the fraction. It must be introduced 
only with prudence, but it is well indicated for us by the effects 
of language. 

Everyone knows that if zero appears in the denominator, the 
value of the fraction no longer has meaning, but assumes by 
convention what mathematicians call an infinite value. In a 
way, this is one of the stages in the constitution of the subject. 
In so far as the primary signiner is pure non-sense, it becomes 
the bearer of the infinitization of the value of the subject, not 
open to all meanings, but abolishing them all, which is different. 
This explains why I have been unable to deal with the relation 
of alienation without introducing the word freedom. What, in 
effect, grounds, in the meaning and radical non-meaning of the 
subject, the function of freedom, is strictly speaking this 
signiner that kills all meanings. 

This is why it is untrue to say that the signiner in the un- 
conscious is open to all meanings. It constitutes the subject in 
his freedom in relation to all meanings, but this does not mean 
that it is not determined in it. For, in the numerator, in the 
place of the zero, the things that are inscribed are significations, 
dialectized significations in the relation of the desire of the 
Other, and they give a particular value to the relation of the 
subject to the unconscious. 

It will be important, in what will follow in my seminar next 
year, to show how the experience of analysis forces us to seek a 
kind of formalization such that the mediation of this infinity of 
the subject with the finiteness of desire may occur only through 
the intervention of what Kant, on his entry into the gravitation 
of what is called philosophical thinking, introduced with so 
much freshness in the term negative quantities. 

The freshness is important here, of course, because there is a 
difference between forcing philosophers to reflect on the fact 
that minus one ( — i ) is not zero and thefact that people soon lose 
interest in such talk and cease to listen. Nevertheless — and 
this is the only use of the reference to philosophical articulation 
— men survive only by being at each moment so forgetful of 
all their conquests, I am speaking of their subjective conquests. 
Of course, from the moment they forget them, they are never- 
theless conquered, but it is rather they who are conquered 
by the effects of these conquests. And the fact of being con- 

252 



FROM INTERPRETATION TO THE TRANSFERENCE 

quered by something that one does not know sometimes has 
formidable consequences, the first of which is confusion. 

Negative quantity, then, is the term that we shall find to 
designate one of the supports of what is called the castration 
complex, namely, the negative effect in which the phallus 
object enters into it. 

This is no more than a foretaste, but I thought it worth 
saying. 



However, we must move on to what is our main topic, namely, 
the transference. How can we take up the thread again? The 
transference is unthinkable unless one sets out from the subject 
who is supposed to know. 

You will now have a better idea of what he is supposed to 
know. He is supposed to know that from which no one can 
escape, as soon as he formulates it — quite simply, signification. 

Signification implies, of course — and that is why I first 
brought out the dimension of his desire — that he cannot refuse it. 

This privileged point is the only one by which we can recog- 
nize the character of an absolute point with no knowledge. It is 
absolute precisely by virtue of being in no way knowledge, but 
the point of attachment that links his very desire to the reso- 
lution of that which is to be revealed. 

The subject comes into play on the basis of this fundamental 
support — the subject is supposed to know, simply by virtue of 
being a subject of desire. Now what actually happens? What 
happens is what is called in its most common appearance the 
transference effect. This effect is love. It is clear that, like all 
love, it can be mapped, as Freud shows, only in the field of 
narcissism. To love is, essentially, to wish to be loved. 

What emerges in the transference effect is opposed to revela- 
tion. Love intervenes in its function, revealed here as essential, 
in its function as deception. Love, no doubt, is a transference 
effect, but it is its resistance side. We are linked together in 
awaiting this transference effect in order to be able to interpret, 
and at the same time, we know that it closes the subject off 
from the effect of our interpretation. The alienation effect, in 
which is articulated, in the relation of the subject to the Other, 
the effect that we are, is here absolutely manifest. 

253 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

We should point out here, then, something that is always 
avoided, which Freud articulates, and which is not an excuse, 
but the reason of the transference, namely, that nothing can be 
attained in absentia, in effigie. This means that the transference 
is not, of its nature, the shadow of something that was once 
alive. On the contrary, the subject, in so far as he is subjected 
to the desire of the analyst, desires to betray him for this 
subjection, by making the analyst love him, by offering of 
himself that essential duplicity that is love. The transference 
effect is that effect of deception in so far as it is repeated in the 
present here and now. 

It is repetition of that which passed for such only because it 
possesses the same form. It is not ectopia. It is not a shadow of 
the former deceptions of love. It is isolation in the actuality of 
its pure functioning as deception. 

That is why we can say that what is there, behind the love 
known as transference, is the affirmation of the link between 
the desire of the analyst and the desire of the patient. This is 
what Freud expressed in a kind of rapid sleight of hand when 
he said — after all, it is only the desire of the patient — this should 
reassure one's colleagues. It is the patient's desire, yes, but 
in its meeting with the analyst's desire. 

I will not say that I have not yet named the analyst's desire, 
for how can one name a desire? One circumscribes a desire. 
There are many things in history that provide us with tracks 
and traces here. 

Is it not strange, that echo that we found — though, of 
course, we are not going to stick our noses into this for long 
— between the ethic of analysis and the Stoic ethic? What does 
the Stoic ethic really amount to other than the recognition of 
the absolute authority of the desire of the Other, that Thy will 
be done! that is taken up again in the Christian register? But 
will I ever have the time to show you this ? 

We are solicited by a more radical articulation. The problem 
may be posed of the relation between the master's desire and 
the slave. Hegel declares it to be solved — this is not so at all. 

Since I am ready to take my leave of you for this year 
— next time will be my last lecture — may I throw out a few 
points that may give you some idea of the direction in which 
we will travel later. 

254 



FROM INTERPRETATION TO THE TRANSFERENCE 

If it is true that the master situates himself only in an original 
relation to the assumption of death, I think that it is very 
difficult to attribute to him an apprehensible relation to 
desire. I'm speaking of the master in Hegel, not of the master of 
antiquity, of which we have one portrait, for example, in that 
of Alcibiades, whose relation to desire is visible enough. He 
asks Socrates for something, without knowing what it is, but 
which he calls agalma. Some of you will know the use that I 
made of this term some time ago. I will go back to this agalma, 
this mystery, which, in the mist that clouds Alcibiades' vision, 
represents something beyond all good. 

How can one see anything other than a first adumbration 
of the technique of the mapping of the transference in the fact 
that Socrates replies to him, not what he said to him when he 
was young, Look to your soul, but something more suited to the 
florid, hardened man he now is, Look to your desire, look to your 
onions. As it happens, it is the height of irony on Plato's part to 
have embodied these onions in a man who is so futile and 
absurd, almost a buffoon. I think I was the first to remark that 
the lines Plato puts in his mouth concerning the nature of love 
are an indication of just such futility, verging on buffoonery, 
which makes of Agathon perhaps the least likely object to 
attract the desire of a master. Furthermore, the fact that he is 
called Agathon, that is to say, the name to which Plato gave 
the supreme value, adds an extra, perhaps involuntary, but 
incontestable, note of irony. 

Thus, as soon as it comes into play in the story, the desire of 
the master seems, of its very nature, to be the most inappropriate 
term. On the other hand, when Socrates wishes to obtain his 
own answer, it is to the slave, who has no right to declare his 
own desire, that he turns. He can always be sure of obtaining 
the right reply from him. The voice of reason is low, Freud says 
somewhere, but it always says the same thing. I don't wish to draw 
a false parallel to the effect that Freud says exactly the same 
thing about unconscious desire. Its voice, too, is low, but its 
insistence is indestructible. Perhaps there is a relation between 
the two. It is in the direction of some kind of kinship that we 
should turn our eyes to the slave, when it is a question of 
mapping what the analyst's desire is. 



255 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

3 
But I would not like to leave you today without introducing, for 
next time, two remarks, two remarks that are grounded in the 
mapping that Freud made of the function of identification. 

There are enigmas in identification, even for Freud himself. 
He seems to be surprised that the regression of love should take 
place so easily in terms of identification — even when, in texts 
written about the same time, he demonstrates that love and 
identification have an equivalence in a certain register and that 
narcissism and over-estimation of the object, Verliebtheit, is 
exactly the same thing in love. 

At this point, Freud pauses — I would ask you to find for 
yourselves in the text the various clues, as the English say, the 
traces, the marks left on the trail. I think this is because he had 
not sufficiently distinguished something. 

In the chapter of Massenpsychologie und Ich-Analyse devoted to 
identification, I stressed the second form of identification, in 
order to map in it, and to detach from it, the einziger Z u g> the 
single stroke, the foundation, the kernel of the ego ideal. What 
is this single stroke? Is it a privileged object in the field of Lust? 
No. 

The single stroke is not in the first field of narcissistic identifi- 
cation, to which Freud relates the first form of identification 
— which, very curiously indeed, he embodies in a sort of 
function, a sort of primal model which the father assumes, 
anterior even to the libidinous investment on the mother 
— a mythical stage, certainly. The single stroke, in so far as the 
subject clings to it, is in the field of desire, which cannot in any 
sense be constituted other than in the reign of the signifier, 
other than at the level in which there is a relation of the subject 
to the Other. It is the field of the Other that determines the 
function of the single stroke, in so far as it is from it that a major 
stage of identification is established in the topography then 
developed by Freud — namely, idealization, the ego ideal. I 
showed you the traces of this first signifier on the primitive bone 
on which the hunter makes a notch and counts the number of 
times he gets his target. 

It is in the intersection by which the single signifier functions 
here in the field of Lust, that is to say, in the field of primary 

256 



FROM INTERPRETATION TO THE TRANSFERENCE 

narcissistic identification, that is to be found the essential 
mainspring of the effects of the ego ideal. I have described 
elsewhere the sight in the mirror of the ego ideal, of that being 
that he first saw appearing in the form of the parent holding 
him up before the mirror. By clinging to the reference-point of 
him who looks at him in a mirror, the subject sees appearing, 
not his ego ideal, but his ideal ego, that point at which he 
desires to gratify himself in himself. 

This is the function, the mainspring, the effective instrument 
constituted by the ego ideal. Not so long ago, a little girl said 
to me sweetly that it was about time somebody began to look 
after her so that she might seem lovable to herself. In saying 
this, she provided the innocent admission of the mainspring 
that comes into play in the first stage of the transference. The 
subject has a relation with his analyst the centre of which is at 
the level of the privileged signifier known as the ego ideal, in so 
far as from there he will feel himself both satisfactory and loved. 

But there is another function, which institutes an identifica- 
tion of a strangely different kind, and which is introduced by 
the process of separation. 

It is a question of this privileged object, discovered by 
analysis, of that object whose very reality is purely topological, 
of that object around which the drive moves, of that object 
that rises in a bump, like the wooden darning egg in the material 
which, in analysis, you are darning — the objet a. 

This object supports that which, in the drive, is denned and 
specified by the fact that the coming into play of the signifier 
in the life of man enables him to bring out the meaning of 
sex. Namely, that for man, because he knows the signifiers, sex 
and its significations are always capable of making present the 
presence of death. 

The distinction between the life drive and the death drive is 
true in as much as it manifests two aspects of the drive. But this 
is so only on condition that one sees all the sexual drives as 
articulated at the level of significations in the unconscious, in 
as much as what they bring out is death — death as signifier and 
nothing but signifier, for can it be said that there is a being-for- 
death? In what conditions, in what determinism, can death, 
the signifier, spring fully armed into treatment? This can be 
understood only by our way of articulating the relations. 

257 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

Through the function of the objet a, the subject separates 
himself off, ceases to be linked to the vacillation of being, in the 
sense that it forms the essence of alienation. This function has 
been sufficiently indicated to us, for long enough, by enough 
traces. I have shown at one time or another that it is impossible 
to conceive of the phenomenology of verbal hallucination if we 
do not understand what the very term that we use to designate 
it means — that is to say, voices. 

It is in so far as the object of the voice is present in it that the 
percipiens is present in it. Verbal hallucination is not a false 
perception, it is a deviated percipiens. The subject is immanent in 
his verbal hallucination. This possibility is there, which should 
make us ask the question as to what we are trying to achieve 
in analysis, concerning the accommodation of the percipiens. 

Up till the advent of psycho-analysis, the path of knowledge 
was always traced in that of a purification of the subject, of the 
percipiens. Well ! We would now say that we base the assurance 
of the subject in his encounter with the filth that may support 
him, with the petit a of which it would not be untrue to say that 
its presence is necessary. 

Take Socrates. The inflexible purity of Socrates and his 
atopia are correlative. Intervening, at every moment, there is 
the demonic voice. 

Could one maintain that the voice that guides Socrates is not 
Socrates himself? The relation between Socrates and his voice 
is no doubt an enigma, which indeed, tempted psychographers 
on several occasions in the early nineteenth century, and it is 
already a great merit on their part that they dared to broach 
the matter since nowadays one daren't touch it with a barge- 
pole. 

It is a new trace to be interrogated in order to know what we 
mean when we speak of the subject of perception. Don't make 
me out to say what I'm not saying — the analyst must not hear 
voices. All the same, read a book by an analyst of good vintage, 
a Theodor Reik, a direct pupil and familiar of Freud, Listening 
with the Third-Ear — in actual fact, I do not approve of the 
formula, as if two were not enough to be deaf with. But he 
maintains that this third ear helps him to hear some voice oi 
other that speaks to him in order to warn him of deceptions 
— he belongs to the good old days, the heroic days, when one 

258 



FROM INTERPRETATION TO THE TRANSFERENCE 

was able to hear what was being said behind the deception of 
the patient. 

Certainly, we have learnt a lot since then, because we know 
how to recognize in these circumventions, these cleavages, the 
objet a, which certainly has still scarcely emerged. 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 

P. Kaufmann : Is there not some kind of connection between 
what you have said again, on the subject of Boo z and Theodore Reik, 
and what you have said, elsewhere, concerning the father at the beginning 
of chapter seven of "The Interpretation of Dreams? 

Lacan : It's quite clear, he is asleep — that's all there is to 
it. He is asleep so that we should sleep too, that is to say, so that 
we should understand only what there is to be understood. 

I wanted to bring in the Jewish tradition, in order to take 
things up where Freud left them, because after all it is not for 
nothing that the pen fell from Freud's hands when he had 
reached the division of the subject, and that just previously he 
had written, in Moses and Monotheism, one of the most radical 
critiques of the Jewish tradition. However historically con- 
testable his evidence or even his approach may be, the fact 
remains that to introduce into the heart of Jewish history the 
absolutely obvious radical distinction of the prophetic tradition 
in relation to another message, was certainly — as he seemed 
to be aware, or in any case as he wrote it — to make of the 
collusion with truth a function essential to our operation as 
analysts. And we can rely on truth, devote ourselves to it only 
in so far as we dethrone ourselves from a collusion with truth. 

Since we are, in a sense, among friends here, and since, after 
all, there is more than one person here who is not completely 
out of touch with what is happening inside the psycho-analytic 
community, I can tell you something amusing. This morning I 
was listening to someone telling me about his life, of his dis- 
appointments, of all the inconveniences to be found in a normal 
scientific career, of being a director of studies, or in charge of a 
research group, or laboratory boss of a senior researcher whose 
ideas you must take account of if you wish to advance in your 
career. Such a situation, of course, is particularly detrimental 
from the point of view of the development of scientific thought. 
Well! I was thinking about what this person was saying and 

259 



THE FIELD OF THE OTHER 

came to the conclusion that there is one field, that of psycho- 
analysis, in which, in fact — if anywhere — the subject is there 
only to seek his qualification for free search governed by a 
demand for truth, and may be regarded as authorized in this 
search only from the moment that he operates freely in it. 
Well! By a sort of strange effect of vertigo, it is in this very 
area of psycho-analysis that they are trying to reconstruct, to 
the maximum degree possible, the hierarchy of posts and titles 
to be found in the university, and to make their qualification 
to practise dependent on someone who is already qualified. 
This even goes further. When they have found their way, their 
mode of thinking, their very way of moving in the analytic 
field, on the basis of the teaching of a certain individual, it is 
through others, whom they regard as fools, that they will try to 
find the authorization, the express qualification that they are 
actually capable of practising analysis. I find that this is one 
more illustration of the difference and conjunctions, of the 
ambiguities, between the analytic field and the university 
field. If it is said that the analysts themselves form part of the 
problem of the unconscious, does it not strike you that we have 
here a fine illustration of it, and a good opportunity to analyse ? 

1 7 June 1964 



260 



To Conclude 



This page intentionally left blank. 



20 



IN YOU MORE THAN YOU 

/ Cove you, but, because inexplicably I love in you something more than 
you — the objet petit a — / mutilate you 

It now remains for me to conclude, for this year, the series of 
seminars that I was forced to hold here owing to certain cir- 
cumstances that have introduced into the course of my teaching 
something which, after all, is accounted for by one of the fun- 
damental notions that I have been examining here — that of 
dustuchia, misfortune. 

So I had to postpone dealing with a subject that I was pre- 
paring to embark on with those who were following my course 
on the Names-of-the-father, and to return here, before a rather 
different audience, to the question that has been at issue from 
the outset of this teaching, my teaching, namely, what is the 
order of truth that our praxis engenders? 

What makes us certain of our practice is something whose 
basic concepts I think I have outlined for you here, under the 
four headings of the unconscious, repetition, the transference 
and the drive — a sketch of which, as you have seen, I was led 
to include in my exploration of the transference. 

Has that which our praxis engenders the right to map out for 
itself necessities, even contradictory ones, from the standpoint 
of truth ? This question may be transposed in the esoteric for- 
mula: how can we be sure that we are not imposters? 



It would not be too much to say that, in the putting in question 
of analysis, in so far as it is always in suspense, not only in the 
popular mind, but still more in the most private feelings of each 
psycho-analyst, imposture looms overhead — as a contained, 
excluded, ambiguous presence against which the psycho- 
analyst barricades himself with a number of ceremonies, 
forms and rituals. 

263 



TO CONCLUDE 

If I am stressing the term imposture in my talk today, it is 
because it is certainly the first step by which one might approach 
the relation of psycho-analysis with religion and, through this, 
with science. 

I would draw your attention here to a formula that had con- 
siderable historical value in the eighteenth century, when en- 
lightenment man, who was also the man of pleasure, put in 
question religion as a fundamental imposture. I do not need to 
point out to you the road we have travelled since then. Who, 
nowadays, would dream of reducing the concerns of religion to 
such simplistic terms ? It can be said that, throughout the world, 
and even where the struggle against it may be at its sharpest, 
religion nowadays enjoys universal respect. 

This question also involves that of belief, which is presented 
by us in terms that are no doubt less simplistic. We have the 
practice of the fundamental alienation in which all belief is 
sustained, in that double subjective term by which, at the very 
moment when the signification of belief seems most profoundly 
to vanish, the being of the subject is revealed from what was 
strictly speaking the reality of that belief. It is not enough to 
overcome superstition, as one says, for its effects in the human 
being to be attenuated. 

It is certainly this that makes it difficult for us to recognize 
what, in the sixteenth century, could have been the status of 
what was, strictly speaking, disbelief. In this sphere, we know 
that we are, in our time, incomparably and paradoxically 
disarmed. Our bulwark, the only one we have, and the re- 
ligious have felt this in a quite admirable way, is, as Lamennais 
remarked on the subject of religion, that indifference that takes 
as its status precisely the position of science. 

It is in as much as science elides, eludes, divides up a field 
determined in the dialectic of the alienation of the subject, it is 
in as much as science is situated at the precise point that I have 
defined as the point of separation, that it may also sustain the 
mode of existence of the scientist, of the man of science. This 
man of science could be approached in his style, his morals, his 
mode of discourse, in the way in which, through a series of 
precautions, he protects himself from a number of questions 
concerning the very status of the science of which he is the 
servant. This is one of the most important problems from the 

264 



IN YOU MORE THAN YOU 

social point of view — less important, however, than that of the 
status to be given to the corpus of acquired scientific knowledge. 

We will not appreciate die full implication of this corpus of 
science if we do not recognize that it is, in the subjective relation, 
the equivalent of what I have called here the objet petit a. 

The ambiguity that persists in the question as to what in 
psycho-analysis is or is not reducible to science can be explained 
if we realize to what extent analysis implies, in effect, a beyond 
of science — in the modern sense of Science itself, whose status in 
the Cartesian departure I have tried to demonstrate. If measured 
against science understood in this sense, psycho-analysis might 
be reduced to the rank of something with whose forms and 
history it so often suggests an analogy — namely, a church and, 
therefore, a religion. 

The only way to approach this problem is on the basis of the 
following — that, among the modes at man's disposal for posing 
the question of his existence in the world, and beyond, religion, 
as a mode of subsistence of the subject who interrogates himself, 
is to be distinguished by a dimension that is proper to it, and 
which is struck by a kind of oblivion. In every religion that 
deserves the name, there is in fact an essential dimension re- 
served for something operational, known as a sacrament. 

Ask the faithful, or even the priests, what differentiates con- 
firmation from baptism — for, indeed, if it is a sacrament, if it 
operates, it operates on something. Where it washes away sins, 
where it renews a certain pact — I would put a question-mark 
here — Is it a pact? Is it something else? What passes through 
this dimension? — in all the answers we get, we will always find 
this mark, by which is invoked the beyond of religion, oper- 
ational and magical. We cannot evoke this operational dimen- 
sion without realizing that within religion, and for strictly 
defined reasons — the separation and impotence of our reason, 
our finitude — it is this that is marked with oblivion. 

It is in as much as psycho-analysis, in relation to the foun- 
dation of its status, finds itself in some way struck by a similar 
oblivion, that it manages to rediscover itself, marked, in cere- 
mony, with what I will call the same empty face. 

But psycho-analysis is not a religion. It proceeds from the 
same status as Science itself. It is engaged in the central lack 
in which the subject experiences himself as desire. It even has 

265 



TO CONCLUDE 

a medial, chance status, in the gap opened up at the centre of 
the dialectic of the subject and the Other. It has nothing to 
forget, for it implies no recognition of any substance on which 
it claims to operate, even that of sexuality. 

On sexuality, in fact, it operates very little. It teaches us 
nothing new about the operation of sex. Not even a tiny piece 
of erotological technique has emerged from it, and there is more 
of this kind of thing to be found in any of the books that are 
constantly being reprinted, and which come to us from the 
depths of an Arab, Hindu, or Chinese tradition, even some- 
times from our own. Psycho-analysis touches on sexuality only 
in as much as, in the form of the drive, it manifests itself in the 
defile of the signifier, in which is constituted the dialectic of the 
subject in the double stage of alienation and separation. 
Analysis has not kept, on the field of sexuality, what one might, 
mistakenly, have expected of it by way of promises — it has not 
kept such promises because it does not have to keep them. This 
is not its terrain. 

On the other hand, in its own terrain, it is distinguished by 
such an extraordinary capacity for inconsequence and con- 
fusion that, sometime in the not too distant future, its entire 
literature will, I assure you, be classified among the works of 
what are known as thefous littiraires. 

Certainly, one cannot but be struck by the extent to which 
an analyst may err in the correct interpretation of the very facts 
he advances — and recently I was struck once again on reading 
a book like Basic Neurosis, a book that is nevertheless so winning 
in the smart way it gathers together a number of very different 
observations that can certainly be borne out in practice. The 
particular fact that Bergler contributes concerning the function 
of the breast is truly wasted in a pointless discussion, of a rather 
fashionable kind, concerning the superiority of man over 
woman, and of woman over man, that is to say, concerning 
things which, by arousing the greatest possible emotion, are 
also, as far as the main question is concerned, what is of least 
interest. 

Today, I must stress what, in the psycho-analytic movement, 
is to be referred to the function of what I isolate as the objet a 
— and it is not for nothing that I referred here to Bergler's 
book, which, because it lacks an adequate mapping of the 

266 



IN YOU MORE THAN YOU 

proper function of the part-object, and of what is signified, for 
example, by the breast, which he deals with at length, is doomed 
although interesting in itself, to an aimless development that 
leads nowhere. 



The objet a is that object which, in actual experience, in the 
operation and process sustained by the transference, is signalled 
to us by a special status. 

One constantly has ou one's lips, without quite knowing 
what one means, the term the liquidation of the transference. 
What, in fact, does the term mean? Exactly what assets are 
being liquidated? Or is it a question of some kind of operation 
in an alembic ? Is it a question of — // must go somewhere and empty 
itself somewhere? If the transference is the enaction of the un- 
conscious, does one mean that the transference might be a 
means of liquidating the unconscious? Do we no longer have 
any unconscious after an analysis? Or is it, to take up what I 
said before, the subject who is supposed to know who must 
be liquidated as such ? 

It would be odd all the same if this subject who is supposed 
to know, supposed to know something about you, and who, in 
fact, knows nothing, should be regarded as liquidated, at the 
very moment when, at the end of the analysis, he begins at last, 
about you at least, to know something. It is therefore at the 
moment what he takes on most substance, that the subject who 
is supposed to know ought to be supposed to have been vaporized. 
It can only be a question, then, if the term liquidation has any 
meaning, of the permanent liquidation of that deception by 
which the transference tends to be exercised in the direction of 
the closing up of the unconscious. I have already explained to 
you how it works, by referring to it the narcissistic relation by 
which the subject becomes an object worthy of love. From his 
reference to him who must love him, he tries to induce the 
Other into a mirage relation in which he convinces him of being 
worthy of love. 

Freud designates for us its natural culmination in the function 
known as identification. The identification in question is not 
— and Freud articulates it with great subtlety, I would ask you 
to go back and read the two chapters in Group Psychology and the 

267 



TO CONCLUDE 

Analysis of the Ego that I referred to last time, the first is called 
Identification and the second Hypnosis and the State of being in Love 
— the identification in question is not specular, immediate 
identification. It is its support. It supports the perspective 
chosen by the subject in the field of the Other, from which 
specular identification may be seen in a satisfactory light. The 
point of the ego ideal is that from which the subject will see 
himself, as one says, as others see him — which will enable him to 
support himself in a dual situation that is satisfactory for him 
from the point of view of love. 

As a specular mirage, love is essentially deception. It is 
situated in the field established at the level of the pleasure 
reference, of that sole signifier necessary to introduce a per- 
spective centred on the Ideal point, capital I, placed some- 
where in the Other, from which the Other sees me, in the form 
I like to be seen. 

Now, in this very convergence to which analysis is called by 
the element of deception that there is in the transference, some- 
thing is encountered that is paradoxical — the discovery of the 
analyst. This discovery is understandable only at the other level, 
the level at which we have situated the relation of alienation. 

This paradoxical, unique, specified object we call the objet a. 
I have no wish to rehash the whole thing again, but I will 
present it for you in a more syncopated way, stressing that the 
analysand says to his partner, to the analyst, what amounts to 
this — I love you, but, because inexplicably I love in you something more 
than you — the objet petit a — I mutilate you. 

This is the meaning of that breast-complex, that mammal- 
complex, whose relation to the oral drive Bergler saw so clearly, 
except that the orality in question has nothing to do with food, 
and that the whole stress is placed on this effect of mutilation. 

I give myself to you, the patient says again, but this gift of my 
person — as they say — Oh, mystery! is changed inexplicably into a 
gift of shit — a term that is also essential to our experience. 

When this swerve is achieved, at the conclusion of the inter- 
pretative elucidation, we are able to understand retroactively 
that vertigo, for example, of the white page, which, for a par- 
ticular character, who is gifted but stuck at the limits of the 
psychotic, is like the centre of the symptomatic barrage which 
blocks off for him every access to the Other. If, quite literally, 

268 



IN YOU MORE THAN YOU 

he cannot touch this white page at which his ineffable intellec- 
tual effusions come to a stop, it is because he apprehends it 
only as a piece of lavatory paper. 

How shall I describe for you the effect of this presence of the 
objet a, rediscovered always and everywhere, in the movement 
of the transference? I do not have much time today, but I will 
make use, by way of illustration, of a short fable, an apologue, 
which I happened to embark on the other day, with a smaller 
group of listeners. I will provide an end for it, so that if I apolo- 
gize to them for repeating myself, they will see that what 
follows at least is new. 

What happens when the subject begins to speak to the 
analyst? — to the analyst, that is to say, to the subject who is 
supposed to know, but of whom it is certain that he still knows 
nothing. It is to him that is offered something that will first, 
necessarily, take the form of demand. Everyone knows that it 
is this that has orientated all thinking on analysis in the direc- 
tion of a recognition of the function of frustration. But what 
does the subject demand? That is the whole question, for the 
subject knows very well that, whatever his appetites may be, 
whatever his needs may be, none of them will find satisfaction 
in analysis, and that the most he can expect of it is to organize 
his menu. 

In the fable I read, when I was a child, in these early forms 
of strip cartoon, the poor beggar at the restaurant door feasted 
himself on the smell of the roasting meat. On this occasion, the 
smell is the menu, that is to say, signifiers, since we are con- 
cerned with speech only. Well! There is this complication — 
and this is my fable — that the menu is written in Chinese, so 
the first step is to order a translation from the patronne. She 
translates — imperial pat6, spring rolls, etc. etc. It may well be, 
if it is the first time that you have come to a Chinese restaurant, 
that the translation does not tell you much more than the 
original, and in the end you say to the patronne — Recommend 
something. This means : You should know what I desire in all this. 

But is so paradoxical a situation supposed, in the final resort, 
to end there? At this point, when you abdicate your choice to 
some divination of the patronne, whose importance you have 
exaggerated out of all proportion, would it not be more appro- 
priate, if you felt like it, and if the opportunity presented itself, 

269 



TO CONCLUDE 

to tickle her tits a bit? For one goes to a Chinese restaurant not 
only to eat, but to eat in the dimensions of the exotic. If my 
fable means anything, it is in as much as alimentary desire has 
another meaning than alimentation. It is here the support and 
symbol of the sexual dimension, which is the only one to be 
rejected by the psyche. The drive in its relation to the part- 
object is subjacent here. 

Well! Paradoxical, not to say free and easy, as this little 
apologue may seem, it is nevertheless precisely what is at issue 
in the reality of analysis. It is not enough that the analyst should 
support the function of Tiresias. He must also, as Apollinaire 
tells us, have breasts. I mean that the operation and manip- 
ulation of the transference are to be regulated in a way that 
maintains a distance between the point at which the subject 
sees himself as lovable — and that other point where the subject 
sees himself caused as a lack by a, and where a fills the gap con- 
stituted by the inaugural division of the subject. 

The petit a never crosses this gap. Recollect what we learned 
about the gaze, the most characteristic term for apprehending 
the proper function of the objet a. This a is presented precisely, 
in the field of the mirage of the narcissistic function of desire, as 
the object that cannot be swallowed, as it were, which remains 
stuck in the gullet of the signifier. It is at this point of lack that 
the subject has to recognize himself. 

It is for this reason that the function of the transference may 
be topologized in the form that I have already produced in-my 
seminar on Identification — namely, the form that I have called 
on occasion the internal eight, that double curve that you see on 
the blackboard folding back upon itself, and whose essential 
property is that each of its halves, following one another, comes 
back to back at each point with the preceding half. Just suppose 
that a particular half of the curve is unfolded, then you will see 
it cover up the other. 

That is not all. As it is a question here of a plane defined by 
the cut, you need only take a sheet of paper to get, with the help 
of a few small collages, an exact idea of the way in which what 
I am going to tell you may be conceived. It is very easy to 
imagine that, in short, the lobe constituted by this surface at its 
point of return covers another lobe, the two constituting them- 
selves by a form of rim. Note that this in no way implies any 

270 



IN YOU MORE THAN YOU 

contradiction, even in the most ordinary space — except that, 
in order to grasp its extent, one must abstract oneself from 
three-dimensional space, since it is a question here only of a 
topological reality that is limited to the function of a surface. 
You can thus conceive quite easily in the three dimensions that 
one of the parts of the plane, at the moment at which the other, 
by its rim, returns upon it, determines there a sort of inter- 
section. 

This intersection has a meaning outside our space. It is 
structurally definable, without reference to the three dimen- 
sions, by a certain relation of the surface to itself, in so far as, 
returning upon itself, it crosses itself at a point no doubt to be 



D: line of demand. 

I : line of 'identification' intersection . 

T: point of the transference. 

d: desire. 



determined. Well! This line of intersection is for us what may 
symbolize the function of identification. 

In effect, by the very work that leads the subject, while telling 
himself in analysis, to orientate what he says in the direction of 
the resistance of the transference, of deception, deception of love 
as well as of aggression — something like closing up occurs and 
its value is marked in the very form of this spiral developing 
towards a centre. What I have depicted here by means of the 
rim comes back on to the plane constituted by the locus of the 
Other, from the place where the subject, realizing himself in 
his speech, is instituted at the level of the subject who is sup- 
posed to know. Any conception of analysis that is articulated 
— innocently or not, God only knows — to defining the end of 
the analysis as identification with the analyst, by that very fact 
makes an admission of its limits. Any analysis that one teaches 
as having to be terminated by identification with the analyst 
reveals, by the same token, that its true motive force is elided. 
There is a beyond to this identification, and this beyond is 

271 




TO CONCLUDE 

defined by the relation and the distance of the objet petit a to the 
idealizing capital I of identification. 

I cannot enter into the details of what such an affirmation 
implies in the structure of practice. I will refer here to Freud's 
chapter on Hypnosis and the State of being in Love, which I men- 
tioned earlier. In this chapter Freud makes an excellent dis- 
tinction between hypnosis and the state of being in love, even 
in its most extreme forms, what he calls Verliebtheit. Here he 
provides the clearest doctrinal account to be read anywhere, if 
only one knows how to read it. 

There is an essential difference between the object defined as 
narcissistic, the i (a), and the function of the a. Things are such 
that the only view of the schema that Freud gives of hypnosis, 




Object 
of Outgo 



J-.x External objtct 



Freud's Schema 



gives by the same token the formula of collective fascination, 
which was an increasing reality at the time when he wrote that 
article. He draws this schema exactly as I have represented it 
for you on the blackboard. 

In it he designates what he calls the object — in which you 
must recognize what I call the a — the ego and the ego ideal. 
As for the curves, they are made to mark the conjunction of the 
a with the ego ideal. In this way Freud gives its status to 
hypnosis by superposing at the same place the objet a as such 
and this signifying mapping that is called the ego ideal. 

I have given you the elements in order to understand it, 
adding that the objet a may be identical with the gaze. Well, 
Freud precisely indicates the nodal point of hypnosis when he 
formulates that the object is certainly an element that is diffi- 
cult to grasp in it, but an incontestable one, namely, the gaze 

272 



IN YOU MORE THAN YOU 

of the hypnotizer. Remember what I articulated for you about 
the function of the gaze, of its fundamental relations to the 
ink-blot, of the fact that there is already in the world something 
that looks before there is a view for it to see, that the ocellus of 
animal mimicry is indispensible as a presupposition to the fact 
that a subject may see and be fascinated, that the fascination 
of the ink-blot is anterior to the view that discovers it. You 
apprehend by the same token the function of the gaze in hyp- 
nosis, which may be fulfilled in fact by a crystal stopper, or 
anything, so long as it shines. 

To define hypnosis as the confusion, at one point, of the ideal 
signifier in which the subject is mapped with the a, is the most 
assured structural definition that has been advanced. 

Now, as everyone knows, it was by distinguishing itself from 
hypnosis that analysis became established. For the fundamental 
mainspring of the analytic operation is the maintenance of the 
distance between the I — identification — and the a. 

In order to give you formulae-reference points, I will say — if 
the transference is that which separates demand from the drive, 
the analyst's desire is that which brings it back. And in this 
way, it isolates the a, places it at the greatest possible distance 
from the I that he, the analyst, is called upon by the subject to 
embody. It is from this idealization that the analyst has to fall 
in order to be the support of the separating a, in so far as his 
desire allows him, in an upside-down hypnosis, to embody the 
hypnotized patient. 

This crossing of the plane of identification is possible. Any- 
one who has lived through the analytic experience with me to 
the end of the training analysis knows that what I am saying is 
true. 

It is beyond the function of the a that the curve closes back 
upon itself, at a point where nothing is ever said as to the 
outcome of the analysis, that is, after the mapping of the 
subject in relation to the a, the experience of the fundamental 
phantasy becomes the drive. What, then, does he who has passed 
through the experience of this opaque relation to the origin, to 
the drive, become ? How can a subject who has traversed the 
radical phantasy experience the drive? This is the beyond of 
analysis, and has never been approached. Up to now, it has been 
approachable only at the level of the analyst, in as much as 

273 



TO CONCLUDE 

it would be required of him to have specifically traversed the 
cycle of the analytic experience in its totality. 

There is only one kind of psycho-analysis, the training 
analysis — which means a psycho-analysis that has looped this 
loop to its end. The loop must be run through several times. 
There is in effect no other way of accounting for the term 
durcharbeiten, of the necessity of elaboration, except to conceive 
how the loop must be run through more than once. I will not 
deal with this here because it introduces new difficulties, and 
because I cannot say everything, since I am dealing here only 
with the fundamentals of psycho-analysis. 

The schema that I leave you, as a guide both to experience 
and to reading, shows you that the transference operates in the 
direction of bringing demand back to identification. It is in as 
much as the analyst's desire, which remains an x, tends in 
a direction that is the exact opposite of identification, that 
the crossing of the plane of identification is possible, through 
the mediation of the separation of the subject in experience. 
The experience of the subject is thus brought back to the 
plane at which, from the reality of the unconscious, the drive 
may be made present. 

3 
I have already indicated the interest to be found in situating, 
at the level of the subjective status determined as that of the 
objet a, what, for the past three hundred years, man has denned 
in science. 

Perhaps the features that appear in our time so strikingly in 
the form of what are more or less correctly called the mass media,, 
perhaps our very relation to the science that ever increasingly 
invades our field, perhaps all this is illuminated by the reference 
to those two objects, whose place I have indicated for you in a 
fundamental tetrad, namely, the voice — partly planeterized, 
even stratospherized, by our machinery — and the gaze, whose 
ever-encroaching character is no less suggestive, for, by so many 
spectacles, so many phantasies, it is not so much our vision that 
is solicited, as our gaze that is aroused. But I will leave these 
features to one side and stress something else that seems to me 
quite essential. 

There is something profoundly masked in the critique of the 

274 



IN YOU MORE THAN YOU 

history that we have experienced. This, re-enacting the most 
monstrous and supposedly superseded forms of the holocaust, 
is the drama of Nazism. 

I would hold that no meaning given to history, based on 
Hegeliano-Marxist premises, is capable of accounting for this 
resurgence — which only goes to show that the offering to 
obscure gods of an object of sacrifice is something to which few 
subjects can resist succumbing, as if under some monstrous 
spell. 

Ignorance, indifference, an averting of the eyes may explain 
beneath what veil this mystery still remains hidden. But for 
whoever is capable of turning a courageous gaze towards this 
phenomenon — and, once again, there are certainly few who 
do not succumb to the fascination of the sacrifice in itself — the 
sacrifice signifies that, in the object of our desires, we try to 
find evidence for the presence of the desire of this Other that I 
call here the dark God. 

It is the eternal meaning of the sacrifice, to which no one 
can resist, unless animated by that faith, so difficult to sustain, 
which, perhaps, one man alone has been able to formulate in a 
plausible way — namely, Spinoza, with his Amor intellectualis 
Dei. 

What, quite wrongly, has been thought of in Spinoza as 
pantheism is simply the reduction of the field of God to the 
universality of the signifier, which produces a serene, excep- 
tional detachment from human desire. In so far as Spinoza 
says — desire is the essence of man, and in so far as he institutes this 
desire in the radical dependence of the universality of the 
divine attributes, which is possible only through the function 
of the signifier, in so far as he does this, he obtains that unique 
position by which the philosopher — and it is no, accident that 
it is a Jew detached from his tradition who embodies it — may 
be confused with a transcendent love. 

This position is not tenable for us. Experience shows us that 
Kant is more true, and I have proved that his theory of con- 
sciousness, when he writes of practical reason, is sustained only 
by giving a specification of the moral law which, looked at more 
closely, is simply desire in its pure state, that very desire that 
culminates in the sacrifice, strictly speaking, of everything that 
is the object of love in one's human tenderness — I would say, 

275 



TO CONCLUDE 

not only in the rejection of the pathological object, but also in 
its sacrifice and murder. That is why I wrote Kant avec Sade. 

This is the prime example of the eye-opening effect (dtsille- 
ment) that analysis makes possible in relation to the many 
efforts, even the most noble ones, of traditional ethics. 

This is an extreme position, but one that enables us to grasp 
that man can adumbrate his situation in a field made up of 
rediscovered knowledge only if he has previously experienced 
the limit within which, like desire, he is bound. Love, which, it 
seems to some, I have down-graded, can be posited only in that 
beyond, where, at first, it renounces its object. This also enables 
us to understand that any shelter in which may be established 
a viable, temperate relation of one sex to the other necessitates 
the intervention — this is what psycho-analysis teaches us — of 
that medium known as the paternal metaphor. 

The analyst's desire is not a pure desire. It is a desire to 
obtain absolute difference, a desire which intervenes when, 
confronted with the primary signifier, the subject is, for the 
first time, in a position to subject himself to it. There only may 
the signification of a limitless love emerge, because it is outside 
the limits of the law, where alone it may live. 
