     ----------------------------------------------------------------
     The Politics of Lack

     Lasse Thomassen
     University of Essex
     lathom@essex.ac.uk

     © 2001 Lasse Thomassen.
     All rights reserved.
     ----------------------------------------------------------------

     Review of:
     Slavoj Zizek, The Ticklish Subject: The Absent Centre of
     Political Ontology. London: Verso, 1999.

  1. The Ticklish Subject is a recent work by Slovene philosopher,
     social theorist, and Lacanian psychoanalyst Slavoj Zizek, who
     has produced books at the pace of more than one per year since
     the 1989 publication of his first book in English, The Sublime
     Object of Ideology. As in his previous books, Zizek intermixes
     psychoanalysis, nineteenth-century German philosophy, political
     theory, and popular culture. With The Ticklish Subject, Zizek
     endeavors to bring together three of his main concerns: Lacanian
     psychoanalysis, the question of subjectivity, and the
     possibilities for a Leftist politics in today's late-capitalist,
     postmodern world. He sets out to provide a "systematic
     exposition of the foundations of his theory" (to quote the
     book's cover), in order to address the relation between Lacanian
     theory, subjectivity, and politics. Thus, The Ticklish Subject
     purports to be a Lacanian theory of politics and the
     political--in short, a theory of political subjectivity.

  2. The book is divided into three parts, each of which addresses
     one of three important formulations of subjectivity: the German
     Idealist subject, the political subject of French
     post-Althusserian political philosophy, and the
     deconstructionist and multi-spectral subject theorized by Judith
     Butler. In each of the book's three main parts, Zizek starts
     from a critical reading of Martin Heidegger's, Alain Badiou's,
     and Judith Butler's respective critiques of the traditional
     Cartesian notion of the subject.

  3. As an alternative to the Cartesian subject and to the three
     critiques of the Cartesian subject, Zizek proposes a Lacanian
     notion of subjectivity. To explain what this involves, we can
     start by looking at the notion of the decision and at the
     distinctions Zizek makes between the "ontological" and the
     "ontic." Whereas the ontic refers to what is--that is, to a
     positive being--the ontological refers to the conditions of
     possibility and limits of what is. With the ontic we ask what
     is; with the ontological we ask how it is possible that it can
     be. Zizek believes that no ontic content or being can be derived
     from an ontological form. In other words, there is no concrete
     ontic content that can be the positive expression of being as
     such--that is, of the ontological order. In this sense, the
     ontological relates to the ontic in the same way as form relates
     to content. What Zizek wants to stress here is that it is not
     possible to find a concrete community that expresses the
     structure of community as such. So, for instance, he criticizes
     Heidegger's assertion that the National Socialist State is the
     concrete expression of the structure of community and social
     being as such. Heidegger's fault lies in the fact that he tries
     to establish a necessary connection between the ontological (the
     structure of social being as such) and a particular ontic being
     (the National Socialist State). We may be able to deconstruct
     community to show the conditions of possibility of community,
     but we cannot find the particular community that best expresses
     these conditions of possibility. Zizek develops this argument as
     a critique of Heidegger. The problem with Heidegger is that on
     one hand he insists on the distinction between the ontological
     and the ontic, but on the other hand he ends up looking for the
     particular ontic community that would realize the "essence" of
     the ontological structure of society as such, that is, for the
     ontic of the ontological.

  4. Zizek insists that there is an insurmountable gap between the
     ontological and the ontic, and that we are not able to move
     directly from one to the other. In other words, it is not
     possible to proceed directly from a formal argument to a
     particular substantial argument, from form to content. The
     question then becomes how the gap between them is filled or
     bridged. Here we encounter Zizek's notion of the decision, which
     fills the gap between the ontological and the ontic. The
     decision cannot be grounded in any ontological structure, but
     this does not mean that you cannot give grounds for the
     decisions you make. What it means is that the decision can only
     be grounded in ontic structures, which are never universal. The
     decision can be grounded in a system of thought--a culture, an
     ideology, a logic, and so on--but no system can be universal and
     fully coherent. Thus, ultimately there is no final and "secure"
     ground for the decision. It is for this reason that Zizek can
     assert that the decision filling the gap between the ontological
     and the ontic is "mad" in Kierkegaard's sense of being
     ultimately ungrounded. The decision is a leap of faith, so to
     speak.

  5. We can now understand Zizek's Lacanian notion of the subject. In
     Lacanian theory, the subject is situated in the lack that we
     find in any symbolic structure and in the decision or act
     attempting to fill this lack. Here we can understand the lack
     analogously to the gap between the ontological and the ontic.
     Any symbolic structure--from mathematics to ideology--is
     constituted by a lack, something that escapes the symbolic
     structure and that it cannot explain. Thus, the lack denotes an
     incompleteness of the symbolic structure. The symbolic
     structures surrounding us and on which we rely for our social
     interaction are lacking something, and this lack is constitutive
     of social life and of any community. This makes social life a
     fragile enterprise because it does not have a secure foundation.
     The subject can then try to "fill in" this gap or to hide it.
     This is, for instance, the case when a constitutive insecurity
     is presented as contingent, when we are told that we merely have
     to get rid of a particular group of people, a particular
     environmental risk and so on in order to (re-)establish a
     perfect harmony. This is one aspect of what Zizek calls
     ideology. However, every attempt to get rid of the constitutive
     lack and fragility is ultimately futile, precisely because it is
     never possible to close the gap between the ontological and the
     ontic. The subject--and political subjectivity--is situated at
     the point where the filling of the lack would take place. Hence,
     the subject is itself constituted by a lack. The subject never
     succeeds in filling out the lack of the symbolic structures or
     the gap between the ontological and the ontic. The subject is
     never fully constituted; rather, the subject is these constant
     but always futile attempts at constituting the subject.

  6. We have seen how Zizek conceives of the subject. It is from this
     conception of the subject that he criticizes conceptions of
     subjectivity by Kant, Heidegger, and Butler in each of the three
     main parts of The Ticklish Subject. Rather than provide a
     detailed analysis of each of these particular critiques, I will
     address the ethico-political conclusions Zizek draws in order to
     evaluate the value of the book. The question Zizek poses is
     whether we can argue for a particular Leftist politics given the
     conclusions he has made about political subjectivity. In this
     regard, the term "the authentic act" is central. The authentic
     act is an act--or, we could say, a decision--relating to itself
     in a special way. The authentic act acknowledges that ultimately
     it cannot be grounded. That is, the authentic act acknowledges
     that there can be no total, universal, and coherent symbolic
     system that can justify and support the act. Obviously the act
     can be supported by and justified within a cultural or
     ideological symbolic system. However, this system cannot be
     complete and coherent. There is something that escapes it; in
     other words, there is a lack. As opposed to what Zizek calls a
     "pseudo-act," the authentic act acknowledges this fact and does
     not seek to cover it up. Zizek then believes that he can
     distinguish the Nazism of the 1930s and the 1940s as a
     pseudo-act, and the 1917 Communist Revolution in Russia as an
     authentic act. Whereas the former sought to (re-)establish a
     positive and "full" totality, according to Zizek, the latter
     acknowledged that it could never establish a complete totality
     and therefore had to be repeated infinitely as an act. The
     latter is said to rely on the idea of a constant revolution.
     Thus, an authentic act acknowledges that it cannot be deduced
     from and reduced to any total and coherent symbolic structure.
     The authentic act is anti-totalitarian. Hence, we can say that
     the authentic act and an authentic politics "suspend" the
     symbolic structures through which we understand the world and on
     which we rely when we act in the world. This amounts to saying
     that the authentic act and an authentic politics put into
     question the structures that are otherwise taken as given,
     natural, and universal.

  7. It is in this light that we must view Zizek's critique of
     capitalism and of the theories of multiculturalism and risk
     society. According to Zizek, the world is capitalist today, and
     therefore politics must relate to the capitalist structures
     underlying contemporary life. This is not the case with the
     theories and the politics of postmodernism, multiculturalism,
     and risk society, however. These theories do not question the
     fundamental structures of contemporary society. Instead, they
     focus on what are merely the consequences of the development of
     contemporary capitalism: namely particularized cultural
     identities and environmental risks. In fact, environmental risks
     are generated by capitalism, and capitalism is able to exist and
     to globalize itself precisely by hiding itself behind cultural
     and national particularities. Thus, a Leftist anti-capitalist
     politics cannot merely recognize and affirm cultural diversity
     and target environmental risks. Rather, a Leftist politics
     should question the very structures underlying these phenomena.
     In this way, Zizek believes that it is possible to argue for a
     Leftist anti-essentialist political position that avoids
     reproducing existing structures and is not nihilistic, but is
     able to improve social conditions.

  8. In The Ticklish Subject, Zizek provides a powerful articulation
     of political subjectivity, and I highly recommend the book. This
     said, however, I do have several reservations about the central
     argument of the book. Although there is a red thread running
     through it, the book does not provide the "systematic
     exposition" promised by its cover. In addition, I am troubled by
     the ambiguous scope and lack of internal consistency of Zizek's
     theoretical argument. As we have seen, Zizek makes two central
     points in The Ticklish Subject. First, he insists on a
     distinction between the ontological and the ontic, and on the
     impossibility of deriving an ethics and a politics from a formal
     political ontology, for instance, from a Lacanian ontology of
     political subjectivity. Secondly, he attempts to argue for a
     Lacanian ethics and/or a Leftist ethico-political position. This
     is, indeed, a very interesting project and an important
     philosophical enterprise, given the ongoing political paralysis
     and postmodern nihilism of the Left today. However, Zizek's
     position raises several problems. First, the status of Zizek's
     notion of the subject is unclear. Is it an argument with
     universal applicability, or an argument about contemporary
     Western societies? Is Zizek's notion of the subject a purely
     formal (structural) notion, or is it only applicable to
     postmodern Western subjectivities?

  9. More importantly, there is the problem of bridging the gap
     between Zizek's formal Lacanian argument and his
     ethico-political arguments. This is not a critique of Zizek's
     ethico-political position, but of the way he argues for it.
     Zizek uses large parts of the book to stress the constitutive
     gap between the ontological and the ontic. However, when he
     engages with ethico-political arguments, an ambiguity appears.
     It is not clear what his Lacanian ethics and politics imply,
     since Zizek appears to argue for three different and mutually
     exclusive positions in The Ticklish Subject. The first position
     is that it is not possible to derive an ethics and a politics
     from the Lacanian argument about subjectivity. This follows from
     his insistence on the gap between the ontological and the ontic.
     The second position is that there is a certain Lacanian ethics,
     namely an ethics of disruption and suspension. This is an ethics
     that does not attempt to erect a new comprehensive system
     telling us how to live the Good Life, but rather attempts to
     open up possibilities for disrupting any existing system. In
     relation to this position, the problem is whether this is not
     already a particular positivization of a formal argument about
     subjectivity, a positivization that does not acknowledge the
     irreducible gap between the ontological and the ontic. Finally,
     Zizek seems to argue not only for concrete ethical and political
     positions, but also that these positions are the correct
     expression of the ontology of the subject. This, of course, runs
     counter to the argument he makes about the irreducibility of the
     gap between the ontological and the ontic. Zizek's Lacanian
     argument is precisely that it is not possible to bridge the gap
     between a formal argument and a concrete position. In short,
     Zizek tries to do things with Lacanian theory that--according to
     his own arguments--it cannot do.

 10. These critical remarks notwithstanding, The Ticklish Subject is
     a book that should be read by anyone interested in political
     subjectivity.

                                            Department of Government
                                                 University of Essex
                                                  lathom@essex.ac.uk

     ----------------------------------------------------------------

     COPYRIGHT (c) 2001 BY LASSE THOMASSEN. READERS MAY USE PORTIONS
     OF THIS WORK IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE FAIR USE PROVISIONS OF U.S.
     COPYRIGHT LAW. IN ADDITION, SUBSCRIBERS AND MEMBERS OF
     SUBSCRIBED INSTITUTIONS MAY USE THE ENTIRE WORK FOR ANY INTERNAL
     NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE BUT, OTHER THAN ONE COPY SENT BY EMAIL,
     PRINT OR FAX TO ONE PERSON AT ANOTHER LOCATION FOR THAT
     INDIVIDUAL'S PERSONAL USE, DISTRIBUTION OF THIS ARTICLE OUTSIDE
     OF A SUBSCRIBED INSTITUTION WITHOUT EXPRESS WRITTEN PERMISSION
     FROM EITHER THE AUTHOR OR THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS IS
     EXPRESSLY FORBIDDEN.

     THIS ARTICLE AND OTHER CONTENTS OF THIS ISSUE ARE AVAILABLE FREE
     OF CHARGE UNTIL RELEASE OF THE NEXT ISSUE. A TEXT-ONLY ARCHIVE
     OF THE JOURNAL IS ALSO AVAILABLE FREE OF CHARGE. FOR FULL
     HYPERTEXT ACCESS TO BACK ISSUES, SEARCH UTILITIES, AND OTHER
     VALUABLE FEATURES, YOU OR YOUR INSTITUTION MAY SUBSCRIBE TO
     PROJECT MUSE, THE ON-LINE JOURNALS PROJECT OF THE JOHNS HOPKINS
     UNIVERSITY PRESS.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------
