
AUTHOR: John the Apostle, John the Elder or another lead- 
ing Christian by the name of John. 

(Justin Martyr in his "Dialogue with Trypho the Je*w" 
'written about 140, appears to ascribe the authorship of this 
book to John the Apostle. But Dionysius, Bishop of Alexan- 
dria from 249 to 265 ', a learned and holy man, could not 
accept John the Apostle as the author of this Revelation, and 
gave almost conclusive reasons for his opinion. Since those 
early days there has been much argument, and much re- 
search has gone into the problem of establishing authorship 
but 'without conclusive result. It is essential that the reader 
should study a good commentary on the subject of author- 
ship, so that he may appreciate the difficulties involved. Some 
books are listed on pages 49 and 50.) 

DATE: Probably about 95, but some hold to an earlier date. 

DESTINATION: This book is plainly intended primarily for the 
Seven Churches of Asia. But since the Message of the book is 
relevant to all Christians under persecution, and since the 
book treats of Divine Judgments upon the 'whole 'world, the 
author must surely have intended it to be circulated among 
all Christian communities. 

THEME: This book consists of a series of visions granted to 
John 'while in exile for his Christian witness. The language is 



2 

highly symbolic and figurative; and attempts in modern days 
to fit its prophecies into contemporary situations have led 
interpreters into all kinds of difficulties. It is thought by many 
that the symbols and figures of the book would be under- 
stood by the Christians to 'whom the book was first sent, but 
that the key to their interpretation has now been lost. How- 
ever , certain themes emerge distinctly for the modern read- 
er's profit: 

1. The absolute sovereignty of God, and His ultimate 
purpose to destroy all forms of evil. 

2. The inevitable judgments of God upon evil, upon the 
worship of false gods, which include riches, power, and suc- 
cess. 

3. The necessity for patient endurance, the ultimate secu- 
rity being the knowledge that God is in control of his- 
tory. 

4. The existence of reality, represented here under such 
symbols as the New Jerusalem, apart and secure from the 
battles and tribulations of earthly life, promises complete 
spiritual security to those who are faithful to God and His 
Christ. 

5. The glimpses of worship and adoration, constantly 
offered to God and the Lamb, are a kind of pattern of mavis 
ultimate acknowledgment of the Character of God when he 
sees Him as He is. 

But for any proper appreciation of the themes of this mys- 
terious book it is imperative that the reader should make use 
of one or more commentaries. 



3 

SPECIAL NOTE: The Greek of this book is peculiar in con- 
struction and is occasionally ungrammaticaL Sometimes, in 
the visions, for instance, there is a mixing of past and present 
tenses. After careful consideration the translator has decided 
not to reproduce these oddities, except where a sudden 
change of tense adds vividness to the description. 



THE REVELATION OF JOHN 

CONCERNING THIS BOOK 

This is a Revelation from Jesus Christ, which God gave 1 
Him so that He might show His servants what must very * 
soon take place. He made it known by sending His angel to 
His servant John, who is the witness of all that he saw the 
Message of God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ. 

Happy is the man who reads this prophecy and happy are 
those who hear it read and pay attention to its Message; for 
the time is short. 

JOHN'S GREETING AND ASCRIPTION 

John, to the Seven Churches in Asia: 1 

Grace and peace be to you from Him Who is and Who 4 
was and Who is coming, from the Seven Spirits before His 
Throne, and from Jesus Christ the faithful Witness, First- 
Born of the dead, and Ruler of kings upon earth. To Him 
Who loves us and has set us free from our sins through His 
own blood, Who has made us a kingdom of priests to His 
God and Father, to Him be glory and power for timeless 
ages, Amen! 
See, He is coming in the clouds and every eye shall see 



4 

Him, even those who pierced Him, and His coming will mean 
bitter sorrow to every tribe upon the earth. So let it be! 

"I am Alpha and Omega," says the Lord God, "Who is 
and Who was and Who is coming, the Almighty." 

THE MESSAGE TO THE SEVEN CHURCHES 

1 I, John, who am your brother and your companion in the 
9 distress, the kingdom and the faithful endurance to which 
Jesus calls us, was on the island called Patrnos because I had 
spoken God's Message and borne witness to Jesus. On the 
Lord's Day I knew myself inspired by the Spirit, and I heard 
from behind me a voice loud as a trumpet call, saying, 

"Write down in a book what you see, and send it to the 
Seven Churches to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, 
Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea!" 

I turned to see whose voice it was that was speaking to 
me, and when I had turned I saw seven golden lampstands, 
and among these lampstands I saw someone like a Son of 
Man. He was dressed in a long robe with a golden girdle 
around His breast; His head and His hair were white as snow- 
white wool, His eyes blazed like fire, and His feet shone as 
the finest bronze glows in the furnace. His voice had the 
sound of a great tvaterfall, and I saw that in His right hand 
He held seven stars. A sharp two-edged sword came out of 
His mouth, and His face was ablaze like the sun at its height. 

When my eyes took in this sight I fell at His feet like a 
dead man. And then He placed His right hand upon me and 
said: 

"Do not be afraid. I am the First and the Last, the Living 
One. I am He Who was dead, and now you see Me alive for 
timeless ages! I hold in My hand the keys of Death and the 
Grave. Therefore, write down what you have seen, both the 



5 

things which are now, and the things which are to be here- 
after. The secret meaning of the seven stars which you saw 
in My right hand, and of the seven golden lampstands is this: 
The seven stars are the angels of the seven Churches and the 
seven lampstands are the Churches themselves." 

(1) TO THE LOVELESS CHURCH 

"Write this to the angel of the Church in Ephesus: 

"These words are spoken by the One Who holds the seven 
stars safe in His right hand, and Who walks among the seven 
golden lampstands. I know what you have done; I know how 
hard you have worked and what you have endured. I know 
that you will not tolerate wicked men, that you have put to 
the test self-styled 'Apostles,' who are nothing of the sort, 
and have found them to be liars. I know your powers of 
endurance how you have suffered for the sake of My 
Name and have not grown weary. But I hold this against you, 
that you do not love as you did at first. Remember how far 
you have fallen. Repent and live as you lived at first. Other- 
wise, if your heart remains unchanged, I shall come to you 
and remove your lampstand from its place. 

"Yet you have this to your credit, that you hate the prac- 
tices of the Nicolaitans, which I Myself detest. Let every 
listener hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: 

"To the victorious I will give the right to eat from the 
Tree of Life which grows in the Paradise of God." 

(2) TO THE PERSECUTED CHURCH 

"Write this to the angel of the Church in Smyrna: 
"These words are spoken by the First and the Last, Who 
died and came to life again. I know of your tribulation and 
of your poverty though in fact you are rich! I know how 



6 

you are slandered by those who call themselves Jews, but in 
fact are no Jews but a synagogue of Satan. Have no fear of 
what you will suffer. I tell you now that the Devil is going 
to cast some of your number into prison where your faith 
will be tested and your distress will last for ten days. Be 
faithful in the face of death and I will give you the crown of 
life. Let every listener hear what the Spirit says to the 
Churches: 

"The victorious cannot suffer the slightest hurt from the 
Second Death." 

(3) TO THE OVER-TOLERANT CHURCH 

"Write this to the angel of the Church in Pergamum: 

"These words are spoken by Him Who has the sharp 
two-edged sword. I know where you live where Satan sits 
enthroned. I know that you hold fast to My Name and that 
you never denied your faith in Me even in the days when 
Antipas, My faithful witness, was martyred before your eyes 
in the very house of Satan. 

"Yet I have a few things against you some of your num- 
ber cling to the teaching of Balaam, the man who taught 
Balak how to entice the children of Israel into eating meat 
sacrificed to idols and into sexual immorality. I have also 
against you the fact that among your number are some who 
hold just as closely to the teaching of the Nicolaitans. Re- 
pent, then, or else I shall come to you quickly and make 
war upon them with the sword of My mouth. Let the listener 
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: 

"I will give the victorious some of the hidden manna, and 
I will also give him a white stone with a new name written 
upon it which no man knows except the man who receives 
it." 



J 

(4) TO THE COMPROMISING CHURCH 

"Write this to the angel of the Church in Thyatira: 2 

"These are the words of the Son of God Whose eyes l8 
blazed like fire and Whose feet shine like the finest bronze: 

"I know what you have done. I know of your love and 
your loyalty, your service and your endurance. Moreover, 
I know that you are doing more than you did at first. But I 
have this against you, that you tolerate that Jezebel-woman 
who calls herself a prophetess, but who by her teaching de- 
ceives my servants into sexual immorality and eating idols'- 
meat. I have given her time to repent but she has shown no 
desire to repent of her immorality. See, now, how I throw her 
into bed and her lovers with her, and I will send them terri- 
ble suffering unless they repent of what she has done. As 
for her children, I shall strike them dead. Then all the 
Churches will know that I am the One Who searches men's 
hearts and minds, and that I will reward each one of you 
according to your deeds. 

"But for the rest of you at Thyatira, who do not hold 
this teaching, and have not learned what they call 'the deep 
things of Satan,' I will lay no further burden upon you. 
Hold on to what you have until I come! 

"To the one who is victorious, who carries out My work 
to the end, I will give authority over the nations, just as I 
Myself have received authority from My Father, and I will 
give him the morning star. He shall 'shepherd them with a 
rod of iron'; he shall 'dash them in pieces like a potter's ves- 
sel.' Let the listener hear what the Spirit says to the 
Churches." 



8 

(5) TO THE SLEEPING CHURCH 

3 "Write this to the angel of the Church in Sardis: 
i "These are the words of Him Who holds in His hand the 
seven Spirits of God and the seven stars: 

"I know what you have done, that you have a reputation 
for being alive, but that in fact you are dead. Now wake 
up! Strengthen what you still have before it dies! For I 
have not found any of your deeds complete in the sight 
of My God. Remember then what you were given and what 
you were taught. Hold to those things and repent. If you 
refuse to wake up, then I will come to you like a thief, and 
you will have no idea of the hour of My coming. 

"Yet you still have a few names in Sardis of people who 
have not soiled their garments. They shall walk with Me in 
white, for they have deserved to do so. The victorious shall 
wear such white garments, and never will I erase his name 
from the Book of Life. Indeed, I will speak his name openly 
before My Father and His angels. Let the listener hear what 
the Spirit says to the Churches." 

(6) TO THE CHURCH WITH OPPORTUNITY 

3 "Then write this to the angel of the Church in Phila- 

7 delphia: 

"These are the words of the Holy One and the True, 
Who holds the key of David, Who opens and no man shall 
shut, and Who shuts and no man shall open. I know what 
you have done. See, I have given you a door flung wide 
open, which no man can close! For you have some little 
power and have been faithful to My Message and have not 
denied My Name. See how I deal with those of Satan's 
synagogue, who claim to be Jews, yet are no Jews but liars! 



9 

Watch how I make them come and bow down before your 
feet and acknowledge that I have loved you. Because you 
have obeyed My call to patient endurance I will keep you 
safe from the hour of trial which is to come upon the whole 
world, to test all who live upon the earth. I am coming 
soon; hold fast to what you have let no one deprive you 
of your crown. As for the victorious, I will make him a 
pillar in the Temple of My God, and he will never leave it. 
I will write upon him the Name of My God, and the name of 
the City of My God, the New Jerusalem which comes 
down out of Heaven from My God. And I will write upon 
him My own new Name. Let the listener hear what the 
Spirit says to the Churches." 

(7) TO THE COMPLACENT CHURCH 

"Then write this to the angel of the Church in Laodicea: 3 
"These are the words of the Amen, the faithful and true J 4 
Witness, the Beginning of God's Creation: 

"I know what you have done, and that you are neither 
cold nor hot. I could wish that you were either cold or 
hot! But since you are lukewarm and neither hot nor cold, 
I intend to spit you out of my mouth! While you say, 
*I am rich, I have prospered, and there is nothing that I 
need,' you have no eyes to see that you are wretched, pitiable, 
poverty-stricken, blind and naked. My advice to you is 
to buy from Me that gold which is purified in the furnace 
so that you may be rich, and white garments to wear so that 
you may hide the shame of your nakedness, and salve to 
put on your eyes to make you see. All those whom I love 
I correct and discipline. Therefore, shake off your com- 
placency and repent. See, I stand knocking at the door. If 
anyone listens to My Voice and opens the door, I will go 



10 

into his house and dine with him, and he with Me. As for the 
victorious, I will give him the honor of sitting beside Me 
on My Throne, just as I Myself have won the victory 
and have taken My seat beside My Father on His 
Throne. Let the listener hear what the Spirit says to the 
Churches." 

THE VISION OF HEAVEN 

4 Later I looked again, and before my eyes a door stood 
* open in Heaven, and in my ears was the voice with the ring 
of a trumpet, which I had heard at first, speaking to me and 
saying, 

"Come up here, and I will show you what must happen 
in the future." 

Immediately I knew myself to be inspired by the Spirit, 
and in my vision I saw that a Throne had been set up in 
Heaven, and there was someone seated upon the Throne. 
His appearance blazed like diamond and topaz, and all 
around the Throne shone a halo like an emerald rainbow. 
In a circle around the Throne there were twenty-four 
thrones and seated upon them twenty-four Elders dressed 
in white with golden crowns upon their heads. From the 
central Throne come flashes of lightning, noises and peals 
of thunder. Seven lamps are burning before the Throne, 
and they are the seven Spirits of God. In front of the 
Throne there appears a sea of glass as clear as crystal. On 
each side, encircling the Throne, are four Living Creatures 
covered with eyes in front and behind. The first Living 
Creature is like a lion, the second is like a calf, the third 
has a face like a man, and the fourth Living Creature appears 
like an eagle in flight. These four Creatures have each of 
them six wings and are covered with eyes, all around them, 



II 

and even within them. Day and night they never cease to 
say, 

"Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God, the Almighty, Who 
was and Who is and Who is coming." 

THE CEASELESS WORSHIP OF HEAVEN 

And whenever the Living Creatures give glory and honor 4 
and thanksgiving to the One Who sits upon the Throne, 9 
Who lives for timeless ages, the twenty-four Elders prostrate 
themselves before Him Who is seated upon the Throne and 
worship the One Who lives for timeless ages. They cast 
their crowns before the Throne and say, 

"Thou art worthy, O Lord our God, to receive glory 
and honor and power, for Thou didst create all things; by 
Thy Will they existed and were created." 

THE SEALED BOOK OF FUTURE EVENTS 

Then I noticed in the right hand of the One seated upon 5 
the Throne a book filled with writing both inside and on its r 
back, and it was sealed with seven seals. And I saw a mighty 
angel who called out in a loud voice, 

"Who is fit to open the book and break its seals?" 

And no one in Heaven or upon earth or under the earth 
was able to open the book, or even to look at it. I began to 
weep bitterly because no one could be found fit to open 
the book, or even to look at it, when one of the Elders said 
to me: 

"Do not weep. See, the Lion from the tribe of Judah, the 
Root of David, has won the victory and is able to open 
the book and break its seven seals." 

Then, standing in the very center of the Throne and of 
the four Living Creatures and of the Elders, I saw a Lamb 



12 

that seemed to have been slaughtered. He had seven horns and 
seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God and are sent 
out into every corner of the earth. Then He came and 
took the book from the right hand of Him Who was seated 
upon the Throne. 

THE NEW HYMN OF THE CREATED AND OF THE REDEEMED 

5 When He had taken the book, the four Living Creatures 

8 and the twenty-four Elders prostrated themselves before 

the Lamb. Each of them had a harp, and they had golden 

bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints. 

They sang a new song and these are the words they sang: 

"Worthy art Thou to take the book and break its seals, 
for Thou hast been slain and by Thy blood hast purchased 
for God men from every tribe, and tongue, and people, and 
nation! Thou hast made them a kingdom of priests for our 
God, and they shall reign as kings upon the earth." 

THE HYMN OF THE WHOLE COMPANY OF HEAVEN 

5 Then in my vision I heard the voices of many angels 
ii encircling the Throne, the Living Creatures and the Elders. 
There were myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands, 
crying in a great voice, 

"Worthy is the Lamb Who was slain, to receive power 
and riches and wisdom, and strength and honor and glory 
and blessing! " 

Then I heard the voice of everything created in Heaven, 
upon earth, under the earth and upon the sea, and all that 
are in them saying, 

"Blessing and honor and glory and power be given to 
Him Who sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, for 
timeless ages!" 



IJ 

The four Living Creatures said, "Amen," while the Elders 
fell down and worshiped. 

THE LAMB BREAKS THE SEALS 

THE FIRST RIDER: CONQUEST 

Then I watched while the Lamb broke one of the seven 
seals, and I heard one of the four Living Creatures say in 
a voice of thunder, 

"Come out!" 

I looked, and before my eyes was a white horse. Its rider 
carried a bow, and he was given a crown. He rode out 
conquering and bent on conquest. 

THE SECOND RIDER: WAR 

Then, when the Lamb broke the second seal, I heard the 
second Living Creature cry, 

"Come out!" 

And another horse came forth, red in color. Its rider was 
given power to deprive the earth of peace, so that men should 
kill one another. A huge sword was put into his hand. 

THE THIRD RIDER: FAMINE 

When the Lamb broke the third seal, I heard the third 
Living Creature say, 

"Come out!" 

I looked again and there before my eyes was a black horse. 
Its rider had a pair of scales in his hand, and I heard a 
voice which seemed to come from the four Living Creatures, 
saying, 

"A quart of wheat for a quarter, and three quarts of 



12 



14 

barley for a quarter but no tampering with the oil or the 



wine! 



THE FOURTH RIDER: DEATH 

6 Then, when He broke the fourth seal I heard the voice 

7 of the fourth Living Creature cry, 

"Come out!" 

Again I looked, and there appeared a horse sickly green 
in color. The name of its rider was Death, and the Grave 
followed close behind him. A quarter of the earth was put 
into their power, to kill with the sword, by famine, by 
violence, and through the wild beasts of the earth. 

THE CRY OF THE MARTYRS IN HEAVEN 

6 When the Lamb broke the fifth seal, I could see, beneath 
9 the Altar, the souls of those who had been killed for the sake 

of the Word of God and through the faithfulness of their 

witness. They cried out in a loud voice, saying, 

"How long shall it be, O Lord of All, holy and true, before 

Thou shalt judge and avenge our blood upon the inhabitants 

of the earth?" 
Then each of them was given a white robe, and they 

were told to be patient a little longer, until the number of 

their fellow servants and of their brethren, who were to 

die as they had died, should be complete. 

THE AWE-FULL WRATH OF GOD 

6 Then I watched while He broke the sixth seal There 
was a tremendous earthquake, the sun turned dark like 
coarse black cloth, and the full moon was red as blood. The 
stars of the sky fell upon the earth, just as a fig tree sheds 
unripe figs when shaken in a gale. The sky vanished as 



15 

though it were a scroll being rolled up, and every mountain 
and island was jolted out of its place. Then the kings of the 
earth, and the great men, the captains, the wealthy, the 
powerful, and every man, whether slave or free, hid them- 
selves in caves and among mountain rocks. They called out to 
the mountains and the rocks: 

"Fall down upon us and hide us from the Face of Him 
Who sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the 
Lamb! For the great day of their wrath has come, and who 
can stand against it?" 

JUDGMENT STAYED FOR THE SEALING OF GOD ? S PEOPLE 

Later I saw four angels standing at the four corners of 
the earth holding in check the four winds of the earth that 
none should blow upon the earth or upon the sea or upon 
any tree. Then I saw another angel ascending out of the 
east, holding the seal of the living God. He cried out in a 
loud voice to the four angels who had the power to harm 
the earth and the sea: 

"Do no harm to the earth, nor to the sea, nor to the 
trees until we have sealed the servants of our God upon 
their foreheads." 

I heard the number of those who were thus sealed and it 
was 144,000, from every tribe of the sons of Israel. Twelve 
thousand were sealed from the tribe of Judah; twelve thou- 
sand from the tribe of Reuben; twelve thousand from the 
tribe of Gad; twelve thousand from the tribe of Asher; 
twelve thousand from the tribe of Naphtali; twelve thou- 
sand from the tribe of Manasseh; twelve thousand from the 
tribe of Simeon; twelve thousand from the tribe of Levi; 
twelve thousand from the tribe of Issachar; twelve thousand 
from the tribe of Zebulun; twelve thousand from the tribe 



l6 

of Joseph; and twelve thousand were sealed from the tribe 
of Benjamin. 

THE COUNTLESS HOST OF THE REDEEMED 

7 When this was done I looked again, and before my eyes 
9 appeared a vast crowd beyond man's power to number. 
They came from every nation and tribe and people and lan- 
guage, and they stood before the Throne of the Lamb, 
dressed in white robes with palm branches in their hands. 
They shouted with a great voice these words: 

"Salvation belongs to our God Who sits upon the Throne 
and to the Lamb!" 

Then all the angels stood encircling the Throne, the Elders 
and the four Living Creatures and prostrated themselves 
with heads bowed befor.e the Throne and worshiped God 
saying, 

"Amen! Blessing and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving 
and honor and power and strength be given to our God for 
timeless ages!" 

THE COUNTLESS HOST EXPLAINED 

7 Then one of the Elders addressed me and asked, 
*3 "These who are dressed in white robes who are they, 
and where do they come from?" 

"You know, my Lord," I answered him. 

Then he told me: 

"These are those who have come through the Great 
Oppression; they have washed their robes and made them 
white in the blood of the Lamb. That is why they now 
have their place before the Throne of God, and serve 
Him day and night in His Temple. He Who sits upon the 
Throne will be their Shelter. They will never again know 



1J 

hunger or thirst The sun shall never beat upon them, neither 
shall there be any scorching heat, for the Lamb Who is in the 
center of the Throne will be their Shepherd and will lead 
them to springs of Living Water. And God will wipe away 
every tear from their eyes." 

THE SEVENTH SEAL: COMPLETE SILENCE 

Then, when He had broken the seventh seal, there was 8 
utter silence in Heaven for what seemed to be about half an i 
hour. 

THE VISION OF THE SEVEN TRUMPETERS 

Then I saw the seven angels who stand in the presence 8 
of God, and seven trumpets were put into their hands. * 

Then another angel came and stood by the Altar holding 
a golden censer. He was given a great quantity of incense 
to add to the prayers of all the saints, to be laid upon the 
golden Altar before the Throne. And the smoke of the 
incense rose up before God from the angel's hand, mingled 
with the prayers of the saints. Then the angel took the 
censer, filled it with fire from the Altar, and hurled it upon 
the earth. And at that there were thunderings and noises, 
flashes of lightning and an earthquake. 

Then the seven angels who were holding the seven trum- 
pets prepared to blow them. 

THE FIRST TRUMPET: HAIL AND FIRE 

The first angel blew his trumpet. Hail and fire mingled 8 
with blood appeared, and were hurled upon the earth. One- 7 
third of the earth was burned up, one-third of all the trees 
was burned up, and every blade of green grass was burned 
up. 



l8 

THE SECOND TRUMPET: THE BLAZING MOUNTAIN 

8 The second angel blew his trumpet, and something like 

8 a vast mountain blazing with fire was thrown into the sea. 

A third part of the sea turned into blood, a third of all live 

creatures in the sea died, and a third part of all shipping 

was destroyed. 

THE THIRD TRUMPET: THE POISONOUS STAR 

8 Then the third angel blew his trumpet and there fell 
"> from the sky a huge star blazing like a torch. It fell upon a 
third of the rivers and springs of water. The name of the 
star is said to be Apsinthus (Wormwood). A third of all 
the waters turned into wormwood, and many people died 
because the waters had become so bitter. 

THE FOURTH TRUMPET: LIGHT FROM THE SKY DIMINISHES 

8 The fourth angel blew his trumpet, and a third part of 
the sun, a third part of the moon and a third of the stars were 
struck. A third part of the light of each of them was darkened^ 
so that light by day and light by night were both diminished 
by a third part. 

THE CRY OF PITY FROM MIDHEAVEN 

8 Then in my vision I saw a solitary eagle* flying in mid- 
3 heaven, crying in a loud voice, 

"Alas, alas, alas for the inhabitants of the earth, for there 
are three more trumpet blasts which the three angels shall 
sound! " 
*Not "angel," as in KJ.V. 



19 

THE FIFTH TRUMPET: THE FATHOMLESS PIT 

The fifth angel blew his trumpet. I saw a star that had 
fallen down from Heaven to earth, and he was given the 
key to the fathomless Pit. Then he opened the Pit, and 
smoke like the smoke of a vast furnace rose out of it, so that 
the light of the sun and the air itself grew dark from the 
smoke of the Pit. 

Then out of the smoke emerged locusts to descend upon 
the earth. They were given powers like those of earthly 
scorpions. They had orders to do no harm to any grass, 
green thing or tree upon the earth, but only to injure those 
human beings who did not bear the seal of God upon their 
foreheads. They had no power to kill men, but only to torture 
them for five months. The torture they could inflict was 
like the pain of a scorpion's sting. 

In those days men will seek death but they will never 
find it; they will long to die but death will elude them. These 
scorpions looked to me in my vision like horses prepared 
for battle. On their heads were what appeared to be crowns 
like gold; their faces were like human faces, and they had 
long hair like women. Their teeth were like lions' teeth, 
their breasts were like iron breastplates, and the noise of 
their wings was like the noise of a host of chariots and 
horses charging into battle. They have tails and stings like 
scorpions, and it is in their tails that they possess the power 
to injure men for five months. They have as their king 
the angel of the Pit, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon 
and in Greek Apollyon (meaning the Destroyer) . 

The first Disaster is now past, but I see two more ap- 
proaching. 



20 

THE SIXTH TRUMPET: THE DESTROYING ANGELS 

9 Then the sixth angel blew his trumpet, and I heard a 
i? solitary voice speaking from the four corners of the golden 
Altar that stands in the presence of God. And it said to the 
sixth angel who held the trumpet, 

"Release the four angels who are bound at the great 
river Euphrates! " 

Then these four angels who had been held ready for the 
hour, the day, the month and the year, were set free to kill 
a third part of all mankind. The number of their horsemen 
was two hundred million I heard what their number was. In 
my vision I saw these horses and their riders, and their 
breastplates were fiery-red, blue and yellow. The horses' 
heads looked to me like the heads of lions, and out of their 
mouths poured fire and smoke and sulfur. A third of all 
mankind died from the fearful effects of these three, the fire, 
the smoke and the sulfur which pours out of their mouths. 
For the power of these horses lies in their mouths and in 
their tails. Indeed their tails are like serpents with heads, 
and with these they inflict injury. 

The rest of mankind, who did not die in this fearful 
destruction, neither repented of the works of their own 
hands nor ceased to worship evil powers and idols of gold, 
silver, brass, stone, or wood, which can neither see nor hear 
nor move. Neither did they repent of their murders, their 
sorceries, their sexual sins, nor of their thieving. 

THE ANGEL WITH THE LITTLE BOOK 

10 Then I saw another mighty angel descending from Heav- 
* en. He was clothed in a cloud, and there was a rainbow 



21 

around his head. His face blazed like the sun, his legs like 
pillars of fire, and he had a little book lying open in his 
hand. He planted his right foot on the sea and his left 
foot on the land, and then shouted with a loud voice like 
the roar of a lion. And when he shouted the seven thunders 
lifted their voices. When the seven thunders had rolled I 
was on the point of writing but I heard a voice from Heav- 
en, saying, 

"Seal up what the seven thunders said, but do not write 
it down!" 

Then the angel whom I had seen bestriding the sea and 
the land raised his right hand to Heaven and swore by the 
Living One of the timeless ages, Who created Heaven, earth 
and sea and all that is in them: 

"There shall be no more delay! In the days which shall 
soon be announced by the trumpet blast of the seventh 
angel the Mysterious Purpose of God shall be completed, 
as He assured His servants the prophets." 

Then the voice which I had heard from Heaven was 
again in my ears, saying, 

"Go and take the little book which lies open in the 
hand of the angel whose feet are planted on both sea and 
land." 

So I went off toward the angel, asking him to give me 
the little book. 

"Take it," he said to me, "and eat it up. It will be 
bitter to your stomach, but sweet as honey in your 
mouth." 

Then I took the little book from the angel's hand and swal- 
lowed it. It was as sweet as honey to the taste but when I 
had eaten it up it was bitter to my stomach. 



22 

JOHN IS INSTRUCTED TO PROPHESY 

10 Then they said to me, "It is again your duty to prophesy 
*i about many peoples, nations, languages and kings." And 

I was given a measuring rod like a staff, and I was told: "Get 
up and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and count 
those who worship there. But leave out of your measurement 
the courtyard outside the Temple do not measure that 
at all. For it has been given over to the nations, and they will 
trample over the Holy City for forty-two months." 

GOD'S TWO WITNESSES 

11 "And I will give authority to My Two Witnesses to 
3 proclaim the Message, clothed in sackcloth for twelve hun- 
dred and sixty days." 

These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands 
which stand before the Lord of the earth. If anyone tries 
to harm them, fire issues from their mouths and consumes 
their enemies. Indeed, if anyone should try to hurt them, 
this is the way in which he will certainly meet his death. 
These Witnesses have power to shut up the sky and stop 
any rain from falling during the time of their preaching. 
Moreover, they have power to turn the waters into blood, 
and to strike the earth with any plague as often as they wish. 

THE EMERGENCE OF THE ANIMAL 

11 Then, when their work of witness is complete, the Ani- 
7 mal will come up out of the Pit and go to war with 
them. It will conquer and kill them, and their bodies will 
lie in the street of the great City, which is called by those 
with spiritual understanding, "Sodom" and "Egypt" the 
very place where their Lord Himself was crucified. For 



23 

three and a half days men from all peoples and tribes and 
languages and nations will gaze upon their bodies and will 
not allow them to be buried. The inhabitants of the earth 
will gloat over them and will hold celebrations and send one 
another presents, because these two prophets had brought 
such misery to the inhabitants of the earth. 

THE RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION OF THE TWO WITNESSES 

But after three and a half days the Spirit of Life from 11 
God entered them and they stood upright on their feet. Il 
This struck terror into the hearts of those who were watch- 
ing them, and they heard a tremendous Voice speaking to 
these two from Heaven, saying, 

"Come up here!" 

And they went up to Heaven in a cloud in full view of 
their enemies. And at that moment there was a great earth- 
quake, a tenth part of the City fell in ruins and seven thou- 
sand people were known to have been killed in the earth- 
quake. The rest were terrified, and acknowledged the glory 
of the God of Heaven. 

THE SEVENTH TRUMPET: 
(i) THE WORSHIP OF HEAVEN 

The second Disaster is now past, and I see the third Dis- 1 1 
aster following hard upon the heels of the second. The H 
seventh angel blew his trumpet. There arose loud voices in 
Heaven and they were saying, 

"The Kingship of the World now belongs to our Lord and 
to His Christ, and He shall be King for timeless ages!" 

Then the twenty-four Elders, who sit upon their thrones 
in the presence of God, prostrated themselves and, with 
bowed heads, worshiped God, saying: 



24 

"We thank Thee, O Lord Who art God the Almighty, 
Who art and Who wast, that Thou hast assumed Thy great 
power and hast become Bang. The nations were full of fury, 
but now Thy wrath has come and with it the time for the 
dead to be judged and for reward to be given to Thy ser- 
vants, the prophets and the saints, and all who fear Thy 
Name, both small and great. Now is the time for destroying 
the destroyers of the earth!" 

Then the Temple of God in Heaven was thrown open 
and the Ark of His Agreement within His Temple could 
be clearly seen. Accompanying this sight were flashes of 
lightning, loud noises, peals of thunder, an earthquake and 
a violent storm of hail. 

THE SEVENTH TRUMPET: 
(il) THE SIGN OF THE WOMAN 

.2 Then a huge sign became visible in the sky the figure of 

* a Woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet 

and a crown of twelve stars upon her head. She was pregnant, 

and cried out in her labor and in the pains of bringing forth 

her child. 

THE SEVENTH TRUMPET: 
(lii) THE DRAGON, THE ENEMY OF THE WOMAN 

2 Then another sign became visible in the sky, and I saw that 

3 it was a huge red Dragon with seven heads and ten horns, 
with a diadem upon each of his heads. His tail swept down 
a third of the stars in the sky and hurled them upon the earth. 
The Dragon took his place in front of the Woman who 
was about to give birth to a child, so that as soon as she 
did so he might devour it. She gave birth to a male child 
who is to shepherd all the nations "with a rod of iron." 







Her child was snatched up to God and to His Throne, while 
the Woman fled into the desert where there was a place 
prepared for her by God's command. There they would 
take care of her for twelve hundred and sixty days. 

WAR IN HEAVEN 

Then war broke out in Heaven. Michael and his angels 12 
battled with the Dragon. The Dragon and his angels fought 7 
back, but they did not prevail and they were expelled from 
Heaven. So the huge Dragon, the Serpent of ancient times, 
who is called the Devil and Satan, the Deceiver of the 
whole world, was hurled down upon the earth, and his 
angels were hurled down with him. 

THE VICTORY OF HEAVEN PROCLAIMED 

Then I heard a great voice in Heaven cry: 12 

"Now the salvation and the power and kingdom of our I0 
God, and the authority of His Christ, have come! For the 
Accuser of our brethren has been thrown down from his 
place, where he stood before our God accusing them day 
and night. Now they have conquered him through the 
blood of the Lamb, and through the Word to which they 
bore witness. They did not cherish life even in the face of 
death! 

"Therefore, rejoice, O Heavens, and all you who live in 
the Heavens! But alas for the earth and the sea, for the 
Devil has come down to you in great fury, knowing that 
his time is short!" 

THE DRAGON'S ENMITY AGAINST THE WOMAN 

And when the Dragon saw that he had been cast down 12 
upon the earth, he began to pursue the Woman who had *3 



2 6 

given birth to the male child. But she was given two great 
eagle's wings so that she could fly to her place in the desert, 
where she is kept safe from the Serpent for a time and times 
and half a time. Then the Serpent ejected water from his 
mouth, streaming like a river in pursuit of the Woman, to 
drown her in its flood. But the earth came to the Woman's 
rescue, opened its mouth and swallowed up the river which 
the Dragon had emitted from his mouth. Then the Dragon 
raged with fury against the Woman and went off to make 
war against the rest of her children those who keep the 
commandments of God and bear their witness to Jesus. 

THE ANIMAL FROM THE SEA 

12 Then, as I stood on the sand of the seashore, there rose 
* 8 out of the sea before my eyes an Animal with seven heads 
and ten horns. There were diadems upon its horns and 
blasphemous names upon its heads. The Animal which I 
saw had the appearance of a leopard, though it had the feet 
of a bear and a mouth like the mouth of a Hon. Then the 
Dragon gave it his own power and throne and great authority. 
One of its heads appeared to have been wounded to death 
but the mortal wound had healed. 

The whole earth followed the Animal with wonder, and 
they worshiped the Dragon because he had given authority 
to the Animal. Then they worshiped the Animal, too, saying: 

"Who is like the Animal? Who could make war against 
it?" 

It was allowed to speak monstrous blasphemies and to 
exert its authority for forty-two months. 

So it poured out blasphemies against God, blaspheming 
His Name and His Dwelling Place and those who live in 
Heaven. Moreover, it was permitted to make war upon the 



2J 

saints and to conquer them; the authority given to it ex- 
tended over every tribe and people and language and nation. 
All the inhabitants of the earth will worship it all those 
whose names have not been written in the Book of Life 
which belongs to the Lamb slain from the foundation of 
the world. 

PARENTHETICAL: A WORD TO THE READER 

Let the listener hear this: 13 

If any man is destined for captivity he will go into cap- 9 
tivity. If any man kills with the sword he must himself be 
killed with the sword. Amid all this stands the endurance and 
faith of the saints. 

THE ANIMAL FROM THE EARTH 

Then I saw another Animal rising out of the earth, and it 13 
had two horns like a lamb but it spoke in the voice of a " 
dragon. It uses the full authority of the first Animal in its 
presence. It compels the earth and all its inhabitants to 
worship the first Animal the one with the mortal wound 
which had healed. It performs great signs: before men's 
eyes it makes fire fall down from heaven to earth. It deceives 
the inhabitants of the earth by the signs which it is allowed 
to perform in the presence of the Animal, and it tells them to 
make a statue in honor of the Animal which received the 
sword thrust and yet survived. Further, it was allowed to give 
the breath of life to the statue of the Animal so that the 
statue could speak and condemn to death all those who do 
not worship its statue. Then it compels all, small and great, 
rich and poor, free men and slaves, to receive a mark on their 
right hands or on their foreheads. The purpose of this is 
that no one should be able to buy or sell unless he bears the 



28 

mark of the name of the Animal or the number of its name. 
Understanding is needed here: let every thinking man cal- 
culate the number of the Animal. It is the number of a man, 
and its number is six hundred and sixty-six.* 

THE VISION OF THE LAMB AND THE FIRST OF THE REDEEMED 

14 Then I looked again and before my eyes the Lamb was 
1 standing on Mount Sion, and with Him were a hundred and 
forty-four thousand who had His Name and His Father's 
Name written upon their foreheads. Then I heard a sound 
coming from Heaven like the roar of a great waterfall and 
the heavy rolling of thunder. Yet the sound which I heard 
was also like the music of harpists sweeping their strings. And 
now they are singing a new song of praise before the Throne, 
and before the four Living Creatures and the Elders. No 
one could learn that song except the one hundred and forty- 
four thousand who had been redeemed from the earth. These 
are the men who have never defiled themselves with women, 
for they are celibate. These are the men who follow the 
Lamb wherever He may go; these men have been redeemed 
from among mankind as first fruits to God and to the Lamb. 
They have never been guilty of any falsehood and they are 
beyond reproach. 

THE ANGEL WITH THE GOSPEL 

14 Then I saw another angel flying in midheaven, holding 
6 the everlasting Gospel to proclaim to the inhabitants of the 
earth to every nation and tribe and language and people. 
He was crying in a loud voice: 

* This number undoubtedly refers to NERO CAESAR, by means of a 
simple Hebrew cipher. Guesses about its later application have been rife 
throughout the centuries. The triple six stands for a concentration of 
evil, six being the number of imperfection. 



29 

"Reverence God, and give glory to Him; for the hour 
of His Judgment has come! Worship Him Who made 
Heaven and earth, the sea and the springs of water." 

THE ANGEL OF DOOM 

Then another, a second angel, followed him crying: 14 

Fallen, fallen is Babylon the Great! She who made all 8 
nations drink the wine of her passionate unfaithfulness!" 

THE ANGEL OF JUDGMENT 

Then a third angel followed these two, crying in a loud 14 
voice: 9 

"If any man worships the Animal and its statue and bears 
its mark upon his forehead or upon his hand, then that man 
shall drink the wine of God's passion, poured undiluted into 
the cup of His Wrath, He shall be tortured by fire and 
sulfur in the presence of the Holy angels and of the Lamb. 
The smoke of such men's torture ascends for timeless ages, 
and there is no respite from it day or night. Such are the 
worshipers of the Animal and its statue, and among their 
number are all who bear the mark of its name." 

THE CALL TO STAND FAST 

In all this stands the endurance of the saints those who 14 
keep the commandments of God and their faith in Jesus. 

THE SECURITY OF THE SAINTS 

Then I heard a voice from Heaven, saying, 14 

"Write this! From henceforth happy are the dead who *3 

die in the Lord!" 
"Happy indeed," says the Spirit, "for they rest from their 

labors and their deeds go with them!" 



30 

THE HARVEST OF GOD'S WRATH 

14 Once again I looked, and a white cloud appeared before 
*4 me with someone sitting upon the cloud with the appearance 

of a Man. He had a golden crown on his head, and held a 
sharp sickle in his hand. Then another angel came out from 
the Temple, calling in a loud voice to the one sitting on the 
cloud, 

"Thrust in your sickle and reap, for the time of reaping has 
come and the harvest of the earth is fully ripe!" 

Then the one sitting upon the cloud swung his 
sickle upon the earth, and the reaping of the earth was 
done. 

Then another angel came out from the Temple in Heaven, 
and he also had a sharp sickle. Yet another angel came out 
from the Altar where he has command over the fire, and 
called out in a loud voice to the angel with the sharp 
sickle, 

"Thrust in your sharp sickle and harvest the clusters from 
the vineyard of the earth, for the grapes are fully 
ripe!" 

Then the angel swung his sickle upon the earth and 
gathered the harvest of the earth's vineyard, and threw it 
into the great winepress of the Wrath of God. The grapes 
were trodden outside the City, and out of the winepress 
flowed blood for two hundred miles in a stream as high as 
the horses' bridles. 

THE SEVEN LAST PLAGUES PREPARED 

15 Then I saw another Sign in Heaven, vast and awe-inspir- 
1 ing: seven angels are holding the seven last plagues, and with 

these the Wrath of God is brought to an end. 



3 1 

THE HYMN OF THE REDEEMED 

And I saw what appeared to be a sea of glass shot through 15 
with fire, and upon this glassy sea were standing those who 2 
had emerged victorious from the fight with the Animal, its 
statue, and the number which denotes its name. In their 
hands they hold harps which God has given them, and they 
are singing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the 
song of the Lamb, and these are the words they sing: 

"Great and wonderful are Thy works, O Lord God, the 
Almighty! Just and true are Thy ways, Thou King of the 
nations! Who should not reverence Thee, O Lord, and 
glorify Thy Name? For Thou alone art holy; therefore all 
nations shall come and worship before Thee, for Thy just 
judgments have been made plain!" 

THE ANGELS LEAVE THE TEMPLE OF GOD 

Later in my vision I saw the Temple of the Tabernacle 15 
of Testimony in Heaven wide open, and out of the Temple 5 
came forth the seven angels who hold the seven plagues. 
They were dressed in spotless shining linen, and they were 
girded round their breasts with golden girdles. 

Then one of the four Living Creatures gave to the seven 
angels seven golden bowls filled with the Wrath of God 
Who lives for timeless ages. The Temple was filled with 
smoke from the glory and power of God, and no one could 
enter the Temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels 
were past and over. 

AND ARE ORDERED TO POUR OUT THE BOWLS OF HIS WRATH 

Then I heard a loud voice from the Temple saying to the 16 
seven angels, * 



32 

"Go and pour out upon the earth the seven bowls of the 
Wrath of God!" 

THE FIRST BOWL: ULCERS 

16 The first angel went off and emptied his bowl upon the 
* earth. Whereupon loathsome and malignant ulcers attacked all 
those who bore the mark of the Animal and worshiped its 
statue. 

THE SECOND BOWL: DEATH IN THE SEA 

16 The second angel emptied his bowl into the sea, which 

3 turned into a fluid like the blood of a corpse, and every 
living thing in it died. 

THE THIRD BOWL: WATER BECOMES BLOOD 

16 Then the third angel emptied his bowl into the rivers and 

4 springs of water, and they turned into blood. And I heard 
the angel of the waters say: 

"Just art Thou in these Thy judgments, Thou Who art 
and wast the holy One! For they have spilled the blood of 
saints and prophets, and now Thou hast given them blood to 
drink. They have what they deserve." 

And I heard the Altar say, 

"Yes, O Lord, God Almighty, Thy judgments are true 
and right." 

THE FOURTH BOWL: SCORCHING HEAT 

16 The fourth angel emptied his bowl over the sun, and the 

8 sun was given power to scorch men in its fiery blaze. Then 

men were terribly burned in the heat, and they blasphemed 

the Name of God Who has control over these afflictions; but 

they neither repented nor gave Him glory. 



33 

THE FIFTH BOWL: THE PLAGUE OF DARKNESS 

Then the fifth angel emptied his bowl upon the throne of 16 
the Animal. Its kingdom was plunged into darkness; men I0 
gnawed their tongues in agony, cursed the God of Heaven 
for their pain and their ulcers, but refused to repent of 
what they had done. 

THE SIXTH BOWL: THE GREAT RIVER DRIED UP 

Then the sixth angel emptied his bowl upon the great 16 
river Euphrates. The waters of that river were dried up to ** 
prepare a road for the kings from the East. And then I 
noticed three foul spirits, looking like frogs, emerging from 
the mouths of the Dragon, the Animal, and the False Prophet. 
They are diabolical spirits performing wonders and they set 
out to muster all the kings of the world for battle on the 
Great Day of God, the Almighty. 

So they brought them together to the place called in 
Hebrew, Armageddon.'* 

THE WORDS IN THE BACKGROUND 

"See, I am coming like a thief! Happy is the man who stays 16 
awake and keeps his clothes at his side, so that he will not *$ 
have to walk naked and men see his shame." 

THE SEVENTH BOWL: DEVASTATION FROM THE AIR 

The seventh angel emptied his bowl into the air. A loud 16 
voice came out of the Temple, from the Throne, saying, *7 
"The End has come!" 
Then followed flashes of lightning, noises and peals of 

* Verse 16 has been put immediately before Verse 15, which seems to 
be its natural place. 



34 

thunder. There was a terrific earthquake, the like of which 
no man has ever seen since mankind began to live upon the 
earth so great and tremendous was this earthquake. The 
Great City was split into three parts, and the cities of all the 
nations fell in ruins. And God called to mind Babylon the 
Great and made her drink the cup of the wine of His furious 
wrath. Every island fled and the mountains vanished. Great 
hailstones like heavy weights fell from the sky, and men 
blasphemed God for the curse of the hail, for it fell upon 
them with savage and fearful blows. 

THE JUDGMENT OF THE EVIL WOMAN ANNOUNCED 

17 Then came one of the seven angels who held the seven 
i bowls, and said to me: 

"Come, and I will show you the judgment passed upon 
the great Harlot who is seated upon many waters. It is with 
her that the kings of the earth have debauched themselves 
and the inhabitants of the earth have become drunk on the 
wine of her filthiness." 

THE GORGEOUS MOTHER OF EVIL 

17 Then he carried me away in spirit into the desert. There 
3 I saw a Woman riding upon a scarlet Animal, covered with 
blasphemous titles and having seven heads and ten horns. 
The Woman herself was dressed in purple and scarlet, 
glittering with gold, jewels and pearls. In her hand she held 
a golden cup full of the earth's filthiness and her own foul 
impurity. On her forehead is written a name with a secret 
meaning BABYLON THE GREAT, MOTHER OF ALL HARLOTS 

AND OF THE EARTH'S ABOMINATIONS. 



35 

4 

THE VISION EXPLAINED 

Then I noticed that the Woman was drank with the blood 17 
of the saints and of the martyrs for Jesus. As I watched her, 6 
I was filled with utter amazement, but the angel said to me: 

"Why are you amazed? I will explain to you the mystery 
of the Woman and of the Animal with seven heads and ten 
horns which carries her. The Animal, which you saw, once 
lived but now is no more it will come up out of the Pit 
only to meet with destruction. The inhabitants of the earth, 
whose names have not been written in the Book of Life 
from the foundation of the world, will be utterly astonished 
when they see that the Animal was, and is not, and yet is to 
come. (Here we need a mind with understanding.) 

"The seven heads are seven hills on which the Woman 
takes her seat. There are also seven kings; five have been 
dethroned, one reigns, and the other has not yet appeared 
when he comes he must remain only for a short time. As 
for the Animal which once lived but now lives no longer, 
it is an eighth king which belongs to the seven, but it goes 
to utter destruction. The ten horns which you saw are ten 
kings who have not yet received their power to reign, but 
they will receive authority to be kings for one hour in 
company with the Animal They are of one mind, and they 
will hand over their power and authority to the Animal. 
They will all go to war with the Lamb, and the Lamb, with 
His called, chosen, and faithful followers, will conquer 
them. For He is Lord of lords and King of kings." 

Then he said to me: 

"As for the waters which you saw, on which the Woman 
took her seat, they are peoples and vast crowds, nations and 
languages. The ten horns and the Animal which you saw 



36 

will loathe the Harlot, and leave her deserted and naked. 
Moreover, they will devour her flesh, and then consume 
her with fire. For God has put it into their hearts to carry out 
His Purpose by making them of one mind, and by handing 
over their authority to the Animal, until the Words of God 
have been fulfilled. 

"The Woman that you saw is the Great City which 
dominates the kings of the earth." 

THE FINAL OVERTHROW OF BABYLON 

18 Later I saw another angel coming down from Heaven, 
* armed with great authority. The earth shone with the splen- 
dor of his presence, and he cried in a mighty voice: 

"Fallen, fallen is Babylon* the Great! She has become a 
haunt of devils, a prison for every unclean spirit, and a cage 
for every filthy and hateful bird. For all nations have drunk 
the wine of her passionate unfaithfulness and have fallen 
thereby. The kings of the earth have debauched them- 
selves with her, and the merchants of the earth have grown 
rich from the extravagance of her dissipation!" 
Then I heard another voice from Heaven, crying: 
"Come out from her, O my people, lest you become 
accomplices in her sins and must share in her punishment. 
For her sins have mounted up to the sky, and God has 
remembered the tale of her wickedness. Pay her back in her 
own coin yes, pay her back double for all that she has done! 
In the cup which she mixed for others mix her a drink of 
double strength! For the pride in which she flaunted herself 
give her torture and misery! Because she says to herself, 
'Here I sit a queen on a throne; I am no woman who lacks 

* Referring to Rome, but prophetically to any great, prosperous but 
Godless city. 



37 

a man and I shall never know sorrow!' So in a single day 
her punishments shall strike her death, sorrow, and famine, 
and she shall be burned in the fire. For mighty is the Lord 
God Who judges her!" 

THE LAMENT OVER THE CITY 

Then the kings of the earth, who debauched and indulged 18 
themselves with her, will wail and lament over her. Standing 9 
at a safe distance through very fear of her torment, they 
will watch the smoke of her burning and cry, 

"Alas, alas for the Great City, Babylon the mighty Qty, 
that your judgment should come in a single hour!" 

The merchants of the earth shall also wail and lament over 
her, for there is no one left to buy their goods cargoes of 
gold and silver, jewels and pearls, fine linen, purple, silk and 
scarlet, all kinds of scented wood, every sort of ivory vessel, 
every kind of vessel of precious wood, of bronze, iron and 
marble; cinnamon, spice, incense, myrrh, frankincense, wine, 
oil, fine flour and corn; cattle, sheep and horses; chariots, 
slaves, the very souls of men. 

Those who bought and sold these things, who had gained 18 
their wealth from her, will stand afar off through fear of *5* 
her punishment, weeping and lamenting and saying, 

"Alas, alas for the Great City that was dressed in fine 
linen, purple and scarlet, and was bedecked with gold and 
jewels and pearls alas that in a single hour all that wealth 
should be destroyed!" 

Then every shipmaster and seafarer sailors and all whose 
business is upon the sea stood and watched the smoke of her 
burning from afar, and cried out, 

* Verse 14 has been incorporated into Verse 23, which seems to be its 
natural place. 



38 

"What city was ever like the Great City?" 

They even threw dust on their heads and cried aloud as 

they wept, saying: 
"Alas, alas for the Great City where all who had ships 

on the sea grew wealthy through the richness of her treasure! 

Alas that in a single hour she should be ruined!" 

A COMMENT IN THE BACKGROUND 

18 "Rejoice over her fate, O Heaven, and all you saints, 
20 apostles, and prophets! For God has pronounced His Judg- 
ment for you against her!" 



THE WORDS OF BABYLON'S DOOM 



18 Then a mighty angel lifted up a stone like a huge mill- 

21 stone and hurled it into the sea, saying: 

"So shall Babylon the Great City be sent hurtling down 
to disappear for ever! Never more shall the sound of harpists 
and musicians, flute players and trumpeters be heard in 
you again! Never again shall a craftsman of any craft be 
found in you; never again will the sound of the millstone's 
grinding be heard in you! No light of a lamp shall ever 
shine in you again, and the voices of bridegroom and bride 
shall be heard in you no more! The fruit of your soul's 
desire is lost to you for ever. All your luxuries and brilliance 
are lost to you and men will never find them in you 
again! 

"For your merchants were the great ones of the earth, and 
all nations were seduced by your witchery!" 

For in her was discovered the blood of prophets and 
saints, indeed, the blood of all who were ever slaughtered 
upon the earth. 



39 

REJOICING IN HEAVEN 

Afterward I heard what sounded like the mighty roar of 19 
a vast crowd in Heaven crying: * 

"Alleluia! Salvation and glory and power belong to our 
God, for His judgments are true and just. He has judged the 
great Harlot who corrupted the earth with her wickedness, 
and He has avenged upon her the blood of His servants!" 

Then they cried a second time, 

"Alleluia! The smoke of her destruction ascends for time- 
less ages!" 

Then the twenty-four Elders and the four Living Creatures 
prostrated themselves and worshiped God Who is seated 
upon the Throne, saying, 

"Amen, Alleluia!" 

Then out of the Throne came a voice, saying, 

"Praise our God, all you who serve Him, all you who rev- 
erence Him, both small and great!" 

And then I heard a sound like the voices of a vast crowd, 
the roar of a great waterfall and the rolling of heavy thunder, 
and they were saying: 

"Alleluia! For the Lord our God, the Almighty, has come 
into His Kingdom! Let us rejoice, let us be glad with all our 
hearts. Let us give Him the glory, for the Wedding Day of 
the Lamb has come, and His Bride has made herself ready. 
She may be seen dressed in linen, gleaming and spotless 
for such linen is the righteous living of the saints!" 



INSTRUCTION TO JOHN 

Then he said to me, 19 

"Write this down: Happy are those who are invited to 9 



40 

the Wedding Feast of the Lamb!" 

Then he added, 

"These are true words of God." 

At that I fell at his feet to worship him, but he said to me, 

"No! I am your fellow servant and fellow servant with 
your brothers who are holding fast their witness to Jesus. 
Give your worship to God!" 

(This witness to Jesus inspires all prophecy.) 

THE WORD OF GOD ON THE WHITE HORSE 

19 Then I saw Heaven wide open, and before my eyes ap- 
peared a white horse, whose rider is called Faithful and 
True, for His judgment and His warfare are just. His eyes 
are a flame of fire and there are many diadems upon His head. 
There is a Name written upon Him, known only to Himself. 
He is dressed in a cloak dipped in blood, and the Name by 
which He is known is the Word of God. 

The armies of Heaven follow Him, riding upon white 
horses and clad in white and spotless linen. Out of His 
mouth there comes a sharp sword with which to strike the 
nations. He will shepherd them "with a rod of iron," and 
alone He will tread the winepress of the furious wrath of 
God the Almighty. Written upon His cloak and upon His 
thigh is the Name KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS. 

THE FEAST OF DEATH AFTER BATTLE 

19 Then I saw an angel standing alone in the blazing light of 
*7 the sun, and he shouted in a loud voice, calling to all the 

birds flying in mid-air: 

"Come, flock together to God's great feast! Here you 

may eat the flesh of kings and captains, the flesh of strong 



4! 

men, of horses and their riders the flesh of all men, free 
men and slaves, small and great!" 

And I saw the Animal with the kings of the earth and 
their armies massed together for battle against the Rider 
upon the horse and His army. The Animal was captured 
and with it the False Prophet who had performed marvels 
in its presence, which he had used to deceive those who 
accepted the mark of the Animal and worshiped its statue. 
These two were thrown alive into the Lake of Fire which 
burns with sulfur. 

The rest were killed by the sword which issues from 
the mouth of the Rider upon the horse; and all the birds 
gorged themselves on their flesh. 

SATAN BOUND FOR A THOUSAND YEARS 

Then I saw an angel coming down from Heaven with the 20 
key of the Pit and a huge chain in his hand. He seized the I 
Dragon, the Serpent of ancient days, who is both the Devil 
and Satan, and bound him fast for a thousand years. Then 
he hurled him into the Pit, and locked and sealed it over his 
head, so that he could deceive the nations no more until the 
thousand years were past. But then he must be set free for a 
little while. 

THE FIRST RESURRECTION 

And I saw thrones, with appointed judges seated upon 20 
them. Then I saw the souls of those who had been executed 4 
for their witness to Jesus and for proclaiming the Word of 
God those who never worshiped the Animal or its statue, 
and had not accepted its mark upon their foreheads or their 
hands. They came to life and reigned with Christ for a 
thousand years. (The rest of the dead did not come to life 



42 

until the thousand years were over.) This is the First Resur- 
rection. Happy and holy is the one who shares in the First 
Resurrection! The Second Death cannot touch such men; 
they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign 
with Him for the thousand years. 

SATAN FINALLY DESTROYED 

20 Then, when the thousand years are over, Satan will be 

7 released from his prison, and will set out to deceive the 

nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, 

and to lead them into battle. They will be as numerous as 

the sand of the seashore. 

They came up and spread over the breadth of the earth; 
they encircled the army of the saints defending the Beloved 
Qty. But fire came down from the sky and consumed them. 
The Devil who deceived them was hurled into the Lake of 
Fire and Sulfur to join the Animal and the False Prophet. 
And there they shall be tortured day and night for timeless 
ages. 

THE FINAL JUDGMENT 

20 And then I saw a great white Throne, and One seated 
upon it from Whose Presence both earth and sky fled 
and vanished. 

Then I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the 
Throne, and the books were opened. And another book 
was opened, which is the Book of Life. And the dead were 
judged by what was written in the books concerning what 
they had done. The sea gave up its dead, and Death and the 
Grave gave up the dead which were in them. And men were 
judged, each according to what he had done. 



43 

Then Death and the Grave were themselves hurled into 
the Lake of Fire, which is the Second Death. If anyone's 
name was not found written in the Book of Life he was 
thrown into the Lake of Fire. 



ALL THINGS MADE NEW 

Then I saw a new Heaven and a new earth, for the first 21 
Heaven and the first earth had disappeared, and the sea was i 
no more. I saw the Holy City, the New Jerusalem descending 
from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride dressed in 
beauty for her husband. Then I heard a great voice from the 
Throne crying: 

"See! The Home of God is with men, and He will live 
among them. They shall be His people, and God Himself 
shall be with them, and will wipe away every tear from their 
eyes. Death shall be no more, and never again shall there be 
sorrow or crying or pain. For all those former things are 
past and gone." 

Then He Who is seated upon the Throne said, 

"See, I am making all things new! " 

And He added, 

"Write this down, for my words are true and to be 
trusted." 

Then He said to me: 

"It is done! I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and 
the End. I will give to the thirsty water without price from 
the Fountain of Life. The victorious shall inherit these things, 
and I will be God to him and he will be son to Me. But as 
for the cowards, the faithless and the corrupt, the murderers, 



44 

the traffickers in sex and drugs, the worshipers of idols and 
all liars their inheritance is in the Lake which bums with 
fire and sulfur, which is the Second Death." 

THE VISION OF THE NEW JERUSALEM 

21 Then one of the seven angels who hold the seven bowls 
9 which were filled with the seven last plagues came to me 
and said, 

"Come, and I will show you the Bride, the Wife of the 
Lamb." 

Then he carried me away in spirit to the top of a vast 
mountain, and pointed out to me the City, the Holy Jeru- 
salem, descending from God out of Heaven, radiant with 
the glory of God. Her brilliance sparkled like a very precious 
jewel with the clear light of crystal Around her she had 
a vast and lofty wall in which were twelve gateways with 
twelve angels at the gates. There were twelve names in- 
scribed over the twelve gateways, and they are the names of 
the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel. On the east there were 
three gateways, on the north three gateways, on the south 
three gateways and on the west three gateways. The wall 
of the City had twelve foundation stones and on these 
were engraved the names of the twelve Apostles of the 
Lamb. 

THE MEASUREMENT OF THE CITY 

21 The one who was talking to me had a golden rod in his 
*5 hand with which to measure the City, its gateways and its 
wall. The City lies foursquare, its length equal to its breadth. 
He measured the City with his rod, and it was twelve thou- 
sand furlongs in each direction, for its length, breadth, 



45 

and height are all equal. Then he measured Its wail, and 
found that to be one hundred and forty-four half-yards 
high by human measurement (which the angel was 
using) . 

THE SPLENDOR OF THE CITY'S BUILDING 

The wall itself was built of translucent stone, while the 21 
City was of purest gold, with the brilliance of glass. The 18 
foundation stones of the wall of the City were fashioned out 
of every kind of precious stone. The first foundation stone 
was jasper, the second sapphire, the third agate, the fourth 
emerald, the fifth onyx, the sixth cornelian, the seventh gold- 
stone, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth green gold- 
stone, the eleventh zircon, and the twelfth amethyst. The 
twelve gates were twelve pearls, each gate made of a single 
pearl. The street of the City was purest gold, gleaming like 
glass. 

THE SPLENDOR WITHIN THE CITY 

I could see no Temple in the City, for the Lord, the 21 
Almighty God, and the Lamb are Themselves its Temple. 22 
The City has no need for the light of sun or moon, for the 
splendor of God fills it with light, and its radiance is the 
Lamb. The nations will walk by its light, and the kings of 
the earth will bring their glory into it. The City's gates shall 
stand open day after day and there will be no night there. 
Into the City they will bring the splendors and honors of 
the nations. 

But nothing unclean, no one who deals in filthiness and lies, 
shall ever at any time enter it only those whose names are 
written in the Lamb's Book of Life. 



46 

A FURTHER GLIMPSE OF THE CITY 

22 Then he showed me the river of the Water of Life, 
* sparkling like crystal as it flowed from the Throne of 
God and of the Larnb. In the middle of the street of the 
City and on either bank of the river grew the Tree of Life, 
bearing twelve fruits, a different kind for each month. The 
leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the nations. 

Nothing that has cursed mankind *hall exist any longer; 
the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be within the 
City. His servants shall worship Him; they shall see His 
Face, and His Name will be upon their foreheads. Night 
shall be no more; they have no more need for either lamp- 
light or sunlight, for the Lord God will shed His Light 
upon them and they shall reign as kings for timeless ages. 

THE ANGEL ENDORSES THE REVELATION 

22 Then the angel said to me: 

<$ "These words are true and to be trusted, for the Lord 
God, Who inspired the prophets, has sent His angel to show 
His servants what must shortly happen. 

"See, I come quickly! Happy is the man who pays heed 
to the words of the prophecy in this book." 

JOHN'S PERSONAL ENDORSEMENT 

22 It is I, John, who have heard and seen these things. At 
8 the time when I heard and saw them I fell at the feet of the 
angel who showed them to me and I was about to worship 
him. But he said to me, 

"No! I am fellow servant to you and to your brothers, 
to the prophets and to those who keep the words of this 
book. Give your worship to God!" 



47 

Then he added: 

"Do not seal up the words of the prophecy in this book, 
for the time of their fulfillment is near. Let the wicked man 
continue his wickedness and the filthy man his filthiness; let 
the good man continue his good deeds and the holy man 
continue in holiness." 

THE INTERJECTED WORDS OF CHRIST 

"See, I come quickly! I carry My reward with Me, and 22 
repay every man according to his deeds. I am Alpha and I2 
Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End. 
Happy are those who wash their robes, for they have the 
right to the Tree of Life and the freedom of the gates of 
the City. Shut out from the City shall be the depraved, the 
sorcerers, the impure, the murderers and the idolaters, and 
everyone who loves and practices a lie! 

"I, Jesus, have sent My angel to you with this Testimony 
for the Churches. I am both the Root and Stock of David, 
and the bright Star of the morning!" 

THE INVITATION OF THE CHURCH AND THE SPIRIT 

The Spirit and the Bride say, "Come!" 22 

Let everyone who hears this also say, "Come!" 17 

Let the thirsty man come, and let everyone who wishes 
take the Water of Life as a gift. 

JOHN'S TESTIMONY TO THIS BOOK 

Now I bear solemn witness to every man who hears the 22 
words of prophecy in this book: 18 

If anyone adds to these words, God will add to him the 
disasters described in this book; if anyone takes away from 
the words of prophecy in this book, God will take away from him his share in the Tree of Life and in the Holy City 
which are described in this book. 

He Who is Witness to all this says, 

"Yes, I am coming very quickly!" 

"Amen, come, Lord Jesus!" 

The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all His people. 


