At the end of the nineteenth century the well-tested mechanical 
principles of Isaac Newton were the very heart of physical theory. 
Electricity and magnetism still presented problems. The electron had 
been discovered but its charge had only just been measured. The 
photon light quantum and its source, the atom, attracted the 
attention. Electromagnetic waves had only recently been detected 
and their radiation pressure verified. However, Newton's principles 
of mechanics were firmly applied throughout physical theory. The 
aether was still a subject of speculation but interest in it was losing 
impetus. Its nature had become a great mystery, standing alongside 
the aged problems of the cause of grav itation and terrestrial magnet- 
ism. The great minds in physics were diverted to the atom and its 
quantum behaviour. Albert Einstein emerged in the midst of this 
diversion when, in 1905, he proposed new principles which were 
destined to limit the scope of application of Newton's mechanics. 
The already-recognized relationship between energy and mass was 
brought into the framework of Einstein's philosophy. A new way of 
looking at physics had been found. The aether had become an 
unnecessary integer since the mathematical structure of Einstein's 
theory provided the medium by which physical theory had to be 
linked. The Special and General Theories of Relativity became 
recognized aristocrats among physical theories. They have acquired 
and retained an undeniable elegance. However, in the past ten years, 
more and more voices have been raised in criticism. More is expected 
than the theories appear able to supply. Tests are becoming more 
exacting as new and better experimental techniques are developed. 
Relativity appears to be weakening even though it stands as a lone 
provider of physical understanding. There is, therefore, due cause for 
concern and this is an appropriate time to review physics as it could 
be without reliance upon Einstein's doctrines. 



7. The Electron 



Electron Charge 

Millikan, writing about the electron in 1935, stated, "We knew that 
there was a smallest thing which took part in chemical reactions and 
we named that thing the atom, leaving its insides entirely to the 
future. Precisely similarly the electron was defined as the smallest 
quantity of electricity which ever was found to appear in electrolysis, 
and nothing was then said or is now said about its necessary ulti- 
mateness. Our experiments have, however, now shown that this 
quantity is capable of isolation, and that all the kinds of charges 
which we have been able to investigate are exact multiples of it." 

Millikan raised the question, "Is the electron itself divisible?" and 
discussed the affirmative support put forward from 1914 onwards, 
principally by Ehrenhaft, only to conclude from an analysis of the 
experimental evidence that "there has then appeared up to the present 
time no evidence whatever for the existence of the sub-electron". 

At the present time, 1969, we find that physical theories are being 
developed on the assumption that there are particles of sub-electronic 
charge. We read about the quarks,* which are hypothetical particles 
having charges of one third or two thirds that of the electron or 
positron. A neutron is then imagined to comprise an aggregation of 
two quarks each of charge -e/3 and one quark of charge 2c 3, 
whereas the proton consists of two quarks of + 2e/3 and one of 
- e/3. Here, - e is the charge of the electron. This is most interesting 
speculation, but the fact remains that particles with these sub- 
electronic charges have yet to be discovered. The quarks are purely 
hypothetical and Millikan's contention that the electron charge is 
indivisible is not yet disproved by any direct experimental evidence. 

What is an Electron? 

Although Millikan stated that the electron was the smallest quantity 
of electricity ever found to appear in electrolysis and thus character- 
ized the electron by its quantum of charge -e, there are other 

* Burhop, 1967. (Note that references are listed on page 217 according to 
author's name and year of publication.) 



2 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

elementary particles possessing this unique charge. The electron is fur- 
ther characterized by its small rest mass w, known to be about 9-11 0~ 28 
gm. The charge e is approximately 4-8 10" 10 esu, expressed in cgs. units. 

Having thus introduced the electron and identified it by its discrete 
charge - e and discrete rest mass m, and shed a little uncertainty on 
the fundamental quantum nature of the electron charge, we are 
ready to consider the question, "What is an electron?" Firstly, if it is 
suggested to some physicists that an electron is a mere corpuscle of 
electric charge, this evokes a smile and a denial. An electron is not 
that simple. Some would present the electron as a kind of vector 
symbol. Others present it as a mathematical formulation. They have 
in mind the spin properties of the electron, or its wave characteristics, 
and they are not really answering the question "What is an electron ?", 
but the question of how an electron manifests itself. Yet, its behavi- 
our really depends upon its interaction with something else, be it only 
the observer! Then, we see that we might have mixed the electron up 
with the properties of something else. According to Heisenberg's 
Principle of Uncertainty, as quoted by Eddington (1929, a) "A particle 
may have position or it may have velocity but it cannot in any exact 
sense have both." Is Eddington really suggesting that a particle 
cannot have a position and a motion at the same time, or is he saying 
that our powers of observation are limited and preclude us from 
determining the exact position and velocity of the particle at any 
instant? It is submitted that the electron is not a mathematical 
symbol, nor is it a wave or group of waves. An electron is an ele- 
mentary particle, almost by definition, and must be taken to be a 
corpuscle in any serious attempt to understand what it really is. 
meaning its size, shape and content. It can be asked why the real 
nature of the electron matters when physical theory need only be 
concerned with its behaviour as seen by an observer. The answer to 
this is that the electron presumably will still exist even when the 
observer is removed. Its properties cannot, therefore, be wholly 
related to the existence of the observer. The electron will still interact 
with other matter, and its interaction properties could well account 
for certain physical phenomena as yet unexplained in physical theory. 

The Electron in Motion 

Assuming the well known relation E = Mc- and that there is no loss of 
energy by radiation or otherwise when a particle of mass M is 



THE ELECTRON 



3 



accelerated to acquire kinetic energy itself augmenting the energy 
it may be show n that the mass of a particle increases to infinity as the 
particle approaches the limiting velocity c. The applicable formula 
for the mass of the particle when moving at velocity v is given by: 

M^M IV[l~{vlc)-] (1.1) 

where M is the mass of the particle when at rest.* The velocity c is 
the speed of light in vacuo. 

Wilson (1946), after presenting the above result, writes "If the 
particle considered is an electron, M will be the mass of the electro- 
magnetic field which it excites and which moves along with it, to- 
gether with any additional mass w hich it may have. If the electron is 
merely an electric charge, it may have no additional mass, but if it 
has some internal energy besides its electrical energy, it will have 
some additional mass corresponding to this additional energy. In 
any case its mass should vary with its velocity in accordance w ith the 
expression found above for M, since this should hold for a particle 
of any kind. The experiments of Kaufmann, Bucherer and others on 
the variation of the mass of electrons with their velocity have shown 
that the mass does vary approximately in accordance with the above 
formula. These experiments confirm the idea that momentum is due 
to flux of energy, but they give no information as to the constitution 
of electrons." 

Experiments on the increase of electron mass with velocity do, 
however, show that electron charge does not vary with velocity. It is 
mass which varies. The analysis used to derive equation (1.1) also 
suggests that an electron does not dissipate its energy by radiation 
when it is accelerated and this is a most important point to keep in 
mind because this is in conflict with other currently accepted theory. 

X-ray Scattering by Electrons 

The role of electrons in X-ray scattering has been analysed by A. H. 
Compton. It is found that the wave-length of the scattered rays is not 
the same as that of the incident rays. Compton supposed that when a 
photon, as an incident radiation quantum, is intercepted by an 
electron, a photon quantum of scattered radiation of lower frequency 
is produced. Then, by assuming that both energy and momentum are 
conserved, results in conformity with observation are obtained. Since 

* The mathematical proof of this is presented in a later section of this chapter. 



4 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

Compton only considers the electron's kinetic energy, this means 
that the energy supplied to the electron in this scattering process is 
wholly kinetic. Now, the electron has a charge and its velocity is 
changed when it absorbs momentum. Its magnetic field must there- 
fore change and with this the magnetic field energy must change. Yet, 
as just stated, experiment shows that the energy form which is 
changed is wholly kinetic. 

This result is, of course, compatible with the above theoretical 
explanation of the increase in mass with velocity. Magnetic energy 
must, presumably, be the whole or part of the kinetic energy itself. 
It is the implications of this which guide us to understand more about 
the real nature of the electron. 



Magnetic Energy of the Electron 

The magnetic energy of an electron in motion is easily calculated if 
the electron of charge -e can be regarded as a sphere of radius R 
with the magnetic field energy wholly disposed outside the sphere. 
The field //distant x from a charge e moving at velocity v at an angle 
to the x distance vector is: 

H = (ec!c) sin Ojx 2 (1.2) 

This can be used in the following expression for the magnetic energy. 

E~T r (H*j&n)27txsm6xdxd0 (1.3) 

J0 J.r 

Upon evaluation using (1.2) and (1.3), we find: 

£ = eV-/3i?c 2 (1-4) 

Nissim (1966), in reviewing the electromagnetic mass properties of 
this electron, writes: "Thus, by virtue of its electromagnetic field 
energy, an electron possesses an electromagnetic mass equivalent to 
2e 2 j3Rc 2 . This was held by J. J. Thomson to be in addition to the 
'ordinary' mechanical mass of the electron but, as previously 
mentioned, Abraham and others subsequently advanced the hypo- 
thesis that the electromagnetic mass, or self-mass as it has been 
called, represents the total inertial mass of the electron. . . . Relativ- 
ists considerations, however, have caused physicists to abandon this 
idea and veer to the view that the electron possesses a certain 
mechanical inert mass in addition to an electromagnetic mass." 



THE ELECTRON 



5 



Electrostatic Rest Mass Energy of Electron 

If an electron is a charged sphere and the charge is taken to be 
uniformly spread over its surface of radius R, the intrinsic electric 
field energy is e 2 j2R, corresponding to a rest mass of e-/2Rc 2 , which 
is less than the electromagnetic mass just deduced. To resolve this 
difficulty, we may follow the argument of Wilson (1946) that there 
are binding forces restraining the electron charge from expanding 
and these must also represent an energy term. He calculated the 
binding energy for the spherical shell electron model as e-j6R, which 
exactly balances the discrepancy between the electric and magnetic 
rest mass calculations. 

Alternatively, if an electron is regarded as constrained to occupy a 
fixed volume, it will be found to adopt spherical form for minimum 
electric field energy and, for uniform pressure throughout this volume, 
its charge will be so distributed that its total electric field energy 
becomes 2e 2 jlR. This again leads to equality in the rest mass 
calculations, allowing kinetic energy to be identified with magnetic 
energy. A proof of this is given in Appendix I. 

This may seem to be mere speculation. If an electron is a sphere of 
charge, it must have a certain size and therefore a certain rest energy. 
There must be something holding it together, whether it is spherical 
or not. In established physical theory these facts cannot be avoided ; 
they are implicit in our analysis of electron behaviour. Instead of 
assuming a quantized charge and a quantized rest energy, which is 
too easy a way of avoiding the problem, we may note that, although 
charge does not vary with velocity, energy does vary with velocity. 
Then we can consider assigning a quantum volume of space to the 
electron. Why not quantize space rather than energy ? This volume 
will not have to change with velocity and the fact that it is constant 
accounts in a single assumption for rest mass energy quantization and 
for the binding force action restraining charge expansion, thus 
simplifying the model of the electron.* 

Electric Field Induction by Motion of Electric Charge 

When an electric charge is in motion at a steady velocity, its electric 
field moves bodily with it. According to the principles of Relativity, 

* The theory of quantum space has remarkable impact upon the understanding 
of elementary particles. See Chapter 7. 



6 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

if an observer moves at this same steady velocity, he will not be able 
to detect any effects of the motion. If the velocity is measured relative 
to the observer, then the electron will induce the magnetic field just 
considered and, presumably, the energy of this field will account 
for its mass properties. However, will any electric field effect of a 
dynamic character also be induced ? A single classical line of reasoning 
suggests that there is an electric dynamic field effect. 

Referring to Fig. 1 . 1, consider a charge e located at O to be moving 
with a velocity r, as shown. At a point P, the strength of the field 
from e is ejx 2 . Also at P, the electric charge e is really "seen" by an 
observer to be at Q because the disturbance set up by the charge in 
motion past P is propagated at the finite velocity c. There must. 




Fig. 1.1 



therefore, be an electric displacement at P, denoted V. The position 
of O is found from the relationship: 

QP\QO = c\v (1.5) 

because the charge travels from Q to O in the time taken for the 
disturbance to travel from Q to P. When V is added vectorially to the 
radial field ejx 1 from O to P, the resultant vector lies along OP. 
Further, since the displacement field will be in the direction needed 
for least energy, that is minimum V, this vector Fwill be normal to 
the radial field direction QP. It follows that V h given by: 

V={ejx > -)sm(p (1.6) 

Now, ip is the angle between QP and OP and if is the angle between 
QO and OP 

QO sin = QP sin y (1.7) 



THE ELECTRON 



7 



From (1.5), (1.6) and (1.7): 



V (evjc) sin x- 



(1.8) 



By analogy with equation (1.2), we find that the electric energy 
attributable to this is exactly as given by equation (1.4). Thus, the 
dynamic electric field energy is: 



Curiously, the magnetic field energy density and electric field energy 
density due to the motion of the charge are identical everywhere in 
the field. 

Now, this poses a problem. If magnetic energy is wholly identified 
with the kinetic energy, how can we now explain an additional 
component of dynamic energy which is exactly equal to the magnetic 
energy? This analysis draws attention to an anomaly facing the 
observations from the Compton Effect. 

Is Magnetic Energy Negative? 

It is standard in physical theory to write the magnetic energy density 
of a field // as (!- tin. However, it is equally standard to put a minus 
sign in front of magnetic energy terms when energy balance conditions 
are under study. According to Bates (1951, a): "The minus sign 
merely indicates that we have to supply heat in order to destroy the 
intrinsic magnetization." Put another way, since heat is really kinetic 
energy, we can say that: 



However, this does not read kinetic energy equals magnetic energy, 
meaning that they are identical. It reads that when we have kinetic 
energy and magnetic energy together in equal measure, they con- 
stitute no overall energy whatsoever. 

If this applies to the electron, we see that the total of the kinetic 
energy and the magnetic energy is zero, but since there is also a 
dynamic electric energy equal to either quantity, the net dynamic 
energy of the electron is given by equation (1.9) alone. 

It follows that we really should take the experimental evidence 
afforded by the Compton Effect as a clear indication that kinetic 
energy, magnetic energy and dynamic electric energy exist in equal 
measure when an electron is in motion but that since one of these, 



E = e-V 2 /3/?r 2 



(1.9) 



Kinetic energy - magnetic energy - 



8 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



the magnetic energy, should always be considered as a negative 
quantity, the electron behaves as if it only possesses a normal 
kinetic energy related to its intrinsic electric energy. 

This conclusion will now be fully supported by analysing the 
inertial effects of an electron when it is accelerated. 

Accelerated Charge 

The effect of accelerating a slow-moving charge e will now be cal- 
culated. The electric field of a charge has the property of inertia and 
moves with the charge. The action of acceleration, however, means 
that the field motion is disturbed. The electric field is distorted. For 
example, if an electric charge is moving at uniform velocity and then 
undergoes acceleration to another uniform velocity during a short 
period of time clt then at time t later there will be a disturbance in the 
field region distant ct from the charge. This assumes such low velo- 
city that the charge is effectively still located at the centre of the 
radiated wave disturbance. Essentially, there is a regular radial 
electric field from the new position of the electric charge within the 
sphere of radius ct. This field is moving at the same velocity as 
the charge and it is therefore not distorted. Outside the radius ct the 
field still centres on the position the charge would have had it not 
been accelerated. This field is still moving with the original charge 
velocity. The disturbance in the field is really wholly contained in a 
spherical shell of radius ct and radial thickness celt. It contains the 
lines of electric field flux which join the two regular field regions. The 
key question we face is whether the total electric field energy in this 
shell is different from the energy content if there were no disturbance. 
If the shell has extra energy, then this is energy carried off by radia- 
tion as the disturbance is propagated outwards at the propagation 
velocity c. 

Referring now to Fig. 1.2, consider a charge e to be moving 
in a straight line BC at velocity v. At the point C the charge is sup- 
posed to undergo sudden acceleration causing it now to move along 
CD at velocity v'. CD is inclined to BC. Both v and v' are taken to be 
very small compared with the propagation velocity c. At time / after 
acceleration a field disturbance has moved to a distance ct from C. 
The disturbance is contained within a radial distance celt. Now 
consider a point P in this disturbance region. To pass through P, a 
line of force will be inclined to the vector v' - v at an angle 0. This is 



THE ELECTRON 



9 




Fig. 1.2 



the line of force emanating from the charge and traversing the wave 
region. In the region of P, however, the line of force has to undergo 
displacement. It is laterally displaced by the distance (r'-r)/ sin 
because, for example, if v' and v are unidirectional the field change 
across the wave region is an advance to a new velocity which causes 
a displacement in the direction of v or v' equal to the change in 
velocity times time. This displacement is (v' - v)t. At right angles to 
the line of motion of the charge we find the direction of this dis- 
placement to be perpendicular to the lines of force emanating from 
C to the field region. Directly ahead of the charge in its line of motion 
we find that the displacement is along the lines of force emanating 
from C. The resulting lateral displacement of the field lines by 
(v' - v)t sin requires an electric field component in the disturbance 
at right angles to the propagation direction and in or parallel with 
the plane containing v' - v. This field component will give rise to a 
separate electric field energy component. The transverse field is 
calculated quite easily, since its ratio to the main radial field ejc 2 t 2 is 
the above lateral displacement divided by the radial disturbance 
distance cdt. By putting the acceleration / as (v' - v)tjdt, this trans- 
verse electric field becomes e/sin 6\c z t Thus, the electric field energy 
per unit volume in the disturbance region is: 




(1.10) 



10 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



The total electric field energy in the disturbance region, that is, the 
total energy carried by the disturbance, is found by integrating this 
expression over the volume of the shell. An elemental volume formed 
by an annulus through P centred around the axis v' - r is 2n(ct) 2 
sin OcdtdO. Performing the integration between - and = n, 
gives : 

t?Pdtl3c s 

Since dt is the time during which the disturbance is formed and 
since this energy quantity is independent of the distance travelled by 
the disturbance, it is deduced that this energy is radiated by the charge 
when subjected to acceleration /and during the time dt. Should the 
acceleration be sustained the rate of energy radiation in the electric 
field form becomes e 1 f-j3c' A . 

This result is that classically obtained by applying Maxwell's 
equations to the problem of radiation by accelerated charge. It has 
to be doubled to follow the usual wave propagation theories, accord- 
ing to which electric and magnetic field energies are equal for wave 
propagation through a vacuum. Classically, magnetic field energy 
has to be added to the expression deduced in order to evaluate the 
total rate of energy radiation. 

Now, this feature of energy radiation by accelerated charge, 
particularly electrons, is relied upon in many accepted physical 
theories. It has been accepted quite readily because energy transfer 
by electromagnetic wave propagation is fundamental. Yet, the 
energy quanta are supposed to come along as photons according to 
other physical theory and factual observation. There is nothing of a 
quantum nature about the derivation of the energy radiation pre- 
sented above, or about the classical derivation using Maxwell's 
equations. Hence, there is a problem. It is part of an accepted 
mystery in physics. Acceptance emerges from the reconciliation by 
the physicist in believing that there can be two ways of looking at the 
same thing. The duality of wave and photon principles of energy 
transfer is no longer treated as an absurdity. It is an accepted and 
fascinating feature of Nature. Yet, if one dares to ask the question of 
how an electron can radiate energy and still stay an electron, or how 
the energy radiated is fed to the electron, one is asking too much 
from physical theory. We should look, instead, at the broader energy 
balance and make our analysis by reference to the field equations. 
How is it that the physicist has given in to this problem? Surely, we 



THE ELECTRON 



11 



will never understand the real nature of the electron if we tolerate 
two conflicting explanations for the same phenomenon and stop 
asking the questions about the source of the electron's energy 
radiation. 

One simple fact is evident. If electromagnetic wave propagation 
had not been discovered, energy radiation merely due to electron 
acceleration would be highly questionable. The physicist would 
retrace his theoretical steps, even revise his theory, before building 
his further theories on the notion that an electron can radiate energy. 
This should be even more a matter for concern in the light of 
the quantum features of energy transfer. Had the discovery of the 
photon preceded the theory of electromagnetic wave radiation, the 
conflict of the dual existence of wave and quantum theory could 
hardly have become a tolerable situation. At this stage, the author 
puts before the reader the clear proposition that an accelerated charge 
does not radiate energy. We will re-examine the above analysis to 
find out where it went wrong. 

We do not have to look very far. It was postulated that the 
acceleration of the charge e was /. From the time of Newton it has 
been known that acceleration cannot be assumed. It results from a 
force. To apply a force to an electric charge demands a field acting 
on the charge. No such field was incorporated in the analysis. Our 
object was to calculate energy and energy is a quadratic expression 
and cannot be calculated if fields present are ignored. Here, then, is 
the source of the error. Now, it seems absurd to suggest that such a 
mistake could have gone without notice for so many years. Perhaps 
this can be understood if we argue that the wave disturbance set up 
by accelerated charge must eventually pass well outside the region of 
any local accelerating field. Then the analysis must be valid. If 
energy is carried along by the disturbance it must come from some- 
where. It comes from the direction of the accelerated charge. Pre- 
sumably it comes out of the field at the source. It does not have to 
come from the electron itself. It is just that the acceleration of the 
electron is a necessary adjunct to whatever it is that causes energy to 
be radiated. This is an argument, but it does not eliminate the duality 
problem and it docs involve an all-important assumption that energy 
is in fact carried by an electromagnetic wave. This is an assumption 
having no analogy in other physics. Waves on water involve local 
interchanges between kinetic and potential energies and no forward 
migration of water or energy at the wave velocity. It seems a better 



12 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



assumption to propose non-radiation of energy by the accelerated 
charge, non-transfer of energy by electromagnetic waves, and leave 
the physicist free to accept the quantum mechanism of energy transfer 
without ambiguity. At least, it is worth the effort of re-analysing the 
mechanism of wave propagation by an electron, allowing for the 
accelerating field. The method of analysis being used by reference to 
Fig. 1.2, incidentally, is a textbook method which is attributed to 
J. J. Thomson. It is only the following introduction of the accelerating 
field which is new. 

An electric field V is applied in the direction of acceleration of the 
charge depicted in Fig. 1 .2. This field V may be resolved at P into two 
components, one radial from C augmenting the regular field of e, 
and the other in opposition to the transverse field component from 
which the radiated energy is derived. Thus, expression (1.10) for the 
energy density in the disturbance region can be expressed as: 

1 (efs'm . \ 2 /, ,n 

Although it is tempting to choose V so that this is zero for all 0, we 
cannot do this because the square of the last term in the expression is 
an energy component belonging to the field V and it cannot be 
assumed to move with the disturbance. The rest of the expression, 
including the interaction term found when the expression is expanded, 
does denote energy moving with the disturbance. The energy density 
which can move with the disturbance is different from that previously 
calculated by the reducing amount: 

-^(2Ksin0e/sin0/c 3 /) (1.12) 

071 

Upon integration, as before, this is 2Veftdt\Z. Thus, the total energy 
carried by the disturbance is : 

e 2 Pdtj3c 3 - 2 Veftdtfi (1.13) 

Now, in considering the mass acted upon in charge acceleration, we 
must equate this mass to that of the electric field remaining to be 
accelerated. This is a function of ct. Expression (1.13) has to be zero 
on the basis of our assumption that the charge does not radiate 
energy. This means that: 



Velf=e 2 l2c 3 t 



(1.14) 



THE ELECTRON 



13 



This expresses the ratio of force Ve to acceleration /, and is a measure 
of the effective mass of the electric field remaining to be accelerated. 
The energy of the electric field outside the disturbance region is 
e-\2ct. Denoting this as E, we have from (1.14): 

E = Mc 2 (1.15) 

where M is the mass involved. 

It follows that the assumption that an electric charge does not 
radiate energy leads to the conclusion that an electric field energy 
has mass according to the relation E = Mc 2 . If this latter relationship 
is not valid, then there should be radiation of energy by accelerated 
charge and we are led back into the duality problem confronting 
physics. The duality problem is avoided if we accept that E = Mc 2 is 
a valid relation. Now, this latter expression is an accepted result in 
modern physics. It has been verified in its application to atomic 
reactions and electron-positron annihilation. Since it must be true, an 
accelerated charge cannot radiate energy. Therefore, if an electro- 
magnetic wave carries energy with it, it must acquire this energy as it 
passes out of the field causing the charge acceleration. If it does this, 
we come back to the duality problem. Also, imagine two electric 
charges mutually attracted and accelerated towards one another. If 
both radiate energy generated somehow in their fields, they must lose 
some of their fields and so their charge. Note that they need not, 
theoretically, have much velocity but may have a high acceleration. 
In short, while it is not proved that there is no energy radiation from 
the field, it is certainly likely to present some peculiar problems to 
assume that the wave gets a supply of energy at some position remote 
from its source. If this assumption is avoided and we accept the 
validity of Maxwell's equations we are left with but one conclusion. 
The assumption made in applying the Poynting vector to deduce 
energy propagation by an electromagnetic wave is wrong. This 
assumption is that the energy of the wave is carried by the wave. In 
fact, the energy might come from a source in the medium through 
which the wave is propagated. It might come from the aether. Or it 
might not exist at all. If, in applying Maxwell's equations, we assume 
that because electric field and magnetic field are equal in a plane wave, 
we have an equal contribution of electric field energy and magnetic 
field energy but only if both of these energy quantities are positive. If 
magnetic energy is negative, the equality of field strengths predicted 
from Maxwell's theory corresponds to zero energy carriage by the 



14 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



waves and we have a wholly consistent approach to our under- 
standing of the electron and its behaviour when accelerated. 

A word should be said about the assumption in the above analysis 
that the electric charge had a velocity which was small compared with 
the velocity of light c. It is submitted that if we can prove that there 
is no radiation of energy from the accelerated charge at a low 
velocity we should not expect a different situation at higher velocity. 
Rigorous analysis to cater for high velocity charge motion is not 
necessarily worth while. The author has not attempted it, mainly 
because it is necessary to claim that the velocity of light is relative 
to something. If it is measured relative to an observer and the charge 
moves at high velocity relative to this observer and is accelerated, one 
w ill possibly get energy radiation. If it is measured relative to a differ- 
ent observer, one will get a different energy radiation. This seems 
ridiculous. If it is measured relative to the charge e, one can forget the 
idea of the electric charge moving at high velocity. It is effectively at 
rest in the frame of reference which matters. Put another w ay, an 
electric charge might know that it is accelerated but it has no way of 
knowing that it is moving at any particular velocity. Its energy radia- 
tion cannot, therefore, depend upon its velocity. Since it is zero at low- 
velocity from the above analysis, it must be zero at any velocity. 

The argument that it cannot tell whether it has uniform velocity 
follows from Newtonian principles. The talk about observers follows 
from Einstein's approach to Relativity. If anything, therefore, the 
non-radiation of energy by accelerated charge is an indication that 
some arguments available from Einstein's Theory of Relativity can- 
not be relied upon, although there is the inevitable result that zero- 
energy radiation for all velocities is consistent with the Principle of 
Relativity. 

It is noted that the mutual requirement for E = Mc- and non- 
radiation of energy by accelerated charge was the subject of a contri- 
bution by the author to the discussion of a paper by P. Hammond, 
relating to the Poynting Vector (Aspden, 1958, a) see also Aspden 
(1966, a), where the author drew attention to this result in view of con- 
troversy about the proper formulation of electromagnetic radiation. 

Superconductivity 

It has been concluded that an accelerated electron develops electro- 
magnetic waves but need not radiate energy by these waves. This 



THE ELECTRON 



15 



explains why electrons can move about in atoms without radiating 
energy and why electrons can travel through a superconductor with- 
out developing heat. We need not have recourse to arbitrary quantum 
assumptions to explain these basic facts of physical science. It is true 
that the motion of electrons through materials at normal tempera- 
tures results in heat generation. There are collisions between the 
electrons and the atoms. The electrons have kinetic energy and may 
transfer some of the atoms. Then, the atoms could be the source of 
the heat and not the electrons. Atoms do radiate energy in quanta. 
They are the source of photon radiation and, as we shall see later, an 
electron has a role to play anyway in the photon action. However, to 
emit photons one has to have enough energy to form a quantum. 
Thus, when an atom is part of a cold substance it has a small amount 
of kinetic energy. No doubt this energy varies about a mean value 
and as long as it is at least occasionally above the threshold needed 
to excite the photon emission there will be radiation. Meanwhile, 
the general interaction between the atoms and the exchange of kinetic 
energy will assure the manifestation of a temperature, even without 
such radiation. Electron flow merely adds to this kinetic energy 
exchange process and by its collisions will trigger off more photon 
emissions. If this electron flow and its collision action does not lift 
the energy level of the atom up to the threshold for radiation, assum- 
ing the material is at a really low temperature, no photons will be 
emitted. The collisions will occur without energy loss. Since they 
will be between electrons, either those carrying the current or those 
surrounding the atomic nucleus, they will be between particles of 
equal mass. Elastic collisions of this kind result in an exchange of 
velocities. Momentum is conserved. The result is that electrons can 
move without any apparent restraint through a loss free medium. The 
current will be sustained because the momentum is sustained by the 
electrons. 

The above theory for superconductivity is merely suggested as the 
possible explanation. If it is valid, one would expect that if two super- 
conductors composed of different isotopes of the same clement are 
compared the heavier isotope will remain superconductive to a 
higher temperature than the other. The reason for this is that at the 
same temperature the heavier isotope has possibly a vibration con- 
dition of its atoms at a lower maximum velocity. Being heavier these 
atoms do not have to move so fast to keep the temperature balance 
with an interface at a reference temperature. It follows that their 



16 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



electrons are less likely to have the more highly energetic collisions 
with the conduction electrons. As a result, photons will be produced 
in such collisions at a lower temperature in the lighter isotope. This 
is mentioned because this is exactly what is found and because the 
recent discovery of this fact has disproved the conventional theory of 
superconductivity, which predicted the inverse. This was reported by 
Fowler et a/. (1967), who found that uranium 235 becomes super- 
conductive at 2T°K and uranium 238 becomes superconductive at 
2-2K. 

The Velocity-dependence of Mass 

The expression E = Mc' applies to electric field energy. It follows 
that when we consider an electric charge in motion as having a kinetic 
energy, a magnetic energy and a dynamic electric field energy, as we 
did in explaining the problem with the Compton Effect, we are 
fortunate that one of these items, the magnetic energy, is negative 
and cancels one of the others. This really means that the dynamic 
electric field energy alone can be regarded as the motion energy of 
the charge. Since E = Mc 1 applies to such energy, the problem we 
now face is that mass must increase as the electric charge increases 
velocity relative to the electromagnetic reference frame. Here, it is 
necessary to talk about motion relative to the electromagnetic refer- 
ence frame because it is in this frame that the magnetic field is induced 
and with it the dynamic electric field. It remains to be seen in our 
later discussions what physical form is to be attached to the means 
sustaining the magnetic field. Whatever these means are, we must 
assume that they have a co-operative influence in determining both 
the dynamic electric field and the magnetic field. It may be that very 
close to the electron itself there is nothing to support the magnetic 
field. But this does not matter as far as the analysis of the energy 
radiation is concerned. Nor does it matter in the earlier calculations 
of magnetic energy and dynamic electric field energy, because these 
latter quantities cancel. It docs matter in calculating the mass effect 
of the dynamic electric field, in view of the assumed equality of the 
dynamic electric field energy and kinetic energy. To proceed, it is 
assumed that, at least over a period of time, the statistical mean value 
of the dynamic electric field energy is equal to the kinetic energy so 
that the latter can be regarded as offset by the magnetic energy, leav- 
ing the electric field energy as the only mass-containing quantity. 



THE ELECTRON 



17 



On this basis, from E = Mc 2 we can say that a mass M moving at 
velocity v has momentum Mv = Evjc 2 . Force is the rate of change of 
momentum and when this is multiplied by v we have rate of change of 
energy. Thus: 

4, C16) 

When solved, this gives: 

E = E IV[l-(vlcf-] (1.17) 
The corresponding mass relationship is: 

M=MolVU~ivim (1-18) 

This result shows that mass increases with velocity in the electro- 
magnetic reference frame. It shows that there is a limiting velocity at 
which mass will become infinite. This is when v becomes equal to c, 
the speed of light. The increase of mass with velocity is well known 
from experiment, as already mentioned earlier in this chapter. 



Fast Electron Collision 

A direct experimental support for the non-radiation of energy by an 
accelerated electron is also afforded by collisions between fast 
electrons and electrons at rest. Using a Wilson cloud chamber, 
Champion (1932) has shown that when an electron moving at high 
velocity (of the order of 90% of the speed of light) collides with an 
electron at rest the resulting motion of the electron satisfies the 
formula in (1.18). On simple Newtonian mechanics the angle between 
the electron tracks after collision should be 90°. Using the above 
relation between mass and velocity and specifying no loss of energy 
by radiation, the conservation of momentum in the collision process 
leads to the formula: 

, m (m\m - 1) sin cos 1f ., 

COS (<?+#) = r7 — , . xo ■ „ n — - A s-Tfjr (1.19) 

vr ' [(m m + l) 2 sin- 0+4 cos 2 0] 1 



where m is the mass of the incident electron as given in terms of its 
rest mass m using (1.18), and and <p are the angles between the 
electron tracks after collision and the direction of motion of the 
incident electron. 

By measuring the velocity of the electron before collision and these 
two angles, Champion was able to verify equation (1.19) as taken in 



18 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



conjunction with (1.18). Now, although in such experiments one 
would expect quite significant radiation of energy by accelerated 
electrons using the classical formula discussed above, Champion was 
able to conclude as follows: "Considering the total number of col- 
lisions measured it would appear that, if any considerable amount of 
energy is lost by collisions during close encounters, the number of 
such inelastic collisions is not greater than a few per cent of the total 
number." 

Electrons and Positrons as Nuclear Components 

So far, the electron has been the topic of interest. Presently, follow- 
ing this chapter, we will enquire into some of the field interaction 
properties of the electron and its electrodynamic behaviour as a 
current element. Thereafter, we will study its role inside the atom 
and later its role in the atomic nucleus itself. However, it is appro- 
priate at this stage to outline briefly the potential which the electron, 
as portrayed in this chapter, has in nuclear theory. This will be 
done without recourse to quantum electrodynamics or even wave 
mechanics. An omission, to be rectified in a later chapter, is the 
analysis of the spin properties of the electron and its anomalous 
magnetic moment. An explanation of spin is important, if only as a 
check on the theory offered to account for any elementary particle. 
For the moment, spin is ignored. 

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, quark theory invites us to 
believe that the proton consists of three elementary particles in close 
aggregation. This quark theory is untenable with the theory presented 
in this work. Here, there is complete reliance upon the indivisibility 
of the charge quantum e, so far as it appears in matter. It will, how- 
ever, be a contention of this theory in Chapter 7 that the proton does 
comprise three elementary particles as required by quark theory, but 
these are the electron, the positron and a heavy elementary nucleon 
of positive charge e. The positron was discovered in 1932. It appeared 
in cosmic rays and is, of course, merely a particle exactly like the 
electron but with a positive charge e. Positrons are ejected from radio- 
active substances, which suggests their existence in the atomic 
nucleus. It has been found that a proton can lose a positive electron, 
or positron, and become a neutron. Also, a neutron can lose a 
negative electron and become a proton. This suggests that the proton 
and neutron must each contain an electron and a positron. Both 



THE ELECTRON 19 

must contain the heavy nucleoli just mentioned, and the neutron 
must have one electron in addition. Now, all this supposes that there 
are no interchanges of polarity or energy exchanges in these various 
transmutations. This is unlikely. Indeed, if we go on to consider the 
combination of the neutron and the proton, it has been suggested 
that they might be bound together by what is called an "exchange 
force" arising because they are rapidly changing their identity. The 
suggestion is that they are exchanging the electrons and positrons as 
described above, so that, according to a proposal by Fermi, the 
neutron and proton are really different quantum states of the same 
fundamental particle. Now, this may be true, but we should not blind 
ourselves to the other possibilities. If we know that these elementary 
particles are aggregations of electrons, positrons and some heavy 
particles, and we know the physical size of these particles, as explained 
earlier in this chapter, it is worth while examining what follows from 
this knowledge. The result contains a double surprise, and is all the 
more gratifying because of its simplicity. 

The deuteron, the nucleus of heavy hydrogen, is the particle form 
to be expected when a proton and a neutron are bound together. We 
will assume that this deuteron, which has a mass of the order of two 
protons and a charge e which is positive, comprises two identical 
heavy particles and some electrons or positrons or a mixture of both. 
Then there are a number of possible configurations having electro- 
static stability. For one of these the energy has a minimum value. 
This configuration is deemed to be that of the deuteron. Its electro- 
static interaction energy is a measure of the nuclear binding energy. 
It is the energy needed to separate the nuclear components well 
apart from one another. How far apart is critical to the analysis if 
we wish to be exact, but for the initial study in this chapter we 
assume separation to infinity. The binding energy of the deuteron is 
known from measurements. Hence, the theory can be checked. 

In Fig. 1.3 different models of possible deuteron configurations 
are shown. Model A depicts two heavy positively-charged particles 
of mass M. They have a very small radius because for a discrete 
charge e the electrostatic energy is inversely proportional to radius, 
as shown in Appendix I. In model A there is one electron located 
between the two heavy particles, or H particles as they will be 
denoted. Since the charges act from their particle centres, the radius 
a of the electron becomes the only significant dimension in the 
analysis. Then, the energy of deuteron model A is 2M + \ electron 



20 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



units plus the interaction energy. It is convenient to evaluate mass 
quantities in terms of the electron mass as a unit. The interaction 
energy comprises three components. Between one // particle and the 
electron there is an energy -e 2 ja. Between the other H particle and 
the electron there is the same energy - c-ja, and between the two // 
particles there is the positive energy e- 2a. The total interaction 
energy is - l-5e 2 ja. Now. we will put: 

ke*-la=mc 2 (1.20) 

where k is a constant and m is the mass of the electron. Then, in the 
units of mass for which m is unity we can express the total energy of 
model A as 2M + 1 -\-5jk. 




Fig. 1.3 



In similar manner the other models of the dcuteron presented in 
Fig. 1.3 can be analysed. An energy evaluation for each model shown 
results in the following masses: 

A 2M+X -\-5jk 

B 2M + 3 -2-311 Ik 

C 2M + 3 -2-911 Ik 

D 2A/ + 5 -3-558/A: 



For different values of k the deuteron could be different, since the 
deuteron will be the one of smallest total mass. Even so, the term 



THE ELECTRON 



21 



involving k is the binding energy of the deuteron, and it is known 
from experiment that this binding energy is about 2-22 MEV or 
4-35 electron mass units. Thus, proceeding from this we can derive 
k. Firstly, if model A is the minimum mass model, k has to be about 
0-35 to assure that 1-5/Yc is 4-35. Then we can see that model C has 
lower energy still, which makes us rule out model A. Model B is 
ruled out on direct comparison with model C. If model C is chosen, 
then k will be about 0-67. This gives model C slightly less overall 
energy than model A. It has also less energy than the other models, as 
may be verified by continuing this exercise. It will be found that 
model C is the only one able to explain the measured binding energy 
of the deuteron. Thus, if this theory is correct k should be 0-67, 
which is verification of the 2/3 factor already deduced earlier in this 
chapter by reference to Appendix I. 

If we pause to comment on this verification that k is 2/3, we note 
that there are now available the following mutually-supporting 
points. Firstly, the magnetic field energy induced around a spherical 
electron of radius a in motion has a mass equivalence, if equated to 
kinetic energy, which puts k as 2/3. Secondly, if we assume that the 
constraint or binding action at the surface of the electron is such that 
the repulsive forces within the electron develop a uniform pressure 
throughout its volume, k is 2/3. This is proved in Appendix I. 
Thirdly, if we assume that the electric charge e of the electron is 
distributed throughout the body of the electron to cause the electric 
field or energy density to be uniform, k is 2/3. This is mentioned in 
Appendix I. Fourthly, it so happens that if k is 2/3 the deuteron 
binding energy is explained and the deuteron is identified with the 
model C in Fig. 1.3. It follows that there is little scope for doubt 
about the real nature of the electron. There have, indeed, been two 
surprises from this analysis. The first is that the deuteron energy is 
calculable on such a simple model, one which happens to be the least 
mass form. The second is that although the form of the electron had 
been deduced by separate analysis, we were able to find an empirical 
approach using experimental data to verify that the energy of the 
electron is 2e 2 /3 divided by its radius. 

It is noted that a value of k of 2/3 used in connection with model C 
results in a binding energy of 4-375 electron units, or about 2-24 
MEV. In Chapter 7 it will be shown that we can take this further to 
find the exact value of the deuteron binding energy. As it is, it 
suffices that the theoretical figure is within 1% of that measured. 



22 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



Summary 

In this chapter the reader has been shown that there is purpose and 
merit in regarding the electron as a spherical ball of charge. The 
quantitative analysis has drawn attention to the need to regard 
magnetic energy as a negative quantity, a feature which is com- 
patible with other physical theory, and this has led to an under- 
standing of the mass properties of the electron. In previous textbooks 
the dynamic component of the electric field energy has not be con- 
sidered. Another omission in the past has been an inclusion of the 
field needed to accelerate the electron when studying its radiation 
effects. By rectifying these omissions, a new insight into physics has 
become available, with consequent benefits. It is incredible to the 
author that the classical formula for the energy radiated by the 
accelerated electron could have been accepted when it has no 
dependence upon the mass or size of the electron, but, be that as it 
may, it has been proved that non-radiation leads us to understand 
the nature of mass and the derivation of the relation E = Mc 2 . The 
increase in mass with velocity follows from this relation, as is well 
known. Accordingly, although the law E^Mc 1 and the velocity 
dependence of mass are regularly ascribed to Einstein's theory, their 
existence in no way makes Einstein's theory an essential part of 
physics. They do not depend upon Einstein's Principle of Relativity. 
The chapter has been concluded by showing that the deuteron bind- 
ing energy can be calculated to provide a result highly compatible 
with the model of the electron presented. This demonstrates one of 
the potential applications of this theory of the electron. The analysis 
of the atomic nucleus is an important subject in this work, as will be 
seen later in Chapter 7. Meanwhile, it is hoped that the reader may be 
beginning to realize that Nature is not quite as complicated in the 
realm of truly fundamental physics as might appear from modern 
mathematical treatments. 



PWE CHI EXIT 



END OF SECTION NOTE 



Follow this link to proceed 



file:///D|/Myweb/books/Pwe/Pwe1 link.html [27/07/01 09:48:11] 



2. Mutual Interaction Effects 



Reaction Effects 

It has been shown in the previous chapter that an electric charge in 
motion has three dynamic energy components. These are its kinetic 
energy, its dynamic electric field energy and its magnetic energy. 
Further, these are all equal in magnitude for observations in the 
electromagnetic reference frame and when the velocity is small 
relative to the velocity of electromagnetic wave propagation. Also, 
and most important, the magnetic energy is a negative quantity 
because it is energy supplied from the field medium. Thus, the total 
self-dynamic energy of an electric charge in motion under the 
conditions just specified is, for normal observations, simply its 
kinetic energy. 

The same principles apply to any reacting charge in motion in the 
magnetic field set up by the above charge, but when additional 
charges are present there are mutual interaction effects to consider. 
It is of importance to consider the mutual interaction energy com- 
ponents present when a group of interacting electric charges is in a 
dynamic state. The basic principles of magnetism are founded in the 
physical understanding of these interactions. 

By way of definition, it will be assumed that a discrete charge in 
the sense to be used in this study of mutual interaction effects is a 
unit which, if not spinning in the inertial reference frame, has all its 
constituents moving together at the same velocity. Such a charge 
might comprise a close-compacted aggregate of charged particles of 
both polarities. For example, if a proton consists of three quarks as 
already mentioned, we still regard this as a single unit of charge. The 
physical reason for this distinction will become evident below. 

Discrete units of charge in a general interacting system may be 
classified as primary or reacting. By this is meant that any charge 
which forms part of the system and has a controlled motion is termed 
primary charge. Other charge present is merely disturbed and reacts 
to the motion of the primary charge so that it may be termed reacting 
charge. An example of this is the flow of current in a circuit. The 



24 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



electrons carrying the circuit current comprise the primary charges. 
Electrons in any surrounding conducting medium comprise a reacting 
system. Even though the circuit current is steady, the conduction 
electrons in adjacent conductive media provide a system of charge 
capable of reacting in the sense intended here. 

The three dynamic energy components will be denoted A', E and H 
respectively applying to kinetic energy, electric energy and magnetic 
energy. Also, a suffix P, R or M will denote primary charge, reacting 
charge and mutual interaction between charge, respectively. Thus, 
the total dynamic energy of the system under study is given by: 



Now, we have already established that the self-electric and magnetic 
energies of the charges are equal. Further, the magnetic energy 
quantity is negative. Thus Ep and Hp in (2.1) sum to zero and E R 
and Hr sum to zero. Physically, this is because the disturbance of the 
field medium which we term magnetism involves a redeployment of 
energy in the field itself. In fact, the terms in (2.1) are energy changes 
and the requirement that Ep and Hp sum to zero is merely a mathe- 
matical account of a situation in which the phenomenon of 
magnetism causes energy to be released from one form in the field 
medium and used to generate the dynamic electric field present where 
this energy is released. The mutual interaction between the charge 
causes a magnetic interaction energy term Hm which also must 
combine with £,1/ to sum to zero. The result is that the energy given 
by (2.1) can be simplified as: 



The term K M has been introduced for generality and denotes what 
we could term mutual kinetic energy. It is of interest to examine 
what is meant by mutual kinetic energy. 

Mutual Kinetic Energy 

Kinetic energy can be said to be the intrinsic energy of motion which 
we associate with a particle. It has been shown in the previous chapter 
that the mass property of a particle is related to its intrinsic electric 
field energy. The law E=Mc- was derived. The rest mass of the 
particle is found by dividing the electric field energy of the particle 



K P + E P + Hp + K Pl + En +Hr+ Km + Em i- Hm 



(2.1) 



Kp I- Kr + Km 



(2.2) 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 25 

by c 1 . Ill the sense of (2.1) we have precluded consideration of effects 
internal to composite charge aggregations. These have self-balancing 
mutual dynamic interactions and the kinetic energy is that of the 
composite mass of the aggregations. We need only consider the mass 
effect of the mutual electric interactions in our open system. This has 
to take account of the implications in the analysis that mutual 
magnetic interaction involves field energy redeployment to produce 
dynamic mutual electric energy states. However, such energy can 
give no mass property to the system since the mutual dynamic field 
energy (electric and magnetic) sums to zero anyway. There are 
mutual non-dynamic electrostatic interaction energy components 
not included in (2.1) and these could be said to give rise to a mutual 
kinetic energy effect for a system in motion. However, in analysing 
interaction effects in a complete system, which is just what we are 
doing, effects are being analysed relative to the common inertial 
frame of the system. The total momentum of the system relative to 
its own inertial reference frame cannot vary if we consider only the 
effects of interaction and the self-action effects of the system itself. 
This is a well accepted fundamental rule of physics. Thus, if the 
electrostatic interaction energy is taken to be at rest in the inertial 
reference frame under study, simply because it is taken to define this 
frame by its very position, we cannot attribute kinetic energy to the 
motion of the interaction electrostatic energy with the system as a 
whole. In other words, we expect that there is no such thing as mutual 
kinetic energy in the context used above. 

To relate this to the orthodox teachings in physics, consider two 
electric charges of opposite polarity but identical mass moving to- 
wards one another at equal speeds, the motions being in a common 
straight line. By accepted principles there are no magnetic forces 
between these two charges because there is no field along this line. 
This leaves us to accept that the mutual electrostatic attraction 
between the charges causes electrostatic energy to decrease as it is 
converted into the kinetic energy added by the accelerated motions of 
the charges. The analysis is simple and the reasoning quite straight- 
forward. However, let us ask where the mutual electrostatic energy is 
located. Surely, it is in the field, that is, it is spread over the space 
surrounding the charges. As the charges come closer together, this 
field energy is released and converted to kinetic energy. Where is this 
kinetic energy located? As the charges come closer together, the 
mutual electrostatic field energy which is not yet released and 



26 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



converted to kinetic energy has nevertheless been compacted into a 
region closer to the charges. The energy distributed in the field has 
moved to new positions. Does this involve any kinetic energy effects 
itself? Accepted physics does not answer these questions. They are 
not formulated so bluntly. Yet, the questions must be asked and 
answered if our understanding of physics is to develop. 

Let us try to formulate some rules. Every fundamental electric 
particle has an associated electric field and an intrinsic electric field 
energy. This gives the particle a rest mass, found by dividing the 
energy by c 2 . Kinetic energy is then the energy of motion of this 
intrinsic electric field energy. The velocity of such motion has to be 
measured in an inertial reference frame which we take to be a non- 
rotating frame in which the "centre of gravity" of the mutual 
electrostatic energy of the complete system of electric charge includ- 
ing the particle is at rest. There is no such thing as mutual kinetic 
energy on this definition. Mutual electrostatic energy can be 
redeployed in its distribution in space without involving any 
additional dynamic energy effects not summing to zero. Mutual 
electrostatic energy can be released to augment the kinetic energy 
of the charges in the system. 

These rules cater for the simple example of the two approaching 
oppositely charged particles. They do not cater for the increase in 
mass of an electric charge as its speed increases. The rules will there- 
fore be extended as follow s. The intrinsic electric field energy of the 
particle moves with the particle. This energy accounts for the mass 
of the particle. In the field surrounding the particle there is a dynamic 
disturbance of the electric field which involves an increase in electric 
field energy. This added field energy moves with the particle and 
augments its mass. There is a deficit in the intrinsic energy of the 
field medium termed magnetic energy and there is kinetic energy in 
equal measure. Both of these move with the particle but they com- 
pensate one another and have no mass effect. The dynamic electric 
field energy remains to add increased mass to the system. Since it 
could be replaced in analysis by the equal valued kinetic energy, we 
may then speak as if kinetic energy is the sole dynamic energy 
quantity. 

It is a conclusion at this stage that there is no such thing as mutual 
kinetic energy. Thus, Km in (2.2) is zero. This leaves us with the 
interesting result that the total energy in any system of electric charge 
in motion, apart from the rest electrostatic energy, is the kinetic 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 



27 



energy of the charges. In particular, we can ignore magnetic energy 
which is somehow cancelled out by the properties of the system. 

The Nature of Induced EMF 

Consistent with the above analysis we can say that (2.1) and (2.2) 
can be written as: 

Kp+Kr l Em + Hm (2.3) 

where: 

E M + Hu=0 (2.4) 

To give a physical interpretation of this expression as applied to an 
electric current in a solenoid, we can say that the energy Kp is the 
energy needed to establish current flow merely to get the electrons 
moving to form the current circuit. In such a case, this energy is small 
compared with the mutual energy components. The energy Em is the 
energy needed to overcome the back EMF, the induced electro- 
motive force in the system. It is energy supplied and stored in the 
mutual interaction of the dynamic electric states of the system. 
It remains available to return energy when the current is stopped. 
This energy is known to equal the conventional magnetic field 
energy supplied to the system. It is numerically equal, but that is 
all. In fact, magnetic energy is not supplied to the solenoid when it is 
magnetized. The energy E M is supplied and by this action the 
negative energy H M of equal numerical magnitude is made available 
in the field to provide energy K R . The energy supplied to the solenoid 
is thus merely: 

Kp + Eu (2.5) 

and we find that: 

A'/j + //;i/=0 (2.6) 

The result arrived at now means that we can extend the rules we 
have formulated still further. Although for a discrete electric charge 
in motion we could say that the magnetic energy released in the field 
was deployed to provide the dynamic electric energy component in 
the field, we now find that where significant mutual interactions 
between charges occur, the release of mutual magnetic energy is 
applied to augment the kinetic energy of the reacting system of 



28 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTFIN 



electric charge present. In other words, we find that when a solenoid 
is magnetized, the core of the solenoid as the seat of the reacting 
charge should be heated to acquire a thermal energy exactly equal to 
the magnetic energy associated with the magnetization. This means 
that thermal energy is available to be radiated away from the core 
once it is magnetized, so that if the magnetic field is switched off 
after it is cooled down, we expect the solenoid energy to come from 
the term E M right away, whilst the kinetic energy of the reacting 
charge in the system has to struggle to return the magnetic energy 
Hm to the field. The result should be a cooling of the solenoid core 
when it is demagnetized. 

Magnetocaloric Effects 

It has been deduced that the process of magnetization and demagnet- 
ization must be associated with thermal effects in such a way that 
magnetization develops heat whereas demagnetization produces 
cooling. This is, of course, found to be supported by experiment. If a 
paramagnetic material is magnetized it is found that its temperature 
increases. The phenomenon is used in the process of cooling by 
adiabatic demagnetization. When magnetized, it seems that energy 
has been added to the conduction electrons in kinetic form which is 
shared with the kinetic energy of the atoms to increase the tempera- 
ture of the body. When a ferromagnetic is magnetized, the intrinsic 
magnetic state of domains in the substance is being brought into 
alignment. This does not cause thermal change related to the appar- 
ent magnetic energy involved. However, the thermal effects are 
manifested in the change in specific heat near the Curie Point. Due to 
intrinsic magnetism being destroyed as the temperature is increased, 
the specific heat of a ferromagnetic is greater than that which would 
be exhibited by a normal metal under the same physical conditions. 
These are well known phenomena. Less known, perhaps, is what 
happens even to a ferromagnetic material when it is suddenly 
magnetized to a very high field strength which far outweighs its 
intrinsic ferromagnetic field. H. P. Furth (1961) has described a test 
procedure attributed to F. C. Ford in which a number of ^-inch 
diameter rods were transiently subjected to fields of the order of 
600 kilogauss. Some test samples showed signs of thermal damage as 
if they had melted and solidified again. Others were ruptured as if 
they had been broken in a tensile testing machine and also showed 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 



29 



signs of thermal damage. Furth demonstrates how these effects can 
be explained by relating the melting temperature in ergs per cc. with 
the energy density B n rjSn and the tensile stress in dynes per square 
cm. with the energy density B s 2 l%n. For hard copper, for example, he 
found B m to be 500 kilogauss and B s to be 300 kilogauss. Appro- 
priately, the copper sample showed both mechanical deformation 
and surface melting in the 600 kilogauss field. For hard steel, with 
B., and B m both 700 kilogauss there is no damage at all in the 600 
kilogauss field. For mild steel which has a lower B s there is some 
deformation. Thus, the magnetocaloric effect imposes a limit on the 
fields which can be developed at least transiently in any material. 
There is ample evidence to show that when a magnetic field is pro- 
duced in any substance, a thermal effect of energy equal to the change 
of magnetic field energy is developed. Since magnetic energy cannot 
be simply identified as thermal energy owing to the dispersal property 
of thermal energy not being contained like magnetic energy by the 
inducing current, we must recognize that magnetic energy and the 
related thermal energy are of separate character. If we do this we are 
forced to answer the problem posed by the mysterious source of the 
thermal energy. If we still have the magnetic energy in the inductive 
storage of the magnetized system, where has the thermal energy 
come from ? The answer to this problem has been presented above. 
It is not a hypothesis. It is an inevitable conclusion to be drawn from 
the facts of experiment. 

One question which inevitably emerges from the above analysis is 
whether the field medium can be caused to supply energy for practical 
application. For example, imagine a solenoid containing a movable 
non-ferromagnetic core to be magnetized. The core receives heat 
energy. The field medium releases magnetic energy. The induced 
EMF action requires retention of energy in the inductive system. 
What if we then withdraw the core before demagnetizing the sole- 
noid? Do we not then find that we have a surplus of heat energy in 
the core and can get back the inductive energy put into the solenoid, 
leaving the vacuous field medium itself in a cooler state (whatever 
that means)? The answer to this is that as the core is withdrawn from 
the field it will cool down, thus thwarting the attempt to get energy 
from nowhere. Then one might say, why not wait for the thermal 
energy to be conducted away from or radiated by the core. Then, 
using this energy to perform a useful function, we can later demag- 
netize the solenoid to end up with a process in which temperature can 



30 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



be cycled to do useful work without the expenditure of energy save 
to sustain copper loss in the solenoid. This should be possible. It is 
analogous to the heat pump in which energy comes from the ambient 
thermal source. What then if we add more thermal energy to the core 
in this cycle than is needed to cool the specimen down to absolute 
zero of temperature in the reverse process? If the core is at room 
temperature and then magnetized to a very high field which will raise 
its temperature to 500°C, say, what will happen if we then allow it to 
cool in this field back to room temperature and then demagnetize it? 
This is a most interesting question which experiment will one day 
answer. The best answer the author can give is that the field medium 
itself will be cooled down, meaning our energy balance problem can 
then show experimentally that there is an aether medium which acts 
as a source as well as a store of energy. 

Evidence of Magnetic Reaction Effects 

As just explained, there is abundant evidence to support the express- 
ion in (2.6), the equality of kinetic energy in the reacting system and 
the negative measure of the magnetic field energy due to mutual 
interaction effects. However, it is of interest to enquire into the other 
evidence which should be available to demonstrate that there arc 
kinetic properties linked with mass in motion and associated with 
the magnetic field. To proceed, imagine a magnetic field II to exist 
in the reacting system under study. We are, for example, considering 
the state of uniform magnetization within a ferromagnetic domain. 
Consider then each element of reacting charge as, for example, a 
conduction element in a ferromagnetic. Let its charge be q in electro- 
magnetic units, and denote its mass M and its velocity v. In the field 
II it will move to provide maximum opposition to the field. Then, 
balancing centrifugal force against magnetic force: 

Hqv = Mv 2 jr 

where ;• is the radius of the charge orbit. Now, qrrl is, on classical 
theory, the magnetic moment of the reacting charge. Thus, the total 
reaction magnetic moment per unit volume becomes, from the above 
equation, the total kinetic energy of the reacting charge system per 
unit volume divided by H. Since this reaction field is not observed in 
experiment, it follows that the primary charge is really developing 
the field H plus a component to cancel this reaction effect. If the 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 



31 



primary action develops the field kH, where A; is a mere numerical 
factor, we note that 4nk becomes the factor relating the current 
moment to the induced field. Thus, we deduce: 



For maximum reaction kinetic energy, that is, the maximum energy 
transfer induced by the primary charge system, it may be shown by 
differentiating (2.7) with the primary field constant that k is 2. When 
k is 2, A'/,> becomes H' 2 l$n. Then, from (2.6), we find that: 



This is a wholly consistent result. We have arrived at the usual 
expression for magnetic energy density. The magnetic energy has 
had to be taken as a negative quantity as we have predicted. Further, 
we have deduced that the magnetic field induced by any charge in 
motion is really invariably double that expected on conventional 
theory. However, as has been shown, reaction effects invariably halve 
this field to leave us with the value found in experiments. 

For maximum reaction kinetic effect, reacting charges of larger 
mass will be favoured as those to provide the energy term A'/;. Thus, 
when a magnetic field is induced in a metal, the heavier of any free 
electric charges will move to set up Kr. If there is free charge in the 
aether medium in quantum units of the electron charge e, then, 
whether or not these react, or the conduction electrons in the metal 
react, will depend upon which have the greater mass. If the con- 
duction electrons have the greater mass they will provide the energy 
Kn. Then, the angular momentum of the reacting charge will manifest 
itself in magnetization changes. It follows that an experiment which 
can respond to the relation between magnetic moment and angular 
momentum of both the primary charge and the reacting charge will 
allow a direct measurement of the factor k. On the other hand, if 
there is free charge in the aether medium which may fill the voids 
between the atomic substance in the magnetized material and this 
charge has greater mass than electrons, this medium will itself pro- 
vide the reaction effects and, although the magnetic field will be 
attenuated as the theory requires, the mechanical effects will not 
occur and the observation that k is 2 cannot be expected. This 
assumes the well known fact that the elusive aether does not provide 
any mechanical resistance to the motion of matter and so cannot 
communicate any angular momentum.* 

* There are interesting exceptions to this rule discussed in Chapters 4 and 5. 



H = kH-4nk(Kn)IH 



(2.7) 



H M = -7/2/87T 



(2.8) 



32 



PHYSICS WITHOUT FINSTEIN 



In the latter event it will be difficult to explain how the magneto- 
caloric effects can occur. If the reaction kinetic energy is not provided 
by matter, it must occur in the aether medium and it cannot then 
cause thermal effects in matter. It must, therefore, be expected that 
if the aether has migrant charge free to move to react to magnetic 
fields, these charges must be of smaller mass than the electron. 
Further, the experimental derivation of the factor k from observation 
on magnetomechanical effects must then be possible.* 

Before discussing the evidence supporting this proposal, we note 
that the energy Kr has to be sustained in a steady magnetic field 
because (2.7) is applicable to the steady state. Thus the physical 
meaning of the equation is that Kr has to be maintained by the 
reacting electric charge system. This is assured if the thermal energy 
of the conduction electrons is adequate, that is, if the temperature is 
sufficiently high. If the temperature is too low because there has been 
cooling after magnetization occurred, it may well be that free charge 
in the aether takes over the role of Kr in (2.7). This means that at 
magnetic fields and temperatures low enough to permit the super- 
conductive state in materials exhibiting this property, it could be that 
the charge in the aether takes over the role of reacting to cancel half 
of the magnetic field. Thus the magnetomechanical ratio should not 
be anomalous under these circumstances. Kikoin and Goobar (1938) 
have measured the gyromagnetic ratio, as it is called, for super- 
conducting lead. They found k to be unity. In referring to this result. 
Bates (1951, b) said, "We conclude that the large diamagnetism of 
superconductors is due to electrons moving in orbits in the crystal 
lattice as if they were free in the sense of having ordinary values of 
e and 7??." However, as will now be explained, k is greater than unity 
under normal circumstances. 

The Gyromagnetic Ratio 

Richardson (1908) suggested that when the magnetism in a pivotally 
mounted ferromagnetic rod is reversed, the rod should sustain an 
angular momentum change. It was predicted that the gyromagnetic 
ratio, the ratio of the change of angular momentum to the change of 
magnetic moment, should be 2mcje, the quantity applicable to the 
electron in free orbital motion, where e is the electron charge, m is its 
mass and c is the velocity of light. Einstein and Haas (1915) first 

* The analysis was presented also by the author in ref. Aspden (1966, b). 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 



33 



observed the effect. Sucksmith and Bates (1923) then found that the 
effect was only one half of that predicted. The gyromagnetic ratio 
was only slightly greater than mcje. Meanwhile, Compton (1921) had 
suggested that the electron possesses an intrinsic angular mo- 
mentum or spin and a magnetic moment. Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit 
(1925) proposed an angular momentum of hi An, and a magnetic 
moment of eh\Anmc, corresponding to the gyromagnetic ratio of 
mc\e. This spin property of the electron was found to help resolve 
problems in spectral theory, and the use of this concept is now firmly 
established in atomic theory. Later, Sucksmith (1930) took the 
experimental observations on ferromagnetic specimens as an 
indication that ferromagnetism is, in the main, due to electrons 
spinning on their own diameters. This conjecture has, however, not 
really been substantiated and is likely to be in error, while the spin 
concept remains to define a primary property of elementary particles 
having no clear physical interpretation.* 

When the direction of magnetism is reversed in a ferromagnetic- 
rod, the electrons generating the magnetic flux undergo a change in 
angular momentum. However, the magnetic flux traverses the 
ferromagnetic medium and this contains free electrons in a state of 
agitation. Similarly, magnetic flux in vacuo may also traverse an 
aether medium in which (for all we know) there could be free electric 
charge in a state of agitation. Free conduction electrons satisfying 
Fermi-Dirac statistics are so numerous in a ferromagnetic conductive 
material that, as a little analysis shows, they should react to cancel 
any magnetic flux traversing the substance. The magnetic field deflects 
the electrons into orbital motion between collisions and, regardless 
of their velocity or direction, the arcuate motion invariably develops 
a reaction field component and a reaction angular momentum. 

The field attenuation problem thus predicted does not show itself 
in our experiments and its absence, or apparent absence, requires 
explanation. In the above analysis it was shown that the magnetic 
field to be expected from orbital electrons in motion in a ferro- 
magnetic is really double that normally predicted. There is then an 
attenuation in that reaction effects due to conduction electrons halve 
the field. Curiously, the analysis points to this halving effect as a 

* In a textbook on magnetism, Professor W. F. Brown (1962) wrote: "If later 
theoretical research succeeds in reinterpreting the 'spinning electron' as an actual 
system of spinning charge or as a system of poles, this . . ." His book was written 
without reliance on either interpretation, clearly having in mind the uncertainty 
surrounding the subject. 



34 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



universal effect but leaves scope for variations in the magnetomech- 
anical ratios involved in different circumstances. However, the 
analysis does show that the parameter k must be 2 and this means a 
gyromagnetic ratio of mc\e and not Imcje. The predictions of the 
previous analysis are clearly supported by the gyromagnetic ratio. 
Also, it is then possible to say that ferromagnetism is due to the 
orbital motions of electrons in atoms and not to the mysterious spin 
property which is so much in dispute. What remains a mystery is the 
way in which the electron reaction effect in metals subject to magnet- 
ization has been overlooked in the researches on the subject. It is 
true that there is a magnetic anomaly facing researchers who try to 
compare theoretical eddy currents and those observed. This anomaly, 
termed the "eddy current anomaly" involves the study of reaction 
currents when there is changing magnetic flux. Its explanation is 
bound up with the behaviour of magnetic domains, as the author has 
demonstrated experimentally (1956). The mystery we are concerned 
with is how electrons can move about in a metal to set up a reaction 
effect without this having been recognized. The simple answer, given 
by the informed physicist, is that it has been recognized, but a correct 
analysis shows that the reaction sums to zero. However, it should be 
noted that such analysis was performed when it was expected that 
the result should sum to zero. It was later that the gyromagnetic 
anomaly was observed. If we examine how one can obtain the zero 
reaction result we find that the argument is somewhat equivalent to 
what is portrayed in Fig. 2.1. In this figure electrons are shown 
describing circular paths to develop the magnetic reaction effect 
opposing an applied magnetic field. Electrons at the boundaries are 
caused by collision with the boundaries to migrate around the whole 
magnetized region and so develop an opposite magnetic effect. They 




Fig. 2.1 



Fig. 2.2 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 



35 



migrate, as can be seen, in the opposite sense to the orbital reaction 
motion of the electrons in the body of the magnetized material. Of 
course, collisions are occurring between electrons and atoms and 
there is no clear boundary as indicated, but the effect is the same. 
Mathematical analysis shows that there is complete cancellation. It is 
a matter of statistics. Now, if we accept this explanation we have to 
dismiss the gyromagnetic explanation offered in the previous pages. 
But if we accept the explanation of this reaction cancellation we 
must accept that electrons bounce like billiard balls in their collisions 
with atoms. Furthermore, there is no boundary at the surface of any 
real substance. All there is to keep the electrons from going into space 
or into another material is an electric field or perhaps a magnetic 
field which deflects the electron back again. It suffices, then, to talk 
of collisions with atoms. Do electrons bounce back like billiard balls, 
recoiling from the heavy atoms as the billiard ball recoils from the 
edge of a billiard table? Alternatively, do electrons strike the 
electrons in an atom and transfer their momentum to these electrons 
just like a billiard ball exchanges momentum with another billiard 
ball in its collisions on the table? When superconductivity was dis- 
cussed in Chapter 1, it was this latter argument that was followed. 
If electrons merely transfer momentum to other electrons and there 
is continuous electron exchange between atoms we get the situation 
depicted in Fig. 2.2.* There is no countermotion of electrons to 
develop the cancelling effect. Is not this an important question? It is 
simply a question of whether, when an electron collides with an atom, 
it collides with a rigid body having the mass of the whole atom or 
collides with an electron having a mass like itself. In one case we have 
no field reaction effects and in the other we have those offered to 
explain the gyromagnetic ratio. The reader has his choice. On the 
conventional path he is led to the intricacies of quantum electro- 
dynamics to seek his answers to the problems posed. On the other 
path, the one which assumes that an electron certainly must collide 
with one of the electrons acting as outer guard in the atom, he is led 
with the author along a virgin and unconventional path. However, 
this is a path well worth exploration, particularly in view of some of 
the uncertainties which now beset physical theory. 

* Clarricoats (1961) in discussing loss mechanisms in ferrites slates. "In ferrite 
materials which contain iron in two valence states, certain electrons can move 
quite readily through the crystal lattice." The fact that the gyromagnetic ratio is 
still 2 in such non-conductive materials does not invalidate the argument that the 
gyromagnetic anomaly is due to electron exchange between atoms. 



36 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

In this quest it has to be assumed that the magnetic field produced 
by any electric charge in motion relative to the electromagnetic frame 
will be exactly double that measured in experiment but that, invari- 
ably, there is something which reacts to halve the true field, whether 
in free space or in matter. This assumption is in line with the finding 
that magnetic field energy is a deficit of energy equivalent to the 
kinetic energy of reacting charge. There has to be a reacting charge 
in free space and it has to have a priming of energy to be able to 
assert a reaction. Having said this, the reader must understand that 
the double magnetic field can be ignored in further analysis. The gyro- 
magnetic factor of 2 has to be used in certain magnetomechanical 
analyses but this is in line with normal physics. Furthermore, when 
we come to explain the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron, 
the gyromagnetic factor is merely assumed on the strength of the 
above explanation and the anomaly is explained by regular analysis. 

The Aether 

Before going on to show how the above principles have immediate 
application to the derivation of the true law of electrodynamic force 
between charges in motion, it is appropriate to comment on the 
concept of the aether. It is usual to ignore this medium in modern 
physics. This is more a matter of convenience than anything else. Its 
existence is a matter for intuition. Electromagnetic waves travel 
through free space at a certain finite velocity. There must be a medium 
to sustain such waves. Hence, from time immemorial when the 
aether was a matter of philosophical hypothesis to today when it is 
more a question of logic, the aether has been ever present. To 
recognize its existence in any specific form causes the difficulties. If 
we have preconceived notions about the aether as a medium which 
provides an absolute frame of reference for light propagation, then 
the physicist rightly will reject such aether. There is experimental 
evidence to the contrary, notably the famous Michelson-Morley 
experiment. However, we do not intend to make such assumptions. 
The aether under review in this work is the one indicated by experi- 
ment, not an imaginary one conceived by hypothesis. The aether is 
the medium permeating space and having the property that it can 
store a magnetic field. Seemingly, from the foregoing analysis, it 
contains free electric charge in motion and able to react to the action 
of electric charge in matter. If we are not then to be led immediately 
into the trap of thinking that this reacting charge determines the 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 37 

frame of reference for electromagnetic wave propagation, we must 
think in terms of wave disturbance. Something is disturbed. There 
must be something other than the reacting charge. Without the 
reacting charge the aether can be said to be unable to sustain a 
magnetic field, but it may still contain electric charge provided this 
can be regarded as primary in the sense used above. Such charge 
would have a controlled motion. With no reacting charge K R in (2.3) 
is zero, and then from (2.4) it is seen that the only energy in the aether 
is Kp, the kinetic energy of its controlled primary charge. Adding 
what must be a relatively small energy in the form of the reacting 
system gives an energy priming of v, say, equal to the kinetic energy 
Kr of the reacting system. Then, since w fixes the limit on the 
energy which can be stored by a magnetic field we have to expect 
there to be a limit on the maximum magnetic field which can exist in 
space. In addition it can be said that since y is much less than K P we 
have to think in terms of the probability that the intrinsic energy 
density of the aether is significant. 

Is there any evidence of a limit of magnetic field strength? Already 
in this chapter there has been reference to fields of 700 kilogauss used 
in practice. Probably the highest magnetic fields are produced in 
thermonuclear reactor experiments in which a self-pinching electric 
discharge is used to focus the magnetic energy of an electric current. 
The object is to develop very high temperatures in an almost infini- 
tesimal volume disposed along the current filament. Evidence of a 
limit on the temperature which can be obtained in practice would be 
evidence of a limit on magnetic field. However, the problem confront- 
ing such research is that of keeping the discharge stable during the 
collapse. Yet, even if the discharge can ever be stabilized sufficiently, 
there might be a limit on the maximum temperature which can ever 
be reached and this limit might be set by a saturation effect in the 
aether. This is speculation, it is true, but it might be worthwhile 
speculation in view of the cost of thermonuclear research. Later, in 
Chapter 6, it will be shown how evidence is forthcoming indirectly 
from the theory and experiment to indicate that there might well be 
such a limiting effect and to afford an estimate of the magnitude of y. 

Thermonuclear Reactor Problems 

The research into the development of the thermonuclear reactor 
gave prominence to plasma physics. Electric and magnetic 



38 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



phenomena in a plasma of ions and electrons need thorough analysis 
to study the behaviour of the processes being applied to induce high 
temperatures by thermonuclear reaction. As mentioned above, a 
strong current arc contracts under its self-pinch action to produce 
high temperatures. With a high energy concentration around atoms 
of heavy hydrogen, having the deuteron as nucleus, it is sought to 
produce a temperature of the order of 300,000,000°K for long enough 
to cause fusion into tritium and helium. Nuclear energy will then be 
released in excess of the energy supplied to stimulate this action. 

As was announced in 1958, trouble was being encountered in 
stabilizing the electric arcs, with the result that they snaked around 
within the reaction chamber and were destroyed by contact with the 
walls. Using the accepted teachings of electrodynamics it was possible 
to devise systems which could, at least theoretically, overcome the 
stability problem. One simple proposal offered by the author (1958, b) 
was to induce the arc along the central axis of a hollow primary 
conductor, the arc being, in effect, the secondary circuit of a trans- 
former. However, what has seemed a theoretical possibility has 
remained a practical impossibility. The attempts to stabilize the dis- 
charge have gone on without success, or at least without sufficient 
success to induce the high temperatures expected. It is not difficult 
to begin to wonder whether the laws of electrodynamics applied with 
such success in other fields have their limitations in this area. One is 
dealing with a closed electric arc which is not held in place by a 
conductor of solid material. The rigidity of the usual current 
conductor is not present. Further, there is scope for the arc to act on 
itself. Electrodynamic theory is usually applied to actions between 
currents where, invariably, one current is a closed circuit. Our simple 
formulations in electrodynamics depend upon this assumption. 
However, it does not apply if we can have one part of a current 
circuit acting on another and we have nothing to restrain the inter- 
action. This introduces the next topic in this work, the law of 
electrodynamic force between two isolated charged particles in 
motion. It is an academic problem of classical importance. The 
practical motivation could be the problems of the thermonuclear 
reactor discharge. The encouragement available is the foregoing new 
approach to magnetic theory and a desire to see how far we can 
proceed without invoking Einstein's theory as a pillar in the analysis. 
Again, we will come to a seemingly heretical suggestion. It will be 
suggested that there was failure to realize the full implications of the 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 



39 



Trouton-Noble experiment. The result of the experiment was not 
surprising in the light of Einstein's theory. However, had 
there been no Einstein's theory the result of the experiment might 
have been used to provide the missing piece in the jigsaw posed by 
the electrodynamic problem. 

The Law of Electrodynamics 

A summary of the early development of the law of electrodynamic 
action between current elements has been presented by Tricker 
(1965). He recites the basic paper of Ampere on this subject, and the 
criticisms sustained by Ampere's law and alternative formulations by 
Biot and Savart and by Grassmann. Also mentioned is the general 
empirical formulation by Whittaker (1951, a) in which he proposes a 
simplified new law based upon new assumptions. The common 
problem is that none of these laws is fully consistent with Newton's 
Third Law when applied to interactions between individual elements 
of current. Yet, all the formulations appear to give the correct answers 
when used in integrated form to apply to interactions involving a 
closed circuit. Tricker then reaches the seemingly inevitable con- 
clusion that an isolated element of steady current is a contradiction 
in terms, and thus he leaves open the question of how two electrons 
in motion really react owing to their electrodynamic interaction. 
This question is important in any attempt to understand the physical 
behaviour of electric charge on a fundamental basis. Electrical 
measurements are based upon electric current flow in solid conductors. 
Forces can possibly be absorbed by such conductors. As explained 
above, there is unusual behaviour in the case of electrical discharges 
which are not constrained by a solid conducting path. Hence, it is the 
basic action between isolated charges in motion which has to be 
understood if the true physics of electrodynamic phenomena are to 
be discovered. It may well be that when we consider the interaction 
between two isolated current elements, the proper application of 
Newton's Third Law requires us to consider a complete system. Then, 
if the facts of experiment do not match the results of applying this 
law to the two current elements, the inevitable conclusion is that the 
system is incomplete. In other words, perhaps the field or the aether 
medium has to be brought into the analysis. Here, it is proposed to 
apply Newtonian principles to the problem of two interacting 
electrical particles. From very simple considerations a formulation 



40 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



of the law of interaction is deduced which is fully consistent with the 
empirically derived general formula of electrodynamics. It has a 
specific form which is identical with that which can be derived 
empirically if we introduce the experimental result afforded by the 
experiment of Trouton and Noble (1903). Curiously this latter 
experiment does not appear to have been applied in previous analyses 
of this problem. The specific law of electrodynamics deduced is 
different from the laws deduced, by assumption, by Ampere, Biot 
and Savart, Grassmann, and Whittaker. The new law of electro- 
dynamics has a most valuable feature. It indicates that there should 
be an inverse square law of attraction operative between like current 
vectors, the force acting directly along the line joining the currents. 
This feature is not shared by the other laws and it is exactly such a 
feature which is needed to contemplate the eventual explanation of 
gravitation in terms of electromagnetic effects. Apart from this, the 
law has another very significant feature when applied to the study of 
interaction effects between electric particles of different charge-mass 
ratios. This may have value in explaining certain hitherto un- 
explained anomalies in electric discharge phenomena. 

Four basic empirical facts were relied upon by Ampere in deriving 
his law: 

(a) The effect of a current is reversed when the direction of the 
current is reversed. 

(b) The effect of a current flowing in a circuit twisted into small 
sinuosities is the same as if the current were smoothed out. 

(c) The force exerted by a closed circuit on an element of another 
circuit is at right angles to the latter. 

(d) The force between two elements of circuits is unaffected when 
all linear dimensions are increased proportionately, the 
current strengths remaining unaltered. 

Ampere combined with the above the assumption that the force 

between two current elements acts along the line joining them, and 

thus he obtained his law:* 

„ [2>(ds.r)(ds'.r) 2(ds.ds')\ 

h=ku - ■ j- 5 ^ j/ U-yj 

In the equation /"denotes the force acting upon an element ds' of a 
circuit of current strength /" and due to a current /' in an element ds. 

* Note that expressions in r are vectors, whereas r 3 , r 5 etc. are scalar. 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 41 

The line from ds to ds' is the vector distance /•; k is arbitrary and 
depends upon the limits chosen, although its polarity may be 
determined by using the law to verify the observation: 

(e) Two extended parallel circuit elements in close proximity 
mutually repel one another when carrying current in opposite 
directions, or attract when carrying current in the same 
direction. 

From the analysis by Whittaker, disregarding Ampere's assump- 
tion, the general formulation consistent with observations (a) to (d) 
is found to be: 

F=kW i 3 ( ds - r )( ds '- r ) r 2{ds.ds')r A(ds.r)ds' 

B(ils'. r)ds _ Bjds . d/)r 3B(ds . r)(ds' . r)r } 

/• 3 r« f ,5 j ( 2 - 10 ) 

Here, A and B denote arbitrary constants. Whittaker then assumed 
linear force balance as represented by symmetry in ds and ds' . This 
involves equating A and -B. In its simplest form, with k and A both 
equal to unity, the law becomes: 

F = ~z {( ds ■ i'W +(ds'. r)ds - (ds . ds')r} (2.11) 

Inspection shows that this formulation satisfies observation (e). 
However, Whittaker made no mention of the all-important experi- 
mental discovery of Trouton and Noble. Their experiment demon- 
strated that separated charges in a capacitor do not cause the 
capacitor to turn when in uniform linear motion transverse to its 
suspension. Put another way: 

(f) There is no out-of-balance interaction torque between anti- 
parallel current elements. 

This balance of torque action is not assured by the simple formulation 
of Whittaker in (2.11). To satisfy observation (f), terms other than 
those in r must cancel when ds is equal to -ds'. This applies to the 
general formulation when A = B. Using the general formulation (2.10) 
and putting A =B = - 1, and k = 1 to obtain the simplest version 
using all the empirical data, we find : 



42 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



F = " 3 - {{ds' . r)ds - {ds . r )ds' - (ds . ds')r) (2.12) 

According to this law, when ds = ds', meaning that the current 
elements are mutually parallel, the last term only remains to indicate 
a mutual force of attraction, inversely proportional to the square of 
the separation distance, and directed along the line joining the two 
elements. Now, it will be shown how this can be explained from 
Newtonian principles without knowledge of any electromagnetic 
phenomena, but assuming that there is a fully-balanced interaction 
force of some kind acting directly along the line joining the elements. 
This force will then be explained in terms of magnetic field theory, 
so combining with the Newtonian argument to provide a truly basic 
explanation of the empirical law in (2.12). 

Consider two particles of mass m and m . They are separated by 
the distance vector r. The centre of inertia of this two-particle system 
is taken to be distant x and y respectively from m and m . Then, 

m'y = mx (2.13) 

Let v, the velocity of m, tend to change, decreasing by dv. This must 
arise from a force - m{dv\dt) acting on m in the direction v. Let v\ the 
velocity of m, tend to change, decreasing by dv' . This must arise 
from a force -m{dv'jdt) acting on m' in the direction v' . 

These two forces on m and m' will, in the general case, produce a 
turning moment in the system. Since there is no evidence that any 
system can begin to turn merely by its own internal interactions, the 
forces in the system must be such as to prevent out-of-balance couple 
from asserting itself. Accordingly, there are restrictions on the 
proper relationship between the two forces just specified. These 
restrictions can be allowed for analytically by adding force compo- 
nents to the two particles to compensate, as it were, for any turning 
effects. On m we add the force: 

, dv' v dv 
dt x dt 

from (2.13). On m we add the force: 

dv x ,dv 
- m -, — = - m —,- 
dt y dt 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 



43 



The total force on rri now becomes: 

, dv' . , .. . 
-m ~j- in v direction, 

, dv . 

-m -j- in r direction, 
dt 

- F in r direction, 

where -F' is the force we now assume to act directly on m' as a 
result of its electromagnetic field interaction with m. This force is a 
fully balanced interaction force. It will be discussed in detail later. In 
summary, we now have three force components acting on each 
particle. One is the prime direct electromagnetic force which induces 
acceleration in a particle and therefore inertial reaction. The other 
two are components of force representing this inertial reaction, but, 
notwithstanding initial generally-directed motion of the particles, 
subject to the condition that the system cannot develop any out-of- 
balance couple about its centre of inertia. 

Consider the rate of energy change at m', that is: 

We then remove the kinetic energy term and equate the remainder 
to zero. Thus, 

- F - ( f^l (2 . 15 ) 
at r (v.v) v 



Similarly for m, 



dv' F' (v.r)v' 
™-7r = — -7 — 7T (2.16) 
at r (v.v) 



We can now evaluate the resultant force acting on each particle. 
For the particle of mass m', equations (2.15) and (2.16) may be used 
to derive the general force expression : 

F=-Av- \(v'.r)v- — (v.r)v'-(v.v')r\ (2.17) 
(r . v )r { m j 

If it is now assumed that the particles are electrons, the masses m and 
m' become equal, and since the effective current elements ev and ec' 
may be written ids and ids', respectively, where e denotes the electron 
charge in the appropriate units, (2.17) becomes: 



44 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



F = {ds F ds y i( ds ' ■ r ) ds ~ ( ds ■ ~ (ds . ds')r} (2.18) 

Comparison with (2.12) shows this to be of the same form as that 
found empirically. It is identical if : 

F ,jjn^_ds) (2]9) 

From observation (e), with ds = ds', (2.18) shows that k in (2.19) is 
positive and unity with the right choice of dimensions. Of interest 
then, is the fact that the force given by (2.19) is exactly the force 
deduced theoretically by evaluating the interaction component of the 
integrated magnetic field energy due to the two current elements. 

Whittaker (1951, b) explains how Neumann published in 1845 a 
memoir showing how the laws of induction of currents were deduced 
by the help of Ampere's analysis. Neumann proposed to take a 
potential function as the foundation of his theory, the nature of 
which was expressed by Whittaker in the form: 



'/J- 



(ds.cti) 

t- 2 - (2-20) 



where the integrations are performed over closed current circuits. 
This expression represents the amount of mechanical work which 
must be performed against the electrodynamic ponderomotive force 
in order to separate the two circuits to an infinite distance apart, 
when the current strengths are maintained unaltered. It therefore 
accounts for the force component between current elements, as 
presented in (2.19). Then, later in his book at page 233, Whittaker 
refers to a series of memoirs published between 1870 and 1874 by 
Helmholtz and refers to Helmholtz's observations that for two 
current elements ds, ds', carrying currents i, /', the electrodynamic 
energy is: 

r y ' 

according to Neumann, but different according to other writers, as, 
for example, Weber. Again, it is noted that all formulations meriting 
attention give the same result when applied to entire circuits. The 
failing seems to be that, although it was recognized long ago by 
Neumann that the true electrodynamic effect is that given by (2.19), 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 



45 



the mechanical effects of inertial reactions in discrete charge systems 
have not been appreciated. It is wrong to assume that current 
strength remains constant when we talk of discrete charges in 
motion and subject to forces. There has been heavy reliance upon 
hypothetical formulations, without true appreciation of the simple 
mechanical implications of the problem.* 

One of these implications, the key difference between the Whit- 
taker formulation in (2.11) and the author's formulation in (2.12), 
is that Whittaker forbids out-of-balance linear force. The author 
forbids out-of-balance torque, with experimental backing, but 
allows out-of-balance linear force. This is seen by the lack of sym- 
metry in ds and ds' in (2.12). Interchanging ds and ds' gives different 
results for the total force. Then the force on rn does not balance the 
force on m . Now, this does not mean that we have argued against 
Newton's Third Law. Action and reaction still have to balance in a 
complete system. It merely means that the system of two particles is 
incomplete unless, perchance, they move mutually parallel or anti- 
parallel, a circumstance which does eliminate the first two terms in 
(2.12) and thereby leaves the equation symmetrical. This tells us that 
the field medium itself, or space-time, has to be regarded as a part of 
the system separate from the particles under study. It also tells us 
that, if space-time contains electrical particles in motion, then, being 
collectively a complete system, they must have a motion which is 
always mutually parallel or anti-parallel as, for example, a harmoni- 
ous circular motion. 

The thought that space-time can exert an out-of-balance linear 
force is feasible. It is well known that photons convey linear mo- 
mentum. Photons are disturbances of space-time and they exert 
linear forces on matter in their creation and absorption. The thought 
that space-time cannot exert out-of-balance torque is feasible. If 
space-time has the force transmission characteristic similar to that 
of a solid body it can be understood how a part of it can be caused to 
turn within the whole without steady restraint, once the slip action is 
developed and the inertial action overcome. This does not mean that 
we are precluded from acknowledging that space-time can accept 
some angular momentum. This is needed to sustain inertial action. 

This type of argument may seem to be fanciful, but, be that as it 

may, a law of electrodynamic force applicable to actions between 

* Note that (2.14) declares that a free electric charge can only store its own 
kinetic energy, as shown on page 26. 



4b PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

isolated charges in relatively steady motion has been developed and 
has empirical support. It remains for us to use the law to prove its 
value. It has already been indicated that the law may have value in 
gravitational theory. This is deferred until Chapter 5. It will be shown 
in Chapter 3 that the law has application to the understanding of the 
nature of ferromagnetism. To conclude this chapter, since it has been 
suggested that the law might have value in understanding electrical 
discharges, it is appropriate to draw attention to the significance of 
the middle term in (2.17). This middle term represents a force com- 
ponent along the direction of current flow, and we may predict that 
in a discharge circuit, where electrons carry current in a cathode and 
positive ions contribute to the current to the cathode, there will be an 
electrodynamic force manifested along the discharge. Similarly, some 
manifestation of the predicted anomalous forces should appear in 
plasma work. 

Many authors have found anomalous cathode reaction forces in 
discharge studies. For example, Kobel (1930) found an anomalous 
cathode reaction force of 250 dynes at 1 6 amps and 1 ,400 dynes at 
35 amps. This is of the order of 100/' 2 , where i is the current in 
absolute units. This quadrature current phenomenon has defied 
explanation. Mere reaction momentum considerations lead to a 
relatively small cathode reaction force which is linearly dependent 
upon current. Even using equation (2.9), for example, any element of 
current in a continuous filament is subjected to balancing forces 
from the filament current on either side. There is no force action 
along the filament. This also applies to the classical formulations of 
the electrodynamic law. However, bearing in mind that in a discharge 
at least some of the current at the electrodes suddenly is transported 
by ions and not electrons, the m'jm factor to be used with the middle 
term of equation (2. 1 2) assumes importance. On one side of this current 
junction, at the cathode, electrons act upon ions in the discharge, and 
on the other side ions act on ions. It works out that there is an out- 
of-balance force productive of a cathode reaction by impact from the 
ions. This force is the product of the constituent ion current component 
squared and the ratio of the ion mass to the electron mass. Forces of the 
order of 100/ 2 , as found by Kobel, are therefore readily explained. 

It may be concluded that the resolution of this long-standing 
problem of the true nature of this basic electrodynamic law is not a 
mere academic topic. Some deeper understanding of the law will 
have practical consequences in discharge and plasma control. For 



MUTUAL INTERACTION EFFECTS 47 

comment on this see Aspden (1965). Also note that the law was lirst 
suggested by the author some years previously (Aspden, 1960) in 
connection with gravitational theory. The analysis in this chapter is 
substantially the same as that in a paper published by the Journal of 
the Franklin Institute (Aspden, 1969). 

Summary 

In this chapter the principles developed in Chapter 1 have been 
extended to a study of mutual interaction effects rather than effects 
only concerned with isolated charge. It has been shown that the idea 
that there are three separate energy components to consider in field 
calculations is wholly compatible with more general phenomena. 
The concept that magnetic energy is a deficit of an energy level 
throughout space is, no doubt, a step which the conservative 
physicist will hesitate to take. Even so, there are rewards in accepting 
this and there are many avenues opened for further advances. The 
gyromagnetic ratio ceases to be a problem needing specialist treat- 
ment in the analysis of the spinning electron. The electron has a spin 
property but it need not have this property to account for the factor 
of 2 found in gyromagnetic ratio measurements. Spin will be 
discussed later in Chapter 7. Also, the law of electrodynamic force 
between two isolated charges has been formulated from empirical 
experimental data and verified by separate analysis using the theory 
thus developed. The law is simple but different from previous 
proposals. It has features which may have practical importance and 
its form is such that it gives new hope for explaining gravitation by an 
electrodynamic approach, our quest in Chapter 5. The inevitable 
conclusion, however, is that attention has to be paid to the aether 
medium. It would be folly to continue efforts to try to cancel it out 
of our theoretical studies, because, though many would say that it 
has cancelled itself out, the fact remains that there are four basic 
discoveries in the last two chapters which owe their origin to the fact 
that omissions in existing theory have eliminated the need to recog- 
nize the aether. This is a reference to the omission of the accelerating 
field in calculating the energy radiated by an electron, the failure to 
recognize the existence of a dynamic electric field induced by charge 
in motion, the failure to give weight to the potential reaction effect 
of free electrons in a magnetized substance, and even the alleged 
misinterpretation of the Trouton-Noble experiment. 



3. The Nature of Ferromagnetism 



Heisenberg's Theory 

Heisenberg's theory of ferromagnetism attributes the ferromagnetic 
state to an alignment of electron spins in atoms due to exchange 
forces. In wave-mechanical terms, the probability that an electron in 
one atom will change places with an electron in an adjacent atom is 
given by an exchange integral which is positive or negative according 
to the ratio of the radius of the relevant electron shell ;• and the 
atomic spacing d. In general, this integral is negative since the 
attractions between the atomic nuclei and the electrons are greater 
than the repulsions between the nuclei and between the electrons. It 
is positive when there exists a certain ratio djr of the distance between 
the adjacent atoms of the crystal and the radius of the electron shells 
containing the uncompensated electron spin. Slater (1930) presents 
the data : 



Metal 


Fe 


Co 


Ni 


Cr 


d\r 


3-26 


3-64 


3-94 


2-60 



Mn 
2-94 



Gd 



3-10 



The conclusion drawn from this is the empirical presumption that, 
for ferromagnetism to exist, djr must be greater than 3-0 but not 
much greater.* 

As Bates (1951, c) points out, in Heisenberg's theory the exchange 
forces depend upon the alignment of the electron spins but the forces 
between the spins themselves are not responsible for the ferro- 
magnetic state. Ferromagnetism is presumed to be due to interaction 
forces between the atoms because these forces apparently have a 
common feature if the ratio djr has an approximately common value, 
evidently greater than 3-0 but not much greater. However, is this a 

* In this chapter the symbols r and d are used to denote dimensions in an atomic 
lattice, whereas in the remainder of this book they are used consistently to denote 
dimensions of the space-time lattice. The coincidental feature that the ratio d\r 
is slightly more than 3 in the space-time lattice is deemed to be fortuitous. 



THE NATURE OF FE R ROM A G N ETIS M 



49 



sufficient explanation of the ferromagnetic state? Also, accepting 
that the exchange forces do have values coming within certain limits 
which are conducive to the ferromagnetic state in the ferromagnetic 
substances, what really is the link between these forces and the 
intrinsic magnetism? How do the electron spins get aligned and why 
is it that so few electrons in each atom have their spins set by action 
of the exchange forces? Why is Heisenberg's theory so vague in its 
quantitative account of the ferromagnetic state? Also, since in 
Chapter 2 it has been argued that ferromagnetism is not primarily 
associated with electron spin, as is popularly believed, but is in fact 
due to the orbital motion of electrons, how is this to be related to 
Heisenberg's theory? 

The Cause of Ferromagnetism 

In considering the nature of ferromagnetism, the idea that mag- 
netic energy is a negative quantity, presented in the previous chapter, 
has immediate significance. Magnetism may have a tendency to 
become the preferred state and ferromagnetism will result if the other 
forms of energy which go with this magnetic state can be fully 
sustained by the source of magnetic energy itself. This is simple 
physics without recourse to exchange integrals defining probabilities 
of electron interchanges between atoms. 

On this point of negative magnetic energy, it is appropriate to note 
that it is included as a negative term in magnetic domain theory 
where the equilibrium states of magnetic domain formation are 
evaluated (see Kittel, 1949). "The minus sign merely indicates that 
we have to supply heat in order to destroy the intrinsic magnet- 
ization."* 

To say that energy has to be supplied to destroy intrinsic magnet- 
ism is to say that energy is needed to restore the undisturbed state 
of the field medium (the aether) since the disturbance, which is 
magnetism, has yielded energy and needs it back to be restored to 
normal. If ferromagnetism, meaning an alignment of the magnetic 
moments of adjacent atoms in a crystal, needs other energy to sustain 
it, such as strain energy, this other form of energy can participate in 
the return to the demagnetized state. But the question of whether a 
substance is or is not ferromagnetic must depend upon the ratio of 
the available energy from the magnetic source and the sustaining 

* See page 7. 



50 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



energy needed, as by the strain. ]f this ratio is greater than unity, 
there is ferromagnetism. Otherwise there is no ferromagnetism. 

Why is iron ferromagnetic to the exclusion of so many other 
elements? The answer to this question is that it so happens that in 
the atomic scale iron is positioned to have properties for low inter- 
action forces between atoms, with a significant alignment of certain 
electron states. In addition, iron is strong enough to withstand the 
effects of these forces, which are many tons per square inch and do 
approach the normal breaking stresses of metallic crystals. Further, 
iron, as well as nickel and cobalt, does happen to have a rather high 
modulus of elasticity so that the energy needed to sustain the strain is 
relatively low. 

Why does the ferromagnetic property disappear as temperature is 
increased through the Curie point? There are the conventional 
explanations for this in the standard works on magnetism (such as 
that of Smart, 1966). A simple alternative answer which appeals to 
the writer is that, since the modulus of elasticity does decrease rather 
rapidly with increase in temperature, by the right amount, the strain 
energy needed to sustain magnetism increases to cross the threshold 
set by the ratio mentioned above. This threshold is at the Curie point. 

If ferromagnetism is so closely related with internal strain, and if 
this internal strain is high, and if at high strain the modulus of 
elasticity becomes non-linear, all of which are logical, then, at least 
in some ferromagnetic substances, there should be significant 
changes in the modulus of elasticity at the Curie point. This is found 
to be the case. The phenomenon has been discussed by Doring (1938). 

It is shown below how the elements of a theory of ferromagnetism 
can be based on the above argument. The analysis is simplified by the 
expedient of regarding the Bohr theory of the atom as applicable. 
This merely serves to allow easy calculation of the stresses mentioned. 

Stress Energy Analysis due to Orbit-Orbit Interactions in a Ferro- 
magnetic Crystal Lattice 

In view of the different account of the gyromagnetic ratio given 
above, the ferromagnetic state can be regarded as due to electrons in 
an orbital motion, rather than a mixture of spin and orbit actions. 
The electron in orbit traversing a circular loop at a steady speed will 
be taken seriously, notwithstanding the wave-mechanical aspects and 
the accepted improbability of such steady motion in an atom. The 



THE NATURE OF FERROM AG N ETISM 51 

purpose of this is to facilitate the approximate calculations presented 
here. Offset against this also, one can argue that the Principle of 
Uncertainty, as used in wave mechanics, may well only have meaning 
when viewing events in atoms on a statistical basis. This principle is 
no warranty that, in some atoms, those of certain size, arranged in 
certain crystal configurations and under certain energy conditions, 
just one electron could not defy the principle, as viewed by an electron 
in an adjacent atom, and actually be in a harmonious state of motion 
with such electrons in adjacent atoms. The motion of electrons in 
atoms is not random. Statistically, wave mechanics helps us to 
understand the systematic behaviour of atomic electrons, but they 
are a mere mathematical tool used for this purpose and not a set of 
laws which a particular electron has to obey. If, energetically, it suits 
the electron to move steadily in an orderly orbit, it will do so. Such is 
the premise on which the model to be studied is based, and with it 
the Bohr theory of the atom will be used. 

Imagine two adjacent atoms arranged in a crystal lattice with 
their electron orbits aligned along the crystal direction linking the 
particles. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.1. Only one electron per atom 
is taken to be in this state. The atoms are spaced apart by a distance 



Fig. 3.1 



1/ y-e, ■ 



-\Le < 



d. Each atom has a nuclear charge Ze, an electron system depicted 
as a cloud, shown shaded, of charge e -Ze, and a single electron of 
charge -e describing a circular orbit of radius /• and velocity v. In 
effect, it is assumed that one electron in each atom has adopted a 
motion in strict accordance with Bohr's theory, whereas the other 
electrons form, statistically, a charge centred on the nucleus, but not 
screening the orbital charge from the electric field set up by the 
nucleus. 

The orbital electrons are taken to move in synchronism in view of 



52 



PHYSICS WITHOUT Kl N S III N 



their mutual repulsion. Then the following components of inter- 
action force between the two atoms may be evaluated in terms of the 
radius r of the electron orbits and the velocity v of the electrons. 

(a) Between the orbital electrons: e 2 ld 2 repulsive, 

(b) Between the orbital electrons: (evjc) 2 ld 2 attractive, 

(c) Between the remaining atoms: e 2 jd 2 repulsive, 

(d) Between the orbital electrons and 

the atoms: 2 e 2 dj(r 2 + d 2 f 2 attractive. 

These force components are, simply, the electrostatic and electro- 
dynamic interaction forces between the two electrical systems 
defined. If the last term is expanded, then, neglecting high order 
terms in rjd, since r is less than d for all cases and very much less for 
most, it becomes 2e 2 jd 2 -3e 2 r 2 jd 4 . . . Combining the force com- 
ponents, the total force between the two atoms becomes, approxi- 
mately, (r/c) 2 - 3(rjd) 2 times e 2 jd 2 , as an attractive force. 

On Bohr theory: 

vjc = aZjn (3.1) 

where a is the Fine Structure Constant 7-298 10 3 , and // is the 
quantum number of the electron level in the atom. Also: 

y = n 2 v u \Z (3.2) 

where rjj is 5-29 10~ 9 cm. 

It follows that as Z increases, the attractive force component 
diminishes and the repulsive force component increases. The zero 
force state occurs when: 

ZV/z fi = 3/-/r/« 2 </ 2 ~ 4,000 

if d is 2 10 -8 cm. This gives, for // = 2, Z = 23. For iron, Z = 26, and it 
so happens that the measured value of the effective value of n is 2-2. 
This represents the number of Bohr Magnetons per atom applicable 
to iron in its state of intrinsic magnetization. 

The above calculation is merely to demonstrate that the approach 
being pursued may prove profitable. 

To develop the theory on more realistic, though still approximate, 
terms, the transverse forces have to be taken into account in stress 
energy considerations. The force in the lateral sense between two 
atoms in the crystal lattice will be effectively all electrodynamic. The 
electrostatic action of the orbital electron of one atom will, on 



THE NATURE OF FERROM AG NETISM 



53 



average, tend to act from a point close to the nucleus when its action 
on the other atomic nucleus is considered. It follows from the law of 
electrodynamics developed in Chapter 2, that the force (ev'c)-Ul 2 
will act in the lateral sense. This will create components of stress 
energy precluding the total stress energy from passing through zero 
as Z increases. This will make the ferromagnetic state less likely to 
occur and very much will depend upon the value of the related 
magnetic field energy and stress energy. 

To proceed, the stress in the substance will be taken to be of the 
order of I V/ 2 times the elemental force just deduced. This is taking 
into account only forces between adjacent atoms in a cubic lattice. 
The actual force will be greater than this, perhaps by a factor of two 
or three. Although there are many atoms interacting, when the 
spacing doubles the forces are reduced in inverse square proportion. 
Further, the harmonious nature of the electron motions may not be 
seen as such for interactions over large distances. In travelling a 
distance d of 2 10~ s cm at velocity c of 3 10~ 10 cm sec, the electro- 
dynamic action, for example, involves a transmission time of 0-67 
10" -18 seconds. In this time, for Z = 23 and n = 2, equation (3.1) shows 
that the electron may move 1-7 10~ 9 cm. This is slightly more than 
one quarter of a revolution. This really means that this approach to 
explaining ferromagnetism requires a redefinition of the synchronous 
state assumed in Fig. 3.1. In fact, since energy considerations are 
involved, the mutual repulsion forces between the electrons in orbit 
urge maximum separation, subject to the propagation velocity. This 
velocity may be different from c, but this does not matter. We take 
it that synchronism exists as viewed by each individual atom. This 
means that electrons in adjacent atoms are out-of-phase in their 
motion as viewed from remote positions. It also means that atoms 
not adjacent to the one under study will be seen by that atom to have 
orbital electrons also out-of-phase. There is an exception for 
successive atoms along the magnetization direction and transverse to 
it along the crystal axis, because the effective value of d increases in 
integral steps. From considerations such as this, it may be shown 
that the prime term is the energy due to interaction with atoms 
adjacent in the crystal lattice directions. The energy will be greater 
than this only provided the surrounding atoms are seen to be in 
synchronism and make a significant contribution to the energy 
required. If these atoms are out of synchronism, they may add to, or 
subtract from, the energy, but. overall, should have little effect. 



54 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



Along the direction of magnetization, there will be a stress F x 
given by: 

Fx = (e 2 /c/ 4 )[(f/c) 2 - 3(rjd)-] (3.3) 

In the orthogonal directions, there will be forces F y and F z , both 
given by: 

/> /•:. (c-<n)u ci- (3.4) 

From (3.3) and (3.4): 

F x -F y - F„ (3.5) 

where : 

F = Xe^){rldf (3.6) 

In terms of Young's Modulus Y and Poisson's Ratio a, the strain 
energy density is: 

E = ~ [Fx 2 + /-V 4- F ; 2 - loFxFy loFyFt - 2aF,F : } 

and, if a is approximated as 1/3, from (3.4), (3.5) and (3.6): 

E = ~y[F» 2 -lFoF y +F *] (3.7) 

From equations (3.1), (3.2), (3.4), (3.6) and (3.7), it is possible to 
evaluate 2 YE'e x as a function of Z for different values of /?, provided 
<:/is known. The value of d depends upon the nature of the crystal, the 
atomic weight and the density of the substance. Consistent with the 
degree of approximation involved in deriving (3.7), it seems feasible 
to assume that d changes linearly with increasing Z. It will be taken 
as the cube root of the atomic weight divided by the density, and 
referred to two substances, say, iron and lead, for which Z is 26 and 
82 respectively. The crystal lattice will be taken to be simple cubic, 
even though iron is body-centred, with lattice dimension 2-8 10 8 em. 
The value of d, derived as indicated, is given by: 

</ = (l-93 i-O-0I43Z) 10 8 (3.8) 

The plot of 2YE'ie A is shown in Fig. 3.2 for /; = 1, 2. 3 and 4. In the 
same figure, along the abscissa, the short lines indicate those atoms 
for which the atomic susceptibility has been found to exceed 10 
The broken lines indicate the values of 2YE miigi e ] , plotted for 



THE NATURE OF FERROM A G NETI SM 



55 



different values of n and on a base value of Y of 2 10 12 cgs units. 
£mag is the magnetic energy density, evaluated as Inifijd* times the 
value of the Bohr Magneton (in cgs units) squared. The Bohr 
Magneton is 9-274 10 21 . 

The pattern of the high susceptibility atoms has a grouping 
matching the minima of the strain energy curves. This encourages 
the strain analysis approach to explaining ferromagnetism. The 
minima of the strain energy curves corresponds to the increased 
likelihood of ferromagnetism, though this latter state can only 
occur if the magnetic energy (being negative) exceeds in magnitude 
the strain energy. Of importance here is the fact that the strain 
energy density and the magnetic energy density are of the same 
order of magnitude, thus making select states of ferromagnetism 
feasible in some materials but not in others. The strain energies of 
the order of 10" ergs per cc, correspond to stresses of tens of tons per 
square inch. This means that selectivity for the ferromagnetic state 
may also depend on the rupture strengths of the materials; ferro- 
magnetism clearly being more likely in strong materials of high 
Young's Modulus. 

Discussion of New Theory 

Theoretically, ignoring the error factor in the under-estimation of 
the strain energy, the curves show that a simple cubic crystal of 
oxygen (Z = 8), if it could exist and if its Young's Modulus was 
2 10 12 or higher, would be ferromagnetic. For n = 1, the prospect of 
a ferromagnetic state has to be ruled out for other atoms, except 
possibly carbon. Diamond has an extremely high Young's Modulus, 
some five times that assumed for the comparison curve. However, 
with Z = 6, carbon, to be ferromagnetic, would have to sustain very 
high internal stresses and these probably preclude ferromagnetism. 
For n =2, iron, nickel and cobalt have to be given favoured con- 
sideration. They all have a relatively high Young's Modulus, some 
50% higher than for copper, for example. They are all strong enough 
to sustain stresses accompanying the ferromagnetic state. Note that 
for Fe, Co, Ni and Cu, Z is 26, 27, 28 and 29 respectively. The 
broken curve in Fig. 3.2 has to be placed 20% or so higher for Fe, 
Ni and Co and the same amount lower for Cu. Fig. 3.2, therefore, 
explains why iron is ferromagnetic and copper non-ferromagnetic. 
Of course, in applying the curves in Fig. 3.2, it should be noted that 



56 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



3.I0 57 -] 



Strain Energy 



57 



2.10 



1. 10" 



o 



i 1 
_l _1 


i - 

i 
i 

\ 


/' : 


-I . 


\ 1 
\ 

i i ; \ 
! 1 ^ . V 


/•no 1 

A 

\n = 3 




n-l / 

W 
•j v 




\ 

[ - 




1 


i JUL 




|l i!lir,:";li!! i ! 



15 



30 



45 

z 



60 



75 90 



Fig. 3.2 



the analysis has only been approximate. Perhaps, also, it was wrong 
to ignore the screening action of some of the electrons in inner shells 
or perhaps this, and an accurate evaluation of the strain energy 
allowing for surrounding atomic interaction, will shift the minima 
of the curves very slightly to the right. This would better relate the 
minima to the susceptibility data and permit a higher error factor 
in the strain energy evaluation. Note that if the strain energy is 
underestimated by much in Fig. 3.2, nickel is only marginally ferro- 
magnetic. With 7z = 3 and 4, the screening action of electrons will 
assume more importance and the evident prediction of a theoretical 
stale of ferromagnetism in several substances shows some qualifica- 
tion of the actions to be necessary. It is significant that Gd with Z 
of 64, located near the minimum of the ?z = 4 curve, is ferromagnetic. 
It may well be that the higher n and the higher Z, the more electrons 
there are in the shell which can be ferromagnetic. Then, the less 
likely it is for the synchronous action to remain as a preferred energy 



THE NATURE OF FERROMAGNETISM 57 

state. The interference from the effects of other electrons could well 
suppress this condition in the larger atoms.* 

The understanding of ferromagnetism by its relation to stress 
properties may prove of interest in that it may be that under the very 
high pressures prevailing inside the earth, even materials which are 
not ferromagnetic at the surface may become ferromagnetic. Young's 
Modulus may then be of no importance and a compression modulus 
may be the factor which is deciding the state of balance between 
stress energy and magnetic energy. 

Summary 

In this chapter, it has been shown how the nature of ferro- 
magnetism can be explained without recourse to wave mechanics. 
The law of electrodynamics developed in Chapter 2 and the principles 
of negative magnetic energy are applied successfully in the analysis. 
In the next chapter we will explain how the theory is reconciled with 
wave-mechanics. It will be shown that an electron can spend some 
time in a Bohr orbit and some time in its wave mechanical stale. 
Thus, a factor has to be applied to lower the magnetic energy curves 
in Fig. 3.2, so limiting the elements in the ferromagnetic stale still 
further. 



* In Physical Review Letters, v. 22, p. 1260, June 1969, E. Buchcr et a!, report 
the discovery that Pr and Nd, of atomic numbers Z 59 and 60, respectively, 
are ferromagnetic in their face centred cubic phases. 



4. Wave Mechanics 



Universal Time 

One of the long standing problems of the Theory of Relativity is the 
clock paradox. Does time differ according to what happens to us 
and where we go as we use it? Relativity does not provide a clear, 
consistent and definite answer to this question. On the contrary, its 
application in different ways leads to conflicting results. The theory 
may not be wrong in its essential principles but the fact that it can be 
interpreted in different ways to produce conflicting results limits its 
immediate value in extending theoretical physics. The paradox has 
not been overcome during the first half century of Relativity. 
Experts on Relativity still come together to discuss their different 
views on the same problem of what happens to a clock w hen it goes 
on a journey through space. How, then, can one have confidence 
that Relativity is the proper foundation for the ultimate in physical 
theory? Is it not better to reject Relativity and start with a sound 
foundation providing a clear concept of time and space, building on 
this the pillars of a theory which is consistent with the experimental 
support for Relativity? 

The clock paradox is avoided if we recognize that the time of a 
universal clock is woven into the properties of space. The principle 
that time is universal is a far better start for a physical theory than is 
the Principle of Relativity. Time has to do with change in form or 
position of something. It is meaningless without motion. If time is a 
property of space it must be related to something which moves in 
space. Free space is devoid of matter. Modern scientists prefer to 
believe that there is no aethereal medium filling space. At least, they 
earnestly believe that it is futile to speculate about such a medium. 
This is so in spite of the fact that "aether" is just a word and there is 
little to argue about until one becomes specific about its form. 
However, recognizing the prejudice against the aether, we can remain 
on common ground with all physicists and still refer to something 
capable of motion in and belonging to free space. Space contains an 
inertial reference frame and provides an electromagnetic reference 



WAVE MECHANICS 



59 



frame. Time, as a property of space, could be quantified universally 
as the relative periodic motion of these two frames. This is the simple, 
logical proposition on which a new theory of physics can be built. It 
is hardly hypothesis. Time has to be defined in terms of motion. 
Motion is relative. Two "something" are needed to have relative 
motion. Only two features of space are available, the inertial and 
electromagnetic reference frames. To believe these frames to be one 
and the same is mere assumption. The reader having this belief 
denies himself the means for understanding Nature's means for 
making time universal. He is left with his problems with clocks, and 
even if he ever succeeds in reconciling the clock paradox and the 
Theory of Relativity he has then to explain why time and the 
fundamental constants of physics are the same for the same con- 
ditions throughout the universe. 

Guided by this introduction we may now formulate the following 
proposition. 

The electromagnetic reference frame in any part of the universe and 
all matter wherever located in the universe have in common a 
harmonious component of circular motion about an inertial reference 
frame. 

This will be termed the "Hypothesis of Universal Time". It will 
be shown to unify physical theory. 

The Michelson-Morley Experiment 

Einstein chose to interpret this experiment as meaning that light 
travels at the same velocity c in all directions relative to an earthly 
observer. He was aware that from the standpoint of mechanics 
physically equivalent inertial frames of reference can exist and that 
an observer can expect to make observations in mechanics independ- 
ent of his motion if it is uniform. The result of the Michelson- 
Morley experiment appeared to warrant the extension of this 
characteristic of mechanical laws to the more general observation 
that the laws of nature are in concordance for all inertial systems not 
in relative motion or relatively accelerated. Einstein thus formulated 
his Principle of Relativity. Curiously, however, he made an un- 
warranted assumption. He presumed that in a vacuum light is pro- 
pagated with the velocity c relative to an inertial reference frame. It is 
not. Light is an electromagnetic phenomenon. It is propagated 



60 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

relative to an electromagnetic reference frame. This distinction is of 
fundamental importance. Einstein's theory has developed into a 
hopeless state of confusion simply because of the failure to dis- 
tinguish inertial and electromagnetic frames of reference. The notion 
of time is implicit in the separation and relative periodic motion of 
the two frames. The Michelson-Morley experiment should ha\e 
indicated that the light studied travelled at the same velocity c 
relative to an electromagnetic reference frame moving with the earth. 
This indication that there is a common translational motion of the 
electromagnetic reference frame and earthly matter is consistent with 
the above proposition that matter shares the intrinsic superimposed 
harmonious motion of the electromagnetic reference frame. We are 
then led immediately to the mass properties of matter and gravitation. 

The Principle of Equivalence 

If all elements of matter share the common circular motion of the 
electromagnetic reference frame (to be denoted the E frame) and 
move in harmony, there is centrifugal force producing an oul-of- 
balance condition. This puts a mass-related disturbance into space. 
It will be proved to be the basis of gravitation in the next chapter. By 
its very nature, we thus see that inertial mass and gravitational mass 
must be identical, consistent with the Principle of Equivalence.* 

The disturbance due to the out-of-balance is provided by some- 
thing in space. The reader who is unwilling to believe that there is 
such a "something" in space is left with mere principles. His starting 
point to understanding gravitation is the Principle of Equivalence: a 
principle we have also had for half a century without understanding 
the nature of the force of gravity. To proceed here and retain 
generality, we will assume that there is something in space moving 
about the inertial reference frame in juxtaposition with the E frame 
and providing centrifugal balance. This we will term the G" frame. 
Whatever it is, it must have a mass property used to balance the mass 
of any matter present in the E frame. Further, it could provide bal- 
ance for any mass property of the E frame itself. At this stage, mass 
has been introduced in a form with which we are not familiar. The 

* The mass of an element of matter can vary. Except for some unusual con- 
ditions occurring in nuclear reactions and dense stars, this mass is the sole cause 
of gravitational effects. Also, as later analysis will show, except under similar 
very exceptional conditions the Constant of Gravitation is invariant. 



WAVE MECHANICS 



61 



suggestion is that space itself has mass properties. Matter has mass 
properties. The inertial effects of the mass in space and the mass of 
matter interact so that space is disturbed by matter. The disturbance 
characterizes gravitation. Gravitation, as we know it, is only associ- 
ated with the mass of matter as a result of this disturbance character- 
istic. Jn the absence of matter space is balanced and undisturbed. If 
there are forces between mass in free space these contribute to the 
uniformity of the system and pass undetected in our experiments 
with matter. It is most important to note, therefore, that though 
reference will be made to the mass properties of free space we are 
talking about a medium which is apparently weightless. Abundant 
evidence is available to support the proposed mass character of free 
space. This is reserved for Chapter 5. 

Energy and Angular Momentum of Space-time 

Space is really the emptiness, the void or the three-dimensional 
expanse in distance around us. Time is the motion of something in 
this space. This tangible medium which must exist in space is termed 
space-time. It comprises an E frame and a 6' frame moving about 
a common inertial frame in balance with one another. We now 
assign the symbol Q to denote the universal angular velocity of this 
motion. 

A system such as this, that is one capable of disturbance without 
change of the periodic time parameter, has the same characteristics 
as two masses subject to a mutually attractive force proportional to 
their displacement distance. An oscillatory mass having a restoring 
force proportional to displacement has a fixed oscillation period 
independent of the amplitude of displacement. Logically, therefore, 
if the E and G frames can be disturbed without affecting their 
oscillation period, their nature is likely to be such that they are 
subject to a mutually restoring force proportional to their separation 
distance. 

Space-lime has angular momentum. This follows from the above 
proposition. Now, it is a fundamental law that energy is conserved 
in all physical processes. It is equally fundamental that angular mo- 
mentum is conserved in a mechanical system of the kind just de- 
scribed. If, as appears from such mechanical analogies, both energy 
and angular momentum in space-time are conserved, it is interesting 
to ask how space time reacts with matter. 



62 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTIIN 



!o understand this, we first note that matter lies in the £ frame. 
Any motion of elements of matter relative to the £ frame develops 
kinetic energy, magnetic energy, etc., and, according to the analysis 
in Chapters 1 and 2, adds mass properties to the matter. We can, 
therefore, speak simply in terms of matter moving with the £ frame. 
This matter has motion at the angular velocity Q in the orbit of the 
£ frame. This adds kinetic energy, but as an energy component 
which appears to be devoid of mass properties since it does not arise 
from motion relative to the E frame. From similar reasoning it is 
calculable in terms of simple Newtonian mechanics. To facilitate 
analysis, let us assume a proposition, proved later, that the £and G 
frames have, when undisturbed, the same mass density p and rotate 
in the same sized orbits of radius r. The kinetic energy of unit volume 
of undisturbed space is then 2(ipv-) or simply pi-, where v is the 
orbital velocity Qr. The mass energy density of space-time is 2pc-, 
from the relation £ = Mc 2 . If, now, energy is added to cause the orbital 
radius /• of both frames to expand equally, the velocity v is increased. 
Work is done against the restoring force between the £ and G frames. 
This is calculated from the centrifugal force as 2pi-[r times the 
increase of r. Note, however, that the angular momentum 2pvr per 
unit volume can be written in the form 2pv l \Q. If angular momentum 
remains constant when energy is added to space-time pi- remains 
constant, since Q is constant. Hence no kinetic energy can have been 
added although v has increased. It follows that p has diminished and, 
since the mass energy density 2pc 2 of free space is likely to be con- 
served, it also follows that c has increased in proportion to v. The 
conclusion from this is that v is, in fact, a parameter of space-time 
related directly to the velocity of light c. Later, it will be proved that 
c is the relative velocity of the £ and G frames, making v= lc. A 
consequence of this is that the energy added to free space all goes 
into doing work against the restoring force. Thus, if the velocity of 
light increases by Sc, corresponding to an increase of /- by Sr equal to 
Sc>2Q, the energy added per unit volume is (2pr- r)dc 2Q which is 
pvde. Since v is Ic this can be written as 2pv6v, which is effectively 
the increase in kinetic energy if p were constant. 

This result will be used in the next chapter to explain several 
phenomena associated with gravitation. The immediate objective 
is to understand the nature of the photon and the principles of wave 
mechanics. In this regard, it is noted that space-time can accept 
energy without changing its angular momentum. Since matter 



WAVE MECHANICS 



63 



possesses an angular momentum due to its motion with the E frame, 
the radiation of energy by matter in a photon event must involve a 
process of angular momentum exchange. This is the entry point to 
wave mechanics. 

Heisenberg's Principle of Uncertainty 

In order to extend the theory we need to evaluate Q or r. This can 
be done in a preliminary way by considering an electron moving with 
the E frame. Because of this motion it has a position which changes 
constantly. It is never at rest in the inertial frame. Its position is 
uncertain by an amount equal to the diameter of the orbit of motion 
2r. Its momentum is uncertain since its motion at velocity Ic con- 
stantly reverses. The uncertainty of momentum is twice its instant- 
aneous momentum \mc. Here, m denotes the mass of the electron. 
Thus, the product of uncertainty of position and uncertainty of 
momentum is 2mcr. Now, according to Heisenberg's Principle of 
Uncertainty, the product of these two parameters is h\2n, where /; is 
Planck's constant. This is an accepted postulate in quantum mech- 
anics. It is used here merely to estimate r and Q. Since Q is c 2i\ we 
can deduce from the data just given that: 

r = hlAnmc (4.1) 

and 

Q = 2nmc- ; h (4.2) 

As already noted on page 2, Heisenberg's Principle of Un- 
certainty has been expressed by Eddington in the words: "A particle 
may have position or it may have velocity but it cannot in any exact 
sense have both." In the sense of our analysis, a particle at rest in the 
electromagnetic reference frame does have velocity in the inertial 
frame. In an exact sense it has velocity and position, but we must not 
think it is at rest when it is always moving and we cannot, nor do we 
ever need to, say exactly where it is in its motion about the inertial 
frame because all matter shares the same motion. The basis of the 
uncertainty is eliminated by recognizing the separate existence of the 
electromagnetic reference frame and the inertial frame. 

Our analysis so far docs tell us that an electron has an intrinsic 
motion when at rest in the electromagnetic reference frame. Its own 
angular momentum is ma-\2 but there is an equal associated angular 



04 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

momentum due to the balance afforded by the G frame. Thus, the 
total angular momentum intrinsic to the electron and due to motion 
with the space-time system is ma\ which is h\Ait, from (4. 1 ). This is of 
importance when we come to discuss the nature of electron spin. 

It is appropriate to mention here that something quite close to 
this theory of space -time is implicit in a physical interpretation of 
de Broglie waves once presented by Einstein (1925). The electron in 
the atom was deemed to be at rest with respect to a Galilean system 
oscillating at a frequency mc~\h which is everywhere synchronous. 
This corresponds exactly with the result given in (4.2). 



Space-time Spin Vector 

The universal motion at the angular velocity Q defines a fixed 
direction in space. There is not really any evidence of a fixed direction 
having preferred properties in space. Space is not deemed to be 
anisotropic. However, in Chapter 8 we will see that at least from this 
theory we can expect the axes about which space-time spins to be 
approximately normal to the plane in which the planets move about 
the sun. The evaluation of the earth's magnetic moment provides 
the evidence of this. It is probable from this that the spin motion at 
angular velocity Q, though the same throughout all space in magni- 
tude, may be directed in different directions in the environment of 
different and widely spaced stellar bodies. When the nature of 
gravitation is explained it will be seen that this implies that widely- 
spaced stars do not mutually gravitate in strict accordance with 
Newton's universal law. Gravitation exists everywhere and between 
all matter, but two elements of matter separated by several light years 
may not be mutually attracted in strict accordance with Newton's Law. 

For the analysis in this chapter the direction of Q is of little 
significance. No angular momentum is added to this motion in the 
photon processes under study. Though reference will be made to 
angular momentum in connection with the space-time system, the 
reader should not restrict his thoughts of this angular momentum to 
an association with Q and consequently a fixed direction in space. 



Planck's Radiation Law 

An electromagnetic wave is a propagated disturbance of the /: 
frame. 1 he f frame can be disturbed if a discrete non-spherical unit 



WAV I: MKCHAMCS 65 

of it rotates and so sets up a radial pulsation. This is depicted in 
Fig. 4.1. The K frame is shown in lattice form and a cubic unit is 




Fig. 4.1 



deemed to be in rotation. Any axis of rotation through the centre of 
the cubic unit can be chosen. The E frame will be disturbed at a 
frequency proportional to the speed of rotation of the unit. We 
presume that the cubic unit of space-time is such that it has the same 
moment of inertia about any axis through its centre. Therefore, the 
propagated disturbance frequency v will be directly related to the 
angular momentum of the unit and independent of the direction of 
this angular momentum vector. The conditions just assumed will be 
proved to be applicable in Chapter 6, where it will also be shown that 
the unit has discrete unique form. Below, it is termed a photon unit. 

A little consideration will show that if the unit rotates at an angular 
velocity Qj4 it will develop an electromagnetic pulsation at the 
frequency of the universal motion of space-time. Under these 
conditions there is no electromagnetic wave propagation since a 
little local adjustment of the £ frame can contain the disturbance. A 
photon unit rotating at the angular velocity Q'A will be termed a 
standard photon unit. If the unit rotates at an angular velocity 
differing from Q\A there will be electromagnetic wave propagation at 
a frequency corresponding to four times this difference quantity. 
Thus: 



v=4coj2n 



(4.3) 



66 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

where o is the amount by which the angular velocity of the photon 
unit differs from Qj4, denoted o) below. 

Having specified the existence of a standard photon unit we will 
now speculate about the possible existence of a unique particle form 
in association with this unit. Firstly, the angular momentum of the 
unit may have some exchange relationship with such a particle. 
Angular momentum cannot be absorbed by space-time for the 
reasons already given. Therefore, if the angular velocity of the unit is 
to change we must have angular momentum drawn from some other 
source. Secondly, we now presume that this particle form can exist 
in either of two states. In one state it has its association with a photon 
unit. In the other state it is transferring from association with one 
photon unit to association with another somewhere else in the E 
frame. We take a simple case in which this transfer is linear and pre- 
sume that during such linear transfers the particle has lost its motion 
with the E frame. When moving with the E frame the particle of 
mass m has an angular momentum of brier plus any intrinsic spin 
s plus the associated component Im'cr linked by the balance action 
of the G frame. This is taken to be zero on the assumption that 
angular momentum is conserved and is zero for the linear motion. 
This gives the condition: 

s= - trier (4.4) 

The kinetic energy associated with the motion with the E and G 
frames is released when the particle is in transit to its new location. 
This energy is Jm'(ic)'- for each frame or a total of ]w'c-\ Since the 
transit of the particle from one part of the E frame to another is an 
observable phenomenon, the energy of the particle in transit is 
drawn from "observable" sources. The particle will not move with- 
out the reason causing movement and the energy source associated 
with it. Thus, the energy \iric' 1 is surplus for the very short transit 
state of the particle. 

Essentially, the particle, once it has left its association with a 
photon unit, is looking for another one. The proposition we now 
have is that the energy just freed is used to produce two counter- 
rotating standard photon units along the trajectory of the particle. 
Thus, when the particle reaches the outermost of these photon units 
it has the opportunity to revert to its state of motion with such a unit 
by virtue of the collapse of the remaining pair of photon units. The 
energy is redeployed as if the process is reversible. This is illustrated 



WAVE MECHANICS 67 

in Fig. 4.2. Note that the particle can move in any direction in space. 
The spin ,v has a set direction in space but the photon unit spins, 
though all parallel or anti-parallel, can be in any orientation. If / 
denotes the moment of inertia of the standard photon unit , the kinetic- 
energy of the two created units is twice Uoj 2 . Thus: 

ifn'c 2 = I(o 2 (4.5) 

From the fact that cj is QjA we can use (4.2) and (4.5) to show that: 

Io) = (m' '\m)h\2ii (4.6) 

From (4.1) and (4.4): 

.v= -{m'\m)h\An (4.7) 

Unless we recognize fractional units of the fundamental spin angular 
momentum quantum hjAn we must, therefore, take m' to be equal to 
m or a multiple of it. The logical conclusion is that the photon- 
related particle is the electron, of mass m. 





Fig. 4.2 

This gives us the angular momentum of the standard photon unit. 
It is h;2n. An electron is, presumably, normally associated with a 
photon unit of spin hjln. As it moves linearly through the E frame it 
induces counter-rotating photon units in its path which collapse 



68 



PHYSICS WITHOl'T EINSTEIN 



behind il as it transfers between its pauses in a successively-new, but 
ever present, standard photon unit. This has been shown in Fig. 4.2 
where at (a) the electron has its spin s and is associated w ith the single 
photon unit. At (b) it has lost its spin and is moving in a path in 
which two new counter-rotating photon units have been formed. At 
(c) the electron has reached the outermost photon unit, reassumed its 
spin, and the units left behind have been eliminated. Note that the 
electron can only settle with a photon unit having a rotation in a 
specific sense. 

At this stage it should be said that the atom is the home for 
photon units having this special affinity for settled electrons. When 
the electron is in its settled state in association with a photon unit it 
complies with wave mechanical criteria. When the electron is in 
transit to another photon unit it complies with Bohr's analysis of the 
atom. Wave mechanics determine the probable position of the elec- 
tron when it is in its settled or pause state. Full analysis requires a 
substantial insight into the mechanisms within the atom and leads 
to the explanation of the photon itself and Planck's radiation law. As 
a preliminary we will explore the state in which the theory of the 
Bohr atom is applicable. 

The Bohr Atom 

If an electron in an atom can move almost anywhere within 
reasonable limits about the nucleus according to a probability con- 
dition set by a wave mechanical formula, we have to accept that it is 
not moving in a simple orbit with fixed angular momentum. However, 
the effect of the nuclear charge will cause its successive transits from 
one photon unit to the next to be small arcs of different, but neverthe- 
less simple, orbits. Where does this angular momentum come from? 
The answer to this is that in the atom it may be that when the 
electron moves out of spin and goes into transit the energy released 
is deployed into forming two photon units which spin in the same 
direction. Then, there will be a reaction angular momentum of tw ice 
h\2n imparted to the mass energy. This mass energy comprises the 
energy mc- of the electron, or multiples of this in a many-electron 
atom. The angular momentum will really come in quanta of h',2n, 
even though made available in pairs in the transition phases of an 
atom or molecule. Note the existence of the single photon unit state 
implicit in (a) of Fig. 4.2. By this mechanism we expect that an 



WAVE MECHANICS 69 

electron can move about around the atomic nucleus sporadically 
complying in its motion with successive sections of Bohr orbits. 

In a multi-electron atom or in a single electron atom in an energetic 
environment primed by free electrons, there is the possibility 'thai 
some electrons in transit between rest positions may move linearly 
even though their surplus energy has gone to form a pair of photon 
units having the same direction of rotation. The surplus angular 
momentum is then available in units of// ;2n to be added to the angular 
momentum of another electron in orbital transit. The result is that 
integral quantization of angular momentum in multiples of /i!2n, as 
assumed in Bohr's theory, is to be expected. 

According to Bohr's theory of the atom, an electron describing a 
circular orbit around a nucleus of charge Ze moves so that its eentri- 
lugal force mr- R is in balance with the electrostatic force of attrac- 
tion Zc- R-. Here, R is the distance of the electron from the nucleus 
and r is the electron velocity. By assuming that the angular mo- 
mentum of the electron is quantized in units of h In it is then 
possible from simple algebra to deduce that the kinetic energv of the 
electron is given by: 

K-.E. ; '."»•-- Z-ehn (4.8) 

where n is the number of units of the angular momentum quantum. 

This kinetic energy quantity is the energy possessed by the electron 
during its transit between photon unit positions. When it reaches such 
a position and is put into its wave mechanical state this energy is 
deployed to prime the electron with a different motion. The electron 
loses its quantum of angular momentum but. as will be seen below, it 
has interplay with the photon unit. Angular momentum is exchanged. 
There is interaction with the nucleus and the properties of the atom 
and its nucleus can be explained. 

The applicability ol" Bohr theory intermittent!} in the successive 
transits of the electron shows that the argument used in Chapter 3 to 
account for ferromagnetism has good basis in atomic theory and, as 
will emerge, is not inconsistent with wave mechanical treatments of 
the atom. 



Electron-Positron Annihilation 

It may be asked whether the two counter-rotating photon unit^ 
shown m Fig. 4.2 can split. As long as they are so close together thev 



70 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



are ready to mutually cancel. In Fig. 4.3 it is shown how an electron 
and a positron which pass through the transit state together may form 
photon unit pairs and then mutually annihilate one another. The 



reaction is deemed to divide the photon units into pairs having the 
same spin direction. As the energy E released by the mutual can- 
cellation of the electron and positron is dispersed the pairs of 
standard photon units are left with their angular momenta. They are 
available for capture by atoms. It is a matter for speculation to ask 
whether an atom could contain photon units having stable spin states 
in opposite directions. Already, we have seen that the angular 
momentum priming of the Bohr atom can involve standard photon 
units with spins in the same direction. At least here we have the 
storage medium for paired photon units with the same spin direction. 
This is possibly the source of the photon units needed for the reverse 
process of electron-positron creation. 

It is, perhaps, appropriate here to note that in the transit state of 
the electron or positron depicted in Fig. 4.3 the energy mc' 1 will 
transform according to Planck's law (Energy = hv) into radiation at a 
frequency corresponding to the angular velocity Q. This follows from 
(4.2). The electron and the positron have this intimate physical 
connection with the properties of the space-time system which 
determine Planck's constant. 

The Schrodinger Equation 

This equation is the basic formula of wave mechanics. It will now 
be shown how it results from the physical theory presented above. In 




(.instable) 



Fig. 4.3 



WAVE MECHANICS 



71 



simple terms, the atom captures a pair of standard photon units, hav- 
ing the same direction of spin, for each electron position. These units 
are divided. One is located with the electron. The other is located in 
the nucleus. 

Referring to Fig. 4.4, consider a photon unit rotating at an angular 
velocity different from co and at a distance from the nucleus of an 
atom. Assume that an electron moves about the centre of this unit 
and that, provided it moves to compensate the electric field disturb- 
ance of the unit normally associated with wave propagation, the 




system will not be radiating uncompensated electromagnetic waves 
and so may be stable. There is also a second photon unit which is 
positioned with the nucleus. This second unit also rotates at an 
angular velocity different from o) but is complementary with the 
other unit in the sense that it generates a pulsating disturbance at 
exactly the same frequency. It does this by rotating slower than o 
by the amount by which the other unit rotates faster. The electron is 
thus able to compensate the propagation tendencies of both photon 
units. This action will occur because the priming of the tw o photon 
units by their high velocity rotation in the same direction allows this 
complementary change in angular velocity by mere energy transfer 
between the units. Angular momentum is conserved between the 
photon units and their respective particles, the electron or the 
nucleus. 

Our problem is to analyse the motion of the electron. This com- 
prises the regular motion to compensate the rotation of the photon 



72 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



units and leads to the derivation of the Schrodinger Equation. It also 
comprises a migratory motion about the nucleus as determined 
statistically by the solution of this equation. Even so, as has been 
explained, this migration is by way of a transit between photon units 
on trajectories determined according to Bohr's theory of the atom. 
This. then, is the physical picture of what is happening inside a stable 
atom. Stability prevails until some quantum event happens to 
prevent the electron from affording the compensation. Then, since 
the photon units are not rotating at the non-disturbance frequency 
c) , there is wave propagation. The quantum event will be discussed 
later in connection with photon emission. 

When the stable state is merely perturbed, as by the electron 
rotating at a lower frequency about its photon unit centre, we find 
that there is still no radiation. The photon unit changes its rotation 
speed by exchanging angular momentum with the electron. They are 
both rotating about the same centre. Any change of kinetic energy by 
the electron involves interchange of energy with other matter forms. 
The mass energy of the system is conserved. Thus, the energy change 
of the photon unit is accommodated by energy transfer between the 
two photon units. The result of this is the change in angular velocity 
of the photon unit in the nucleus and the related angular momentum 
exchange between it and the nucleus. On balance, therefore, both 
energy and angular momentum are conserved in the matter of the 
atom, but we have a process of transfer of angular momentum in- 
directly between the nucleus and the electron. 

The electron is deemed to have an angular momentum c, which is 
deployed in a motion to compensate the photon unit rotation. Let i: 
decrease by A v. as angular momentum is transferred to the photon 
unit of the electron. This unit has the standard angular velocity oj„, 
corresponding to an angular momentum hUn, and an additional 
angular velocity oj which complements the motion of the electron. 
In this sense it is to be noted that the standard angular momentum 
h\2n has to be changed to provide the electron with any angular mo- 
mentum in its compensating state. The photon spin is taken to be 
opposite to that of the electron because energy transfer to a limited 
degree is needed between the matter and the photon units due to the 
second order energy considerations, and this is more likely to occur 
in the electron environment. To understand this, note that energy 
terms in cr need to be added to the photon units. In the nucleus this 
energy can be drawn from the reduction in angular velocity of the 



WAVE MECHANICS 73 

standard photon unit as the electron is adopted by the outer photon 
unit. In this latter position, energy is needed in addition to the 
surplus from the nuclear photon unit. It is available from the motion 
of the electron. However, this situation requires the opposed motions 
of the electron and its associated photon unit. Returning to our 
analysis of the perturbed state, the transfer of Ac to the photon unit 
of the electron slows it down by a small amount of angular velocity 
Av>. Neglecting second order terms, for energy conservation and 
wave compensation, we find that the nuclear photon unit will then 
spin at the angular velocity oj -c> \-Aco. It will interact with the 
nucleus to give it the angular momentum Ac. This is added to its 
intrinsic angular momentum c n which probably will be some basic 
quantum as adjusted by an initial priming as the electron entered the 
condition under analysis. 

The process described provides some remarkable results w hen we 
come to evaluate quantitatively the magnetic moments and spin 
properties of atomic nuclei. This subject is treated in Chapter 7. 

To provide compensation in its non-transit state the electron 
describes a circular orbit at a frequency v which matches the angular 
velocity co of the photon unit. Thus, from (4.3) we have a relation 
between v and co. From (4.6), with m = m' and c Jo ---Q : 4, we have a 
value of the moment of inertia I of the photon unit. Thus: 

I(o = hvjQ (4.9) 

The kinetic energy IF of the electron can be expressed in terms of its 
angular momentum in its orbit. Thus: 

W=nvc, (4. 10) 

Since the angular momentum s is equal and in balance with ho, 
these equations give: 

W 7i.hr- Q (4.1 1) 

The electron moves to compensate a wave disturbance which 
would be developed by the photon units and which would have the 
frequency v but for the action of the electron. To make this com- 
pensation complete for both photon units, the position of the electron 
must move about the nucleus so that there is effective compliance of 
position w ith the amplitude of a wave tending to be developed at the 
frequency r. It is noted that in Chapter 1 it has been explained that 
an electromagnetic wave does not need to convey energy. It is a 



74 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

disturbance in which energy is exchanged between different states 
without being propagated. The wave is propagated, if not com- 
pensated, but the energy involved in the wave disturbance is not 
carried away at the wave velocity. Thus, so long as the electron can 
wander around the nucleus by its transits between photon units and 
satisfies the conditions of circular orbital motion as specified by 
equation (4.10), there is no sustained unbalance of radiation. The 
statistical position of the electron is governed by its need to comply 
with the form of the wave amplitude. 
The standard wave equation of frequency v is: 

AA+(4n 2 v 2 lc 2 )A=0 (4.12) 

where A is wave amplitude. Eliminating r from (4.1 1): 

A A I- {AnQjhc 1 ) WA -0 (4.13) 

This becomes the well-known Schrodinger Equation: 

A A + (Sn 2 mlh 2 )(E - V)A = (4. 1 4) 

when, consistent with (4.2): 

Q = 2nmc 2 jh (4.15) 

E-V denotes the kinetic energy W as the difference between the 
total energy E assigned to the electron in the atom and the potential 
energy V. 

Physically, instead of the electron moving in an orbit about the 
nucleus to balance centrifugal force against the electric field of 
the nucleus, as in the Bohr state, it is moving under the influence of the 
induced electric fields in the wave field. Its total energy is conserved 
but it has exchanged its angular momentum with photon units, as 
already explained. 

The Schrodinger Equation is the basic equation of wave mechanics 
and much of the success of physical theory which may be termed 
"non-classical" has resulted from the valid application of the equa- 
tion. As is well known by students of quantum theory, it is possible 
to develop the theory of electron structure of the atom by using the 
Schrodinger Equation. However, particularly in respect of the 
quantitative priming of the energies of the discrete energy levels of 
the electrons, the Bohr theory has to be used in conjunction with 
wave mechanics for a complete understanding of the atom. 



WAVE MECHANICS 



75 



Photon Momentum 

We will now consider those events in which there is an unbalanced 
state, where the electron is somehow jolted in its successive transits 
between photon units so that it might move to another energy level 
and fail to provide full compensation for wave propagation. In 
short, we consider the mechanism of the photon. 

From (4.10) and (4.11): 

c = hv',Q (4.16) 

Since e is 2nv, the angular velocity, times the moment of inertia of 
the electron, nix\ about the centre of its orbit of radius x: 

i:=2nvmx 1 (4.17) 
These two equations and the fact that Q is c,'2r give: 

A" = 2r (4.18) 

When the electron is in transit from one photon unit to another its 
kinetic energy corresponds to its velocity and momentum. However, 
these quantities arc very much contained by the atom if it is not 
radiating. Momentum has direction and as the electron moves about 
in the atom this will somehow be exchanged, absorbed and balanced 
by other motions. This sort of momentum is lost from the atom when 
the electron goes out of the atom as well. It is not radiated. 

When the electron, in its normal migration around the atomic 
nucleus, goes out of transit and moves into association with a photon 
unit it acquires angular momentum e in an orbit of radius 2r. Conse- 
quently there is a sudden change of the linear momentum of the 
electron equal to c/2/\ This linear momentum arises from direct 
interaction with space-time. It is not a reaction with other matter. 
From (4.16) this momentum is hvj2rQ, or since Q is ci2r, hv'c. It 
follows that each time the electron goes in and out of transit there is a 
momentum exchange with space-time. In a stable atom these ex- 
changes occur alternately with alternate compensations of mo- 
mentum. However, if the atom is disturbed to become radiating, and 
some of this momentum is lost by the electron, it cannot assume a 
compensating state. There will be a difference in the frequencies of 
the electron motion and the photon units giving rise to a propagated 
wave disturbance. The frequency of the radiated wave will be related 



76 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

to the lost momentum. The lost momentum will be simply ///r times 
the radiation frequency. This is the simple mechanism of the photon. 
A photon is an event in which momentum is exchanged between 
matter and space-time. An exchange in one location results in the 
emission of a wave radiation throughout space. This primes space at 
the disturbance frequency and encourages atomic systems elsew here 
to restore balance and compensate the radiation by inverting the 
process and exchanging, in the opposite sense, the same momentum 
quantum with space-time. The overall result, of course, is that it 
appears that a photon is a corpuscle which moves with momentum 
hjc times the radiation frequency. In fact, the momentum has been 
imparted to space-time. Probably the E frame is given a push w hich 
on balance tends to be cancelled by successive actions in the opposite 
sense. On this theme, it would be interesting to know whether this 
momentum of space-time can be deployed to generate photons of 
different frequencies not in the same proportion as those imparting 
the momentum. Experiments seem to be restricted to the study of a 
radiation momentum in relation to energy absorbed or a single 
emission frequency. However, this is mere speculation and is beyond 
the scope of the present work. Suffice it to say, the analysis of the 
atom discussed above is wholly consistent with the momentum 
properties of the photon. 

Anomalous Electron Behaviour 

Before leaving this chapter, it is worth noting that an uncertainty 
jittering of the electron at the Compton wavelength related to the 
angular velocity Q has been proposed as a basis for explaining the 
anomalous spin moment of the electron (Harnwell, 1966). Precise 
measurement of the ratio of the magnetic moment and spin angular 
momentum of the electron shows that it differs slightly from the 
mere ratio of ehjAnmc to hjAn, or ejmc, as previously expected. The 
quantum-mechanical explanation is rather complicated and is not 
wholly accepted, but it appears to predict that the ratio is greater by 
the factor 1 +a!2n, where a is the fine structure constant. The 
physical basis of the explanation is that the electron may be thought 
of classically as exchanging radiant energy with its surroundings. 
This makes the electron mass appear different for its linear acceler- 
ated motion and its spin. 

The above account, however, is hardly acceptable from the theory 
presented in this work. This, therefore, sets us the task of finding the 



WAVE MECHANICS 



77 



reason Tor the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron. It is a 
challenge which can be met, and, indeed, the explanation is really 
quite simple. However, since its quantitative aspects require some 
further analysis of the parameters of space-time, it is reserved for 
Chapter 7. Even so, it is appropriate here to evaluate some data of 
later use in this exercise. This is the angular momentum component 
of the photon unit due to the balance of the electron angular mo- 
mentum in the non-transit state. Put another way, we will evaluate 
From (4.9) and (4.11): 

ho = vXWh<nQ) (4.19) 
Since the kinetic energy Wh given by (4.8) we then have: 

Ioj = (Ze 2 lnc)\/(2n?nc 2 :hQ) (4.20) 
Simplifying this from (4.2) and putting Z= 1 and // = 1, we have: 

ho = 2a{h\An) (4.21) 
w here a is the fine structure constant Ine-Jw. 

Summary 

To summarize, in this chapter we have developed a notion of 
space-time which lends itself to the linking of gravitation and wave 
mechanics. A common feature of space-time has provided the clues 
to the Principle of Equivalence, the disturbance in dependence upon 
mass of matter, and, most important, the basic motions and spin 
relationships operative in wave mechanics. The analysis has led to 
the Schrodinger Equation and supported it by a clear physical picture 
of the structure of the atom. The mechanism of photon momentum 
has emerged from the analysis. A key feature has been the develop- 
ment of the space-time properties by which energy can be added to 
space-time without augmenting its angular momentum. This makes 
the theory ready for extensive development in the next chapters. 
Energy added to space-time has the effect of increasing the velocity 
of light. This is our starting point in Chapter 5. It is feasible to 
regard space-time as primed by a small amount of such energy. 
Though not discussed in this chapter, this priming energy, briefly 
introduced already in Chapter 2, will be later seen to be of funda- 
mental importance. It will be termed space polarization energy and 
denoted i//. It is small compared with the intrinsic mass energy of 
space-time but its depletion from its normal value is, seemingly, the 
state of magnetism and also the indirect source of gravitational force. 



5. Gravitation 



The Nature of Space-time 

It has been said by Hoyle (1964) that "there is no such thing as 
gravitation apart from geometry ... the geometrical relationship 
between different localities is the phenomenon of gravitation". If we 
fall down it is because we are involved in geometry. It seems absurd 
to say this, but it makes sense according to Einstein. Gravitation is 
deemed to be a phenomenon due to the interplay between matter and 
space- time. Matter distorts the space-time metric. In Einstein's 
theory this distortion finds a way of expression which, in effect, 
makes gravitation a geometrical property of a mathematical formula- 
tion of space-time. Below, it is sought to portray the metric of what 
we call space-time in a truly physical form with a view to explaining 
gravitation in more meaningful terms. 

It is convenient, by way of introduction, to imagine space as if it is 
a three-dimensional lattice of physical substance. Any physical 
portrayal of space with an added time dimension must still be three- 
dimensional even though mathematical space can be multi- 
dimensional. As already suggested in Chapter 4, a simple way of 
introducing time is to assume that the lattice has a rhythmic harmoni- 
ous motion such as a regular cyclic motion. Since space-time is, 
almost by definition, the frame of reference for light propagation and 
the famous Michelson-Morley experiment shows that an observer at 
rest in the earth frame shares the motion of the light reference frame, 
the lattice of our space-time moves with the earth. However, there is 
no evidence that space-time has linear momentum. Therefore, it is 
probably true to say that the centre of mass of any substance forming 
space-time can be deemed to be at rest in an absolute frame of 
reference. Now, how can this be possible while we have motion of 
the space-time lattice in a linear sense with the earthly observer? 
This is a most basic question in physics. 

The answer is equally basic and quite logical. If the lattice moves 
but the centre of mass is at rest, something associated with the lattice 
must be moving in the opposite direction. One of the earliest observa- 



GRAVITATION 



79 



tions connected with gravity was that the water on the earth always 
moves downwards towards the earth's centre. Yet, the levels of the 
seas tend to remain constant as if their centres of mass remain a fixed 
distance from the centre of the earth. As is well known, there is 
something associated with the water moving upwards and this is 
water vapour. Whatever it is that forms the propagation velocity 
determining lattice of space-lime may move but there may be a 
counter-motion of it in different form which does not affect the 
propagation properties. It can be said that with the earth's water we 
need the sun's heat to sustain the circulation. This implies energy 
and resistance in the space -time analogy. However, in reply it can be 
argued that the lattice has its rhythmic motion and that if parts of 
the lattice come loose these parts could deploy their motion to speed 
them in the reverse direction so fast that they hardly disturb the 
properties of the lattice as a whole. This is depicted in Figs. 5.1 and 
5.2. Fig. 5.1 shows a lattice which may be regarded in the rest state. 




Fig. 5.1 Fig. 5.2 



It has a cyclic circular motion, not shown, which is like a vibration 
and which does not affect this argument. The lattice is the E frame of 
Chapter 4. The boundary is an arbitrary boundary enclosing any 
volume of space. Now, if we imagine that somehow this lattice moves 
with a velocity v, say, as shown in Fig. 5.2, it may shed some of its 
substance, expanding a little, and thereby allowing linear momentum 
to be balanced by the reverse motion of such substance. This reverse- 
moving substance is shown by the dotted elements in the figure. They 
are not held in a regular lattice pattern and have lost their vibration 
state. Thus, they may use their kinetic energy to sustain their high 
velocity motion in the inertia! frame in the direction opposite to r. In 
the same volume of space such lattice motion could occur indefinitely 
because this substance could reform into lattice structure at the rear 



80 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



boundary of the lattice and yet constantly hold the centre of mass of 
space-time fixed in the inertial frame (vibration being ignored). 

It is thus seen that in any volume of space we can have motion of 
the light reference frame without motion of the centre of mass of the 
carrier medium. The above account is not hypothesis. It is the only 
feasible physical answer to a basic problem in physics. We cannot be 
too rigid about what we mean by "lattice", and the question of its 
physical nature will be kept open until, later in this chapter, we 
adduce support for the above proposal. For the moment, it suffices 
to say that as long as one is prepared to use the words "space-time" 
we must be prepared to recognize that something termed "space- 
time" exists, as otherwise we would not need to refer to it. It is 
elusive. Though it apparently has mass properties it does not reveal 
itself in linear momentum interchange. It offers no resistance, 
inertial or frictional. We know that it does provide the carrier medium 
for light waves and that its frame of reference moves with the earthly 
observer. We suspect that its distortion by matter is the cause of 
gravitation. Furthermore, in the previous chapter it was shown that 
it had its own harmonious motion, two frames being, in effect, in 
dynamic balance. It was shown to have angular momentum yet could 
store energy without addition of angular momentum. It was sug- 
gested that it could have discrete units of its lattice structure in 
rotation to cause electromagnetic disturbance. These are our starting 
points in an effort to apply a physical interpretation of space-time to 
the explanation of what appear to be gravitational properties. 

I'ests of Einstein's General Theory 

Einstein's General Theory of Relativity is supported by four 
quantitative tests. These are: 

(a) The solar red shift; 

(b) The deflection of stellar light by the sun's gravitational lield ; 

(c) The slowing down of radar waves when subject to the sun's 
gravitational field; and 

(d) The account of the anomalous component of the perihelion 
motion of the planet Mercury. 

Tests (a), (b) and (c) have never really been supported by measure- 
ments accurate enough to be conclusive. Recently, measurements 
reported by Gwynne (1968) according to test (c), however, do look 



GRAVITATION 81 

like affording fairly good evidence in favour of Einstein's results. 
Test (d) is the most important. It has really carried Einstein's General 
Theory for many years, though, as will be explained later, it has been 
challenged with some success in the last few years. 

Now, in fact, tests (a), (b) and (c) are all closely related because 
they all stem from a common aspect of Einstein's theory which 
requires the velocity of light to be smaller in a gravitational held. As 
Fock (1964) interprets the equation: 

7i = l +2GMslRc 2 (5.1) 

"The fictitious medium of refractive index n is optically more dense 
in the vicinity of the sun than it is far away from it. Therefore, light 
waves will bend around the sun. . . ." In the equation, A/ s denotes the 
mass of the sun and R is distance from its centre of gravity. G is the 
constant of gravitation. 

It follows that if we can now derive the equation without using 
Einstein's Theory, any evidence supporting tests (a), (b) and (c) 
equally supports this new theoretical analysis. We have an entry 
to the problem because early in Chapter 4 it was shown that the 
velocity of light depended upon the energy density of space - 
time. Test (d) concerning the planetary motion is more challenging. 
However, we have our entry here, too, because, although space- 
time has no linear momentum property, it would seem that the lattice 
in Fig. 5.1 could rotate about a central axis without having to shed 
any of its substance and while keeping its centre of mass at the same 
point in the inertial frame. In the study of planetary motion we are 
dealing with angular momentum. Perhaps the angular momentum of 
the space-time in a planet cannot be ignored. If we allow for it, 
perhaps we can explain the problem with Mercury's perihelion. 

Before proceeding, it should be mentioned why the red shift test is 
embraced by (5.1). A photon has conserved momentum live and the 
fundamental quantum of a photon is really momentum. It is not 
energy. This has been explained near the end of the previous chapter. 
With Planck's constant /; invariant, the value of v for a particular 
quantum will be set in proportion to e at the source. Thus r, the 
radiation frequency, which must be constant throughout transit 
(ignoring any doppler effects), will be determined for any character- 
istic spectral emission according to the way c is determined at the 
source. In a strong gravitational field, according to (5.1), c will be 
reduced because n is increased, making v lower also. It follows that 



82 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

light spectra emitted by the sun, which has a gravitational held at its 
surface much stronger than that on earth, will have lower frequency 
than spectra of earthly origin. This phenomenon is termed "red 
shift" because it corresponds to a displacement of spectral lines 
towards the red end of the spectrum. 

In Chapter 2 it has been suggested that gravitation is a magnetic 
phenomenon. This is our basic assumption. We take gravitational 
energy to be magnetic energy. In Chapter 2 it was argued that 
magnetic energy was a condition of depletion of the primed energy 
level of the aether or space-time, as it is termed here. Magnetic 
energy is a deficit of kinetic energy in space-time, that is, a reduction 
of the space-time kinetic energy from its normal level. This kinetic 
energy is, of course, the energy of the harmonious rhythmic motion of 
the space-time lattice. Thus, following the analysis in Chapter 4, we 
may calculate the kinetic energy density of space-time as: 

K2p)(c/2) 2 (5.2, 

since the E and G frame each have the same mass density p and each 
move at velocity c\2. A reduction in this energy density by <p corres- 
ponds to a reduction of c by 3c, where: 

<p = lpc3c (5.3) 

In such a region the refractive index n of the space-time medium, 
normally deemed to be unity, may be expressed as: 

n^c'j{c 3c) (5.4) 

From (5.3) and (5.4): 

/; = 1 A-lflpc 1 (5.5) 

On the above argument about the relationship of kinetic energy 
change and magnetic or gravitational energy, ip may be equated to 
the gravitational potential energy per unit volume. This can be 
expressed by: 

rp = GMpjR (5.6) 

where M is a mass developing the gravitational field and R is the 
distance between M and the region of the E frame under study. It is 
to be noted that only mass in the E frame has gravitational properties. 
This follows from the discussion of the Principle of Equivalence in 
Chapter 4. For this reason the mass density p of only the E frame is 



GRAVITATION £>3 

used in the above equation. From (5.5) and (5.6) the equation (5.1 ) is 
obtained, showing that this theory leads directly to the same result as 
Einstein's without recourse to the geometry of a four-dimensional or 
multi-dimensional space-time medium. 

To digress a little, it is important to bear in mind that this analysis 
has been pursued by reference to kinetic energy changes, even though 
it was shown in the analysis of space-time energy in Chapter 4 that 
it is really potential energy and not kinetic energy which is stored by 
doing work against the restoring forces between the frames of the 
space-time metric. Tt was there explained how it was equivalent to 
work from the kinetic energy analysis. This aspect of the theory will 
be further considered when the derivation of the line structure con- 
stant is discussed in Chapter 6. 

Wc turn next to the fourth test of Einstein's General Theory to see 
what alternative can be offered by the straightforward physical 
approach being pursued in this work. 



Mercury's Perihelion 

The mainstay of Einstein's theory is the explanation for the small 
anomaly in the motion of the planet Mercury about the sun. Newton's 
laws fail to provide the exact estimation of the perihelion motion of 
Mercury due to the perturbations of other planets. They fail if the 
assumption of conserved angular momentum is correct as applied to 
the matter constituting the solar system. The measured anomalous 
value of the perihelion advance for Mercury is 42-56 seconds of arc 
per century. Einstein's theory, which is inflexible in its estimation, 
gives a theoretical value of 43-03 seconds of arc per century. This is a 
most remarkable result. However, the measured value is really the 
difference between the measured motion of the planet and pre- 
dictions of its motion as perturbed by the masses of other planets. 
Some of these masses have been of questionable accuracy. Least 
certain, in the past, has been Mercury's mass but this has had no 
effect on the calculation of its own perturbation, though it has made 
estimates for Venus's perihelion anomaly uncertain. Strangely, 
however, the calculations of the measured anomaly for Mercury 
have failed to cater for the possibility that the sun itself may not be 
oblate. Being such a massive body even a small degree of oblateness 
can cause a small perturbation affecting the anomaly. The problem 
of solar oblateness has caused Einstein's theory to come under attack 



84 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



in recent years. Dicke (1965) has argued that if the sun is oblate by as 
little as O005",„ then the numerical estimate afforded by Einstein 
will be in error by 10",,. Dicke said: "It must be emphasized that 
Einstein's General Relativity is without a single definitive quantita- 
tive test until the possibility of non-negligible solar oblateness is 
excluded." Then Dicke (1967) reported measurements of solar 
oblateness which point to a discrepancy of 8% in Einstein's result. 
The sun must, of course, be oblate because it is rotating and is 
gaseous. Centrifugal forces at its equator will, of necessity, develop 
the oblate form. Furthermore, the expected oblateness on this 
account is of the order measured by Dicke. Indeed, if the sun were 
not oblate we would be confronted with a problem of more signi- 
ficance than that presented by the perihelion anomaly. 

It is submitted that, since three of the four tests of Einstein's 
theory have ready alternative explanation and since the theory fails 
to retain its validity in respect of the fourth test (and if invalid for one 
it is invalid for all), we must of necessity reject the General Theory of 
Relativity. The perihelion anomaly has to be re-examined and 
perhaps the best approach is along new fundamental lines. It seems 
unlikely that one can modify Einstein's ideas in some way, when after 
fifty years of effort to expand his theory to unify physics little of 
value has emerged. From the fundamental point of view it is import- 
ant to ask whether we are concerned with an anomaly in gravitation 
or an anomaly in mechanics. Attention is diverted to the question of 
the conservation of angular momentum in the planetary system, 
bearing space-time in mind. 

Rotating space-time has angular momentum whereas it does not 
have linear momentum. The reason is that the lattice system shown 
in Fig. 5.1 can rotate about a central axis without disturbing the 
lattice structure of any surrounding space-time lattice. It cannot 
move linearly without causing such disturbance unless it crumbles 
away at the interface and some of its substance travels in the reverse 
direction to reform behind the moving lattice. Alternatively, the 
lattice of the space-time system in the path of the moving lattice may 
crumble and be deployed in the same way. The result is the space- 
time property of no linear momentum but possible angular 
momentum. 

Now, consider the motion of a spherical volume of space-time 
about a remote axis. If this space-time is rotating at a steady velocity 
within its own spherical bounds there is a steady angular momentum 



GRAVITATION 



85 



due to this. Also, however, we have to consider what happens to the 
displaced lattice substance in the reverse motion. This moves about 
the remote axis in an arc, whereas the centre of mass of the lattice is 
effectively a point in which the lattice mass in motion is concentrated. 
In effect, the lattice moves in one direction with its angular mo- 
mentum about the remote axis given by MX-o, whereas the lattice 
substance in reverse motion has an angular momentum in opposition 
of M\X 2 2Ri:5)<»', where Mo> = M'<»'. Here. M is the mass of the 
lattice and o its angular velocity about the remote axis distant A' 
from M . M' is the mass of the displaced substance and <■/ its angular 
velocity in the reverse direction. This has involved the use of the 
parallel axes theorem. It is like having a compound pendulum having 
a spherical bob of radius R fixed to the arm of the pendulum in 
counter motion with a simple pendulum having a pivotal spherical 
bob rotating at a steady speed. Assuming the bobs are the same size, 
the total angular momentum per unit mass is evidently: 



If this argument is applied to the space-time contained within a 
planet rotating about the sun it becomes clear that (5.7) is a measure 
of the angular momentum of space-time due to such motion. If the 
orbit of the planet is truly circular, meaning that vj is constant, then 
the space-time angular momentum is constant, as is the component 
due to the rotation of the planet about its own axis. Then it would 
pass unnoticed. On the other hand, if the planet moves in an ellip- 
tical orbit so that o varies we must expect space-time to make a 
contribution to the balance of angular momentum in the matter 
system itself. !t is easy to calculate the effect of this contribution. 

The Newtonian equation representing the motion of a planet 
around the sun, neglecting perturbation by other planets, is given in 
polar co-ordinates by: 



M, denotes the mass of the sun, taken as a point mass much larger 
than that of the planet, G is the constant of gravitation and X, are 
the polar co-ordinates. H is the moment of velocity of the planet in 
its orbit. If// is constant as applied to the planet only, (5.8) represents 
an ellipse with the sun at one focus. If, however, angular momentum 



2ojR^5 



(5.7) 




(5.8) 



86 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



is constant as applied to the system of matter and space-time, 
H - AH is constant, where AH is the expression in (5.7). Then (5.8) 
represents an ellipse which advances progressively in the plane of 
the orbit as the planet describes successive orbits. There is an 
advance of perihelion. The advance, measured in radians per 
revolution, may be evaluated as: 

8?r M W 

5 /> A- ™ 

where P is the mass of the planet. R has become the radius of the 
space-time lattice of the planet and X is distance from the sun. 

An anomalous advance of perihelion must, of course, follow if we 
ignore the effect of space-time. There is, therefore, nothing surprising 
about the perihelion motion of Mercury. Indeed, the fact that the 
discrepancy between the measured and theoretical value neglecting 
space-time is detected is a clear indication that (5.7) is not neglible. 
The mass of the space-time lattice can be deduced from observation. 
Attempting this, we note that it is unlikely that the space-time 
volume of the planet will be simply co-extensive with its physical 
form. It w ill be somewhat larger. The ionosphere limits of the earth 
suggest a location for the boundary. Let us guess that for the planet 
Mercury the space-time lattice has a radius 10% larger than that of 
the planet. Mercury has a radius of 1,500 miles, so this assumption 
puts the boundary 150 miles above its surface, about the same height 
as the ionosphere above the earth. Then, available data enable the 
mass density of the space-time lattice to be calculated. The mass P of 
Mercury is 3-27 10'' fi gm. X is 5-7 10 12 cm. The radius of Mercury is 
2-495 10 8 cm. The orbital period is 88 days. The anomalous peri- 
helion advance measured, allowing for the solar oblatcncss, is 38 
seconds of arc per century. From (5.9) it may then be shown that the 
mass density of the space-time lattice is about 150 gnvec. 

This is not conclusive until it is shown that the space-time lattice 
has a mass density of this order calculable from physical observation 
//; the laboratory. Atomic physics affords all the data needed to 
evaluate the mass density of space -time, as w ill be shown in the next 
chapter. For the moment, it is w orthy of note that the above explana- 
tion can be applied satisfactorily to the earth's perihelion motion 
and that of other planets, including Venus. But, more than this, we 
can take what seems to be an absurd result, this very high density 
of space-time, and make sense out of it in two immediate respects. 



GRAVITATION 87 

Firstly, common sense must tell us that, if the explanation of the 
Principle of Equivalence in Chapter 4 has merit, then the presence of 
ordinary matter in space -time is a mere disturbance in a heavier 
medium. The substance of the G frame has to balance the extra 
disturbance of matter which, as we know from observation, can have 
densities up to about 10 or 1 5 gm/cc. Space-time must be more dense, 
appreciably more dense, than this. 150 gm/cc is highly reasonable. 
Secondly, on the basis that the sun has a density of about 1 -4 gm/cc 
and an angular momentum which is only 1% that of the planets in 
their orbits, we see that to add the angular momentum of the rotating 
space-lime will make the sun have about the same angular mo- 
mentum as the total of that of the planets. More will be said about 
this in Chapter 8. In the meantime, the reader should not under- 
estimate the importance of the really great anomaly which has 
confronted us since the time of Newton. Angular momentum is sup- 
posed to be conserved in a complete system. If the solar system has 
been a complete system since the birth of the planets and before, how 
is it that the sun has so little of the angular momentum now belonging 
to the solar system? There is no problem if \vc recognize the role of 
space -time. Not only will it solve the anomalous perihelion difficulty, 
but we can see a sensible basis for explaining the creation of the solar 
system. 

Another point which may have occurred to the reader is that this 
theory might preclude the existence of very high densities of matter. 
The reader who can visualize gravitational collapse of stars and 
contraction of matter to almost infinite mass densities should re- 
member that he is assuming that G, the constant of gravitation, 
remains constant under such conditions. It is a convenient assump- 
tion encouraged by the inflexibility of Einstein's theory, but if 
gravitation has its origins in a real physical disturbance of space- 
time, as we believe, it may well not cater for some of the mathematical 
fantasies of the astrophysicist. After all, the physicist does not under- 
stand what gravity is, so he is being rather bold to assert that its 
action has no dependence upon the concentration of the substance 
exhibiting gravitation. All the author can offer ahead is an argument 
explaining why G cannot be constant when we consider really dense 
matter, and the encouragement that gravitation is explained and G 
is evaluated from atomic data. 

Already, it has been shown that Einstein's General Theory of 
Relativity has no advantages over the present theory. All four of its 



88 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



quantitative tests have been derived by other means. The tests 
provide equal support for the theory under review and the theory 
under review has very many more advantages. Already, it has been 
shown that this theory has application to atomic theory. We have the 
link with wave mechanics and with held theory. We are reach' also to 
turn attention now to the serious analysis in this work, leading us to 
the derivation of G in terms of the properties of the electron. This, of 
necessity, involves us in an explanation of the nature of gravitational 
force. 

The Nature of Gravity 

If space-time is not something real, then it is simply imaginary and 
serves as a mere exercise for the imagination. If it is real we cannot 
dispose of it, as Einstein does, by mere mathematics. If has, there- 
fore, to be portrayed in physical terms. Above, the lattice of space- 
time has been deemed to become crumbled at its forward boundaries 
when in motion. What does this mean physically? The simple answer 
is that the lattice is probably an array of electrically charged par- 
ticles. At the boundary, particles come out of their lattice positions 
and travel through the lattice. This can be fully supported by a rigor- 
ous analysis of an electrical space-time system. Imagine the lattice 
to comprise identical particles of electric charge permeating a uniform 
electric continuum of opposite charge. The particles mutually repel. 
For zero electrostatic interaction energy, these particles form into a 
simple cubic array. Their arrangement is different for minimum 
electrostatic energy, the normal assumption in physics. However, we 
are dealing here with space-time. In laboratory experiments, where 
electric charge can be separated to store energy and provide a system 
which tends to be restored to its original state by lending to minimum 
energy, we deal only with relative quantities. Negative energy in a 
relative sense is possible in such analysis. On an absolute basis, in 
space-time, negative energy is beyond imagination. We are not 
dealing in relative terms. The system is absolute. This is the key to 
the analysis, because it means that the stable state of space -time is not 
one of rest. The zero energy condition is not the one of zero restoring 
force. Electrostatic forces will occur in the system of electric particles 
and continuum described above and will be finite for zero electro- 
static interaction energy. Such forces are balanced by the centrifugal 
forces of an orbital motion, the harmonious motion of space-time 



GRAVITATION 



89 



already introduced. The time dimension comes into space time 
because the rest condition of space -time would have minimum 
energy which is negative. The fundamental energy condition applies 
everywhere in space. The interaction energy cannot be negative in 
some parts and positive in others. Each lattice particle in the E frame 
of space-time must satisfy the same energy condition. This assures a 
kind of symmetry and causes the particles to be arranged in a simple 
cubic array. 

When the lattice is in linear motion, some particles must exist in a 
free state. They are the lattice "substance" displaced by the motion. 
They do not form part of the lattice array (see Fig. 5.3). but because 
they are present the lattice will have expanded. This follows from 
electrostatic charge balance considerations. Space is electrically 
neutral on a macroscopic scale. This will be further analysed in 
Chapter 8. The freed particles can deploy their kinetic energy to 
travel at speed in the direction opposite to the linear motion of the 
lattice, as shown by the arrows in Fig. 5.3. 



/ 

/ 

\ o o 
\ 
I 

/ 

\ 
\ 

Fig. 5.3 

Ignoring the existence of free particles, which, because of their 
rapid transit through the lattice, tend to meld statistically into the 
background charge of the electric continuum, we can now illustrate 
the harmonic motion of the E frame. Firstly, note that each electric 
particle in this frame is attracted to a neutral rest position in the 
continuum. Each particle is held displaced by a state of motion. The 
whole particle lattice forming the E frame moves in a circular orbit 
so that each particle is subjected to the same centrifugal action and 
can retain its position against the electric forces urging it to the rest 
position in the continuum. As is evident from the analysis already 
presented, this continuum is part of the G frame which provides the 




90 PHYSICS WITHOUT LINSTEIN 

counter-balance to the motion of the E frame. Indeed, both the E 
frame and the G frame move in counter-balance in the same circular 
orbit relative to the inertial reference frame. In Fig. 5.4 the broken 




Fig. 5.4 



lines show the position of the inertial frame and the full lines show 
the position of the E frame. The electric particles forming this frame 
are depicted each in circular motion with the frame. Fig. 5.5 shows 
the way in which the orbits of the E frame particles are diminished 
around a gravitating system of matter not illustrated but deemed to 
be centrally located in the system shown. Gravitation involves 
magnetic forces, and these affect the balance between the centrifugal 




Fig. 5.5 



GRAVITATION 



91 



force and electrostatic force on each E frame particle. Said another 
way, in the light of the argument in Chapter 2, the diminution of the 
kinetic energy or, more correctly, the diminution of the electrostatic 
energy is the magnetic effect corresponding with gravitation. 
Remember that in Chapter 2 it was suggested that there w as a small 
priming energy in space-time which set the condition from which a 
reduction of energy corresponding to magnetism was possible. This 
is consistent with the zero electrostatic interaction energy condition 
discussed above. This is the lower limit of energy reduction, or the 
upper limit of magnetization or gravitation. It will be better under- 
stood when Planck's constant is evaluated in Chapter 6. 

Since the E frame is the electromagnetic reference frame, there can 
be no direct magnetic force between these particles forming the 
lattice. In contrast, since the charge of the continuum in the G frame 
is moving at velocity c relative to the E frame it has its own mutual 
magnetic interaction which exactly cancels its mutual electrostatic 
action. This follows using the law of electrodynamics presented in 
Chapter 2. At any instant the charge is in parallel motion. Exact 
cancellation of the mutual forces in the continuum explains why it 
can form into a continuum. Tt is unlike the behaviour of charge in a 
particle subject principally to self-repulsion. 

We are now ready to explain gravitation, subject to two minor 
comments. Firstly, note that there is no question of propagation 
delays in the magnetic interaction forces between G frame substance. 
Motions are mutually parallel but constantly changing direction. 
Yet, field energy between interacting charge is the same even though 
the directions of the current vectors are changing. Hence, unless the 
sources of these vectors move in the electromagnetic reference frame, 
either by coming together or separating further apart, there is no 
reason for a propagation phenomenon. It can be said that gravitation, 
as a magnetic force, is propagated at the velocity c, but this requires 
motion of the gravitating bodies and is not related to the universal 
motion of space-time. Secondly, note that, if the G frame comprises 
the same magnitude of charge as that of the lattice particles in the E 
frame, it is difficult to understand how the G frame can have the 
same mass density and so have the same orbital radius. These are 
requirements of the balance condition under study. The only answer 
available is to assume that the G frame has some rather heavy ele- 
mentary particles of charge e (positive polarity), sparsely populating 
the G frame, but providing the mass needed for balance. These 



92 



PHYSICS WITHOUT 1 INST HI \ 



particles are termed "gravitons". Their existence is supported by 
abundant evidence to be presented. They are the seal of the reaction 
which causes gravitation. 

Now consider a particle of matter at rest in the £ frame. In Fig. 5.6, 
this particle denoted P is shown with the continuum of positive 
charge streaming past it at velocity c relative to P. Note that we lake 
the lattice particles to be negative. The approach velocity of the 
continuum relative to P is c and the recession velocity is c. but to 
maintain continuity the continuum has to speed up a little in passing 



the particle owing to its effect as an obstruction. This means that the 
integral of the current vector quantity or charge-velocity parameter 
applicable to the continuum is independent of the physical size of the 
particle P. It is like saying that the quantity of gas passing through a 
pipe in unit time can be measured at either end of the pipe without 
worrying about the nature of any partial obstructions en route 
within the pipe. The charge-velocity parameter or current vector is 
what gives rise to electrodynamic action. It therefore follows that 
there is no direct electrodynamic action seated in a particle of matter 
at rest in the electrodynamic reference frame. However, there is an 
indirect effect. Since P is at rest in the £ frame it moves with the 
space-time universal motion about the inertial frame. It needs to be 
balanced. It is balanced by something in the G frame. As already 
indicated, the mass of the G frame is attributed to "gravitons". 
These arc all that is available to accept disturbance due to P and 
provide balance. Their disturbance consists in their contraction 
slightly to become a little heavier. Mass is inversely proportional to 
radius. As is shown in Appendix I, electric energy is inversely pro- 
portional to radius, for any charged particle. Since Mc- applies 
to such energy, mass is an inverse function of the physical radius of a 




i i 



Fig. 5.6 



GRAVITATION 93 

charged particle. Now, if the particle of matter P causes a nearby 
graviton in the (7 frame to alter slightly in size, we do have an 
electrodynamic effect. A current vector parallel with all current 
vectors associated with all other elements of matter is developed. 
The current vector is directly determined by the mass of the matter 
causing it. Consequently, there is a mutual force of electrodynamic 
attraction between regions of space-time containing matter. 
Effectively, there is a mutual force of attraction between all elements 
of matter. This is the force of gravitation. 

The test of this theory is the evaluation of the constant of gravita- 
tion. To proceed in this direction, let dE denote the rest mass energy 
of a particle of matter causing the graviton disturbance. To balance 
this, the graviton has to increase its energy by dE also. From equation 
(6) in Appendix I, the energy of a graviton charge e can be expressed 
as : 

/•.' 2r 3.v (5.10) 

where v is the radius of the graviton. If £ increases by dE, x is reduced 
and there will be a continuum charge increase by the elemental 
volume change Anx-dx times the continuum charge density n. The 
electrodynamic current vector developed by dE is then: 

{67ix^i e 2 )dE (5.11) 

as is found by differentiating (5.10) and substituting dx. Note that, 
since the charge moves at c relative to the electromagnetic reference 
frame, though in its small space-time orbit which does not give rise 
to relativistic mass considerations, the electrostatic charge is equal in 
magnitude to the electrodynamic current vector. 

Using the electrodynamic law developed in Chapter 2, it follows 
that the force of attraction between two spaced mass energy quanti- 
ties like dE is the product of two quantities such as (5.11) divided by 
the square of the separation distance. By analogy with Newton's 
gravitational force, we find that the constant of gravitation G is, 
simply : 

G = {6nx^c^e-f (5.12) 

c has been introduced to convert energy into mass, using E = Mc 2 . 

This equation shows that in order to evaluate the constant of 
gravitation it is necessary to determine the mass of the graviton, and 
so x, as well as the lattice spacing of the E frame, and so a. In short, 



y4 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

G becomes a simple property related to the parameters of the system 
comprising space- time. It is important to note that the gravitons have 
not merely been invented to provide this explanation of gravitation. 
They are the energy source for the creation of matter, and much of 
the analysis in the following pages is concerned with their role in 
creating elementary particles. The mass of the graviton is calculable 
in terms of the mass of the electron. It depends upon the geometry of 
space-time, curiously enough. Tt gives the exact value of G when used 
in (5.12). Further, there is experimental evidence indicating the 
existence of this unusual particle. 

Summary 

The concepts on which wave mechanics were explained in Chapter 
4 have been presented in a manner more dependent upon the physical 
form of space-time. It has been shown that all four quantitative tests 
of the General Theory of Relativity can be explained by this new 
space-time theory. The potential of this new theory in explaining the 
nature of gravitation and evaluating the constant of gravitation has 
been outlined. It remains to analyse space-time rigorously now, in 
order to deduce theoretical values of the fundamental physical 
constants. 



6. Space-time Analysis 



Space time Motion 

From the foregoing account of various physical phenomena it has 
become quite clear that we cannot evade the need to analyse the 
details of space-time structure. The existence of the aether is not a 
matter for speculation. It is subject to straightforward analysis in 
simple and logical terms. What has been presented already serves 
merely to show that we need not be deterred by the presence of 
Einstein's Relativity, by Quantum Theory or Wave Mechanics. The 
aether, or space-time, as it has been termed, can make these various 
theories, or at least the experimental evidence supporting them, fit 
together in one unified structure. Now, guided by the contents of the 
previous chapters, it is necessary to attack the problem of analysing 
this aether. It would, of course, have been more logical to start with 
this analysis, but the author would have perhaps been taxing the 
reader's patience to embark upon such a task without first showing 
where accepted theory is weak and demonstrating some of the poten- 
tial of a new approach. 

To proceed, space-time has been shown to comprise a uniform 
continuum of electric charge permeated by a cubic array of electric 
particles of opposite polarity. Any normal motion of these con- 
stituents of the aether has, at all times, to be parallel or antiparallel. 
This means that motion is harmonious, probably in circular orbits. 
The requirement for the mutually parallel or antiparallel motion 
state comes from the law of electrodynamics presented in Chapter 2. 
With such motion the forces between charges act directly along the 
line of separation. There are no torques in the space -time system. 
Action and reaction must be balanced. Hence this basic motion 
condition. With it comes the condition of universal time, the Hypo- 
thesis of Universal Time introduced in Chapter 4. This is consistent 
with the property of the electrical system by which the positive charge 
is attracted to the negative charge by a force proportional to dis- 
placement. This is the feature of the linear oscillator, the cause of the 
fixed period oscillation of the universal time. It is this condition that 



96 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



force is proportional to displacement which tells us that we are not 
dealing with particles of charge in both of the polarity systems. 
Instead, we note that if a particle of charge is located in a uniform 
continuum of opposite charge, and is displaced from a neutral 
position, it is subject to a restoring force proportional to displace- 
ment. If a lattice array of such charge contained in particle form is 
displaced as a whole from the neutral position, then each particle in 
the array will, in effect, be subject to its own interaction force with the 
continuum. There arc constraints operative to hold the array cubic 
in form, as already explained, but essentially the lattice remains as a 
kind of w hole unit capable of motion as a whole. It may be subject 
to local disturbance in the presence of matter and under the effects 
of electric fields due to matter, but we are speaking of an entity, which 
has properly been termed a frame, the E frame, in previous analysis. 
This means that the lattice particle constituent in space-time is 
formed like the atoms in a crystal and can withstand linear force, 
whereas there is less restraint on the development of spin or rotation 
within the lattice. Note that this is a most important feature. The need 
to balance linear force in the application of Newton's Third Law of 
Motion has misled physicists who cannot admit the aether. Without 
it, there is no complete system, as required by Newton. With it, there 
is a complete system and Newton's law holds. The true law of electro- 
dynamics is then derivable from experimental results, and the 
Trouton-Noble experiment can be utilized to verify the reasoning. 
The aether, or, more properly, the lattice of space-time cannot 
withstand turning forces. The fact that it can turn has been the basis 
of the general account of the photon phenomenon. This is to be 
developed further below to derive Planck's constant. However, in 
connection with photon radiation, it is observed that momentum is 
propagated in quantum form. The lattice of space-time provides the 
rigid structure able to carry this momentum. On the other hand, 
energy is not transported by the photon. Nor is it transported by- 
electromagnetic waxes. Space-time is primed with energy. It takes 
and gives energy in quanta as it accepts and releases momentum 
quanta. Otherwise energy merely diffuses to be uniformly distributed, 
as in a gas communicating thermal energy by diffusion. In such a gas, 
energy released as heat can promote the transmission of a sound w ave 
w ell in advance of the thermal migration of energy. 

Returning to the electrical features of space-time, we note that 
motion is essential to its character. There is a definite displacement 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 



97 



distance between the positive charge and the negative charge. The 
restoring force proportional to this displacement is in balance with 
the centrifugal force of the motion. The ground state, or basic motion 
state, is taken to be that in which the interaction energy between the 
opposite charges is zero. The electrostatic interaction energy would 
be negative for minimum energy conditions. This is ruled out 
because for minimum energy conditions there is no displacement of 
charge needing balance by centrifugal force action. Any motion is 
then random. There would be no basis for saying that time or any- 
thing else had association with universal physical constants. The zero 
energy condition is the most logical state, in the circumstances, at 
least if we consider only the two space-time constituents so far dis- 
cussed in this chapter. Later, we will see that Nature is just a little 
more complicated than this. 

Next, it is necessary to formulate the motion state of the space- 
time charge. Accordingly, let m denote the mass of each lattice 
particle of charge e. Let p denote the mass density of the substance 
providing the balance and moving with the continuum charge, the 
latter being uniform and having a density denoted This is charge 
density, and it is opposite in polarity compared with the lattice 
particle charge. Let x r denote the radius of the orbit of a, that is, 
the orbit of the G' frame, w hereas the particles form the £ frame. Also, 
let Q denote the angular velocity of their motions, as before. Then, 
since the restoring force on charge e is 4noe times displacement 
distance, balance of centrifugal force for both systems gives: 



w here .v is the total displacement, the sum of the radii of the orbital 
motions of the two charge systems. A is the number of lattice par- 
ticles in unit volume. 

Before proceeding with this analysis, it is appropriate to note that 
previously, particularly in Chapter 5, it was assumed that the orbital 
radii of the E and G frames were identical. This remains to be proved. 
In the meantime, consider the following. Take two systems in dynamic 
balance at angular velocity Q. Let their mass densities be /; and //, 
and their orbital velocities r and v'. Then, balance of centrifugal force 
gives : 



Anaex = m Q 2 r 



(6.1) 



NAnoex = pQ'\x - r) 



(6.2) 



pQv — p'Qv' 



(6.3) 



98 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

Angular momentum is: 



(6.4) 



Kinetic energy is: 



^r 2 + Ip'v'i 



(6.5) 



DitTercntiating (6.5), a change in kinetic energy is given by: 

pvdv + p'v'dv' 

From (6.3) and (6.6), the change in kinetic energy is: 

pv(dr + civ') = IpcSc 



(6.7) 



(6.6) 



approximately, if the systems move at velocities approximately 
equal and if the relative velocity between the tw o systems, r ■;- r', is 
c exactly. 

By comparing (6.7) with (5.3), it is seen that the results obtained in 
Chapter 5 do not depend upon maintained equality of the orbital 
radii of the two systems in balance. Only one system need be dis- 
turbed. Also, taking angular momentum given by (6.4) as conserved, 
comparison with (6.5) indicates conservation of kinetic energy. 
How ever, as previously explained, we need take only one of the two 
energy factors. If we assume invariable mass, we can take kinetic- 
energy change and ignore the energy stored in opposing the restoring 
forces, as well as ignoring conservation of angular momentum. If we 
allow variable mass but constant kinetic energy and constant angular 
momentum, we are left with the same result by considering only the 
restoring force energy action. This is pQv times the distance incre- 
ment Sc'Q. It is the same as (6.7), and again does not impose any 
condition that both system radii should change together. 

The whole point of this analysis is to show that the findings in 
Chapter 5 can be retained even though we specify that only the lattice 
particle system is disturbed by energy storage due to field action and 
matter. It allows the assumption that the charge density o remains 
always uniform. Any distortion of the motion state of a resulting in 
a change of radius of motion in one region compared with that in 
another would require a variable a. This is precluded in the whole of 
this analysis. It is a firm assumption that the radius of the orbit of 
the continuum charge is fixed. It is assumed that velocity in this orbit 
is c/2. This is a matter for later proof. 



SP ACF. TI ME ANALYSIS 



99 



Electromagnetic Wave Propagation 

The particle lattice is the E frame of space-time. It is the electro- 
magnetic reference frame. It is now necessary to show how disturb- 
ances are propagated at finite speed relative to this frame. 

To proceed, the fundamental harmonious motion of space-time 
in its undisturbed state is ignored. Any forces needed to sustain such 
motion in the inertial frame are deemed to be present, but they are 
ignored because the analysis will consider only effects relative to the 
E frame. Then, we may follow the usual line of argument in electro- 
magnetic theory. First, the force on an electric charge e is the 
product of e and what is termed the electric displacement of other 
charges present. Denoting this displacement D, the force on the 
element is: 

F = AneD (6.8) 

The quantity An is introduced to keep the units right. Secondly, from 
the inverse square law of force between electric charge, Coulomb's 
law, the charge density a of a system of charge giving rise to D may 
be evaluated from the relationship: 

div£> = (7 (6.9) 

This expression div D is the divergence of the vector quantity D, 
since it represents the rate at which D changes with distance. Thus, if 
the charge e is initially at rest in a neutral position and is unrestrained 
against the action of the charge forming a, a displacement of e 
through a distance x will cause D to become <t.y, from (6.9). The 
restoring force acting on e will then be, from (6.8): 

F = 4neax (6.10) 

This explains the basis of (6.1). 

If a quantity H is defined by an equation of the form: 

\Hds = An\CdS (6.11) 

where the integral of H is taken around the boundary s of the surface 
area 5 over which the integral of the quantity C is taken, and C 
denotes the electric charge conveyed through unit area of .S' and 
normal to it in unit time, an observation by Faraday may be formu- 
lated thus: 

H 



100 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



Dds 



4nc 2 dt 



1 d 




(6.12) 



Here, D is the component of electric displacement parallel to ds. The 
quantity c is a constant having the dimensions of velocity. It is the 
ratio of electromagnetic and electrostatic units, since // is magnetic 
field . In the above equation / denotes time. 

Equations (6.1 1 ) and (6.12) may be written in the forms: 



These equations represent Faraday's laws of induction. The motion 
of electric charge is shown, by these equations, to induce electric 
displacement elsewhere. The quantity H establishes the coupling in 
this process. It arises from the action of electric charge in motion. 
What H is, physically, is not explained by this conventional treatment. 
In the early chapters it has been suggested that the magnetic field // 
is a condition in which energy priming space-time, probably, as we 
have just seen, in a form of stored energy linked with the restoring 
action between the E and G frames, is deployed into a dynamic- 
electric field energy associated with moving charge. 

Now, the process of producing a magnetic field does not imply the 
radiation of electromagnetic waves. Faraday's analysis applies to the 
reversible energy exchange conditions we associate with magnetic 
phenomena in dynamo-electric machines and transformers. Historic- 
ally, equations (6.13) and (6.14) were found to be inadequate if 
applied to current flow in an open circuit. Thus, a circuit which 
includes a capacitor undergoing discharge has current flow in which 
the charge does not traverse the open part of the circuit between the 
capacitor plates. To overcome this problem, Maxwell recognized 
that there could be a motion of charge in the aether. Such charge 
could give rise to a displacement current. Then, the expression C is 
enlaced by C - dD\dt to produce the equations: 



47rC = curl // 



(6.13) 



Ane- dt 



curl D 



(6.14) 




(6.15) 



-dH:dt - 4nc 2 cur\ D 



(6.16) 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 101 

The term dDjdt introduces the electrical character of the aether and 
allows these equations to be used to account for the observed 
electromagnetic wave propagation phenomena of the aether medium. 

In the absence of the effect C, that is, well away from an electric 
source, the equations can be put in the form : 

dVjcIt^c cuv\ H (6.17) 

-dH\dt = c curl V (6.18) 

provided we put Vas4nD, and put // as a quantity in electromagnetic 
units rather than electrostatic units, by dividing by c. The quantity V 
is electric field intensity. 

In a plane wave propagation, both V and // are constant in 
magnitude and direction in a plane normal to the direction of 
propagation. Taking co-ordinates .v, r, z at right angles and assuming 
propagation in the .v direction, equations (6.17) and (6.18) give: 

d\„ dt (dll : dx)c (6.19) 

-dH z \dt^{dVy\dx)c (6.20) 

There is also a pair of similar equations relating V z and //„, the 
electric field intensity in the z direction and the magnetic field inten- 
sity in the y direction, respectively. Derivatives of the fields in the 
y and z directions are zero in view of the constancy applicable to the 
plane wave. 

The combination of (6.19) and (6.20) to eliminate H : . for example, 
produces : 

d*V y ]d£ = {c£Vy\dxt)c± (6.21) 

The general solution of this may be written as: 

V,, ,/,(.v ct) - ./ol.v • ct) (6.22) 

where /i and /■> are functions of the single arguments v ct and 
x + ct, respectively. Then, assuming that the wave disturbance 
moving in the direction of x increasing, it is only the solution in .v - ct 
which needs to be considered. This solution indicates that the electric- 
field intensity in the y direction is constant if measured at a position 
which advances in the .v direction at the velocity c. The velocity of 
wave propagation is c. 

This does not mean that whatever it is that forms the field is 
advancing too. The solution shows that, if a detector travelled at 



1 02 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

velocity c in the x direction, the field intensity would appear constant, 
whereas, if the detector remained at rest, the field intensity would 
vary in dependence upon the nature of the wave disturbance. 

Now, this theory according to Maxwell, based as it is upon 
Faraday's observations, explains how it is that electromagnetic 
waves are propagated at the velocity c, which is also a parameter we 
find relates electromagnetic and electrostatic units. As is well known, 
c can be measured in the laboratory without even examining any 
propagation phenomena. The theory does not explain the mechanics 
of the aether which give rise to the phenomenon of finite velocity- 
wave propagation. Maxwell's theory is really empirical. It involves a 
displacement current concept, and it is accepted, even though physi- 
cists are reluctant to assign charge in the aether as the source 
providing the displacement current. In the author's interpretation 
under review, charge in space-time has been specified. Now, we will 
proceed to derive the disturbance propagation velocity of the /: 
frame lattice of this space-time medium. The parameter c relating 
electromagnetic and electrostatic units will be shown to equal this 
propagation velocity. Maxwell's equations will be used, though it 
will be sought to interpret them to provide physical insight into the 
nature of the displacement current. 

Initially, the following analysis uses the accepted principles of 
electron theory. Remember that the analysis is with respect to the 
electromagnetic reference frame. The medium under analysis is, 
typically, a system of A' electrons per unit volume. The electrons 
have charge e and mass m, and are all subject to a similar restraining 
force proportional to displacement distance, denoted k\\ where A is the 
force rate and y is distance. The equation of motion of the electron is : 

m(d 2 y!dfi) + ky ~eV }J =0 (6.23 ) 

Here, V y is the electric field intensity in the v direction. It is given by: 

V y =V 0]l -AnNey (6.24) 
Von is the component of electric field intensity due to charge displace- 
ment in the aether. These two equations have the following solutions 
for V y and r: 

( k -p-m ) 



e 

k p-m rAnNe- 



SPACE TIME ANALYSIS 



103 



p is the angular velocity of a simple periodic disturbance imposed 
upon the system. To eliminate A, it is convenient to put: 

k=po 2 m (6.27) 

noting that p is the angular velocity of a free vibration of the 
electron, that is, one for which V y is zero. 

From (6.19), as modified to cater for the motion of electron charge, 
by reference to (6.15): 

AnNeidy'jdt) + dV y ldt = - (dHrdx)e (6.28) 

Hence, from (6.24) and (6.28): 

dtdx dt 1 v 

From this and the differential of (6.20) with respect to ,v: 

d 2 V oy klt- = c 2 (d 2 \\, dx-) (6.30) 

By analogy with (6.21), it may then be shown that, since V y and V„ y 
are proportional, the propagation velocity of the electron medium is: 

c\/{Vy!V oy ) (6.31) 

From (6.25) and (6.27), this velocity, denoted i\ may be written as: 

r < \ LI (1 t^)] (6.32) 

where <p is given as: 

<p = 4nNe'jm(po" - p 1 ) (6.33) 

This is a formula used in electron theory to determine the refractive 
index of a medium in terms of the electron systems in its crystalline 
atomic structure. If no electrical matter is present, the propagation 
velocity v becomes c because <p is zero. If a plurality of different 
electrical systems exists, then <p becomes a summation of a series of 
terms like (6.33). 

If, now, we analyse the space-time system itself on the assumption 
that it contains electrical systems reacting to disturbances just as the 
electron system described, we see that the unity term in the denomin- 
ator of (6.32) may itself have the form of (6.33) or be a summation 
of such terms. To be unity, there must be no dependence upon 
propagation frequency. Thus, p must be very small compared with 
p . Earlier in this chapter, it was argued that the G frame moved in a 



104 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

fixed orbit. This was consistent with the charge density a remaining 
uniform. Wave disturbance, therefore, no doubt involves displace- 
ment of the particle lattice. This lattice sets the £ frame by its ground 
state, its undisturbed state. If it is displaced, each particle of charge 
e will be subject to a restoring force towards its ground position in 
the E frame. This force will be 4nae times the separation distance, 
making this term the rate k applicable in (6.27). Thus, for the 
lattice particle of mass m : 

4nae=p 2 m (6.34) 

Since Ne becomes a, in the sense of this equation, it is seen how <p 
becomes unity in (6.33) when p is negligible. Thus, the theory of 
space-time presented will explain why the velocity of electromagnetic 
waves in free space is the parameter c relating electromagnetic and 
electrostatic units. It is to be noted that p is not equal to Q in (6.1 ). 

The above account explains why electromagnetic waves are pro- 
pagated by the space-time lattice at the velocity c. It is important, 
however, to note that this wave propagation cannot be connected 
with the electrodynamic interaction of gravitation. Electromagnetic 
waves are attenuated in inverse proportion to distance from their 
source. Gravitation is an inverse-square-of-distance phenomenon. 
We are not, therefore, concerned with the problem of wave propaga • 
tion by the space-time particle lattice, when we analyse effects at 
frequencies of the order of Q. Propagation at such high frequencies 
involves another mechanism. This is the mechanism by which 
disturbances are propagated through the medium separating the 
lattice particles. 

In Chapter 1 the effect of accelerating an electric charge was 
considered on the basis that a wave disturbance was radiated from 
the surface of the electric charge at the propagation velocity c. In 
Appendix I it is shown, by equation (4), that the pressure P within 
an electric charge e is given by: 

P = e 1 \W (6.35) 

where b is the radius of the charge, assumed spherical. If this applies 
to the lattice particles forming the E frame of space-time, there is 
the conclusion that a pressure P given by (6.35) pervades space. It is 
this pressure which holds the lattice particle charges, all quantized 
at e, together in their discrete quanta, and ensures that all the 
particles have the same mass. Now, whatever this substance might be, 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 105 

if it exerts a pressure it must contain energy. Since energy is con- 
served, we may write: 

Energy density times volume = constant (6.36) 

If the substance is nothing but mere energy, and the substance is 
primordial, it cannot be considered as a gas or fluid. It cannot store 
more energy, nor can it be considered as expanding adiabatically or 
isothermally. Nevertheless, it can be displaced to fill voids in space. 
It can expand, if it has space to move into. Let us suppose that there 
is a pressure P urging the energy into motion at a limiting velocity r. 
Then, in unit time the energy flowing across unit area will be r times 
the energy's mass density. The rate of change of momentum will be 
v- times the mass of the energy density. Since this is across unit area, 
it is the pressure P. Thus, if energy is mass times c-, as shown in 
Chapter 1, where c is the propagation velocity of disturbance in this 
medium, the energy density is c 2 P/v~. Thus (6.36) becomes: 

Pressure times volume = (r'c) 2 times a constant (6.37) 

From the theory of sound propagation in a gas satisfying this 
relationship, assuming vjc is a constant also, the disturbance pro- 
pagation velocity is given by: 

i-o \ (P po) (6.38) 

where p is the mass density of the medium. But /;,/•- is c-Pr-. 
Therefore, v is the velocity v. Also, v is c, since all three of these 
velocities are propagation velocities of disturbances in the medium. 

It is concluded that the space surrounding the lattice particles is 
filled with energy, the density of which is equal to the pressure given 
by (6.35). A lattice particle has a volume 4nb 3 i3. From (6.35), it 
displaces energy of e 2 /3b. This energy has the effect of giving buoy- 
ancy to the lattice particle. It is exactly half the mass energy of the 
particle, from equation (6) in Appendix I, and so, the effective mass 
of the lattice particle is given by: 

m = e i j3bc- (6.39) 

This is a most important result. In the following analysis all other 
charged particles are taken to have a mass given according to 
equation (6) of Appendix I. The reason is that we will find that the 
lattice particle m is the lightest of all particles. The electron is about 
twenty-five times heavier and since it displaces about 1/1,840 of the 



106 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



volume displaced by the lattice particle any correction for the 
buoyancy effect is quite negligible. For heavier particles the effect is 
even smaller. 

At this stage, it has been shown that the space-time system will 
sustain propagation of disturbances at the velocity c. Electromagnetic 
waves are carried by the lattice constituent of space-time. Electric 
field propagation at the velocity c occurs in the medium which 
surrounds the lattice particles and provides the pressure holding them 
in balance. It is this mechanism which operates according to the 
inverse-square-of-distance law. The action of this electric field 
disturbance is converted by lattice reaction into the Maxwell-type 
waves, which are onwardly propagated according to the direct- 
inverse-of-distance law. Lattice reaction is also effective in generating 
any standing magnetic fields. 

Balance in Space-time 

We are now ready to consider the dynamic balance in space-time. 
The lattice particle system and the G frame are in balance. Thus, we 
may equate the right-hand sides of (6.1) and (6.2): 



after allowing for the factor N. 

In view of the common angular velocity, the kinetic energy of unit 
volume of these constituents of space-time is proportional to: 



From (6.40), this is proportional to Nm rx or px{x -/•). Now, kinetic 
energy tends to increase in a dynamic system, just as potential energy 
tends to decrease. The latter condition fixes x, the total separation 
distance between the charged systems involved. We take p as fixed, 
as reference. Then, if p is greater than or equal to Nm„. from (6.40) 
2r is greater than or equal to x. The maximum kinetic energy term is 
then px(x-r), but the limit condition for r makes /• equal to v 2. If 
Nm is greater than p or equal to it, from (6.40) 2r is less than or 
equal to x. The maximum kinetic energy term to use is A'w /\\\ but 
the limit condition then gives r equal to a/2, as before. It follows that 
A' must equal 2r, for the normal undisturbed state of space-time. This 
then makes the mass densities of the G frame and the lattice particle 
frame equal, as assumed in the early chapters. 



Nm r = p(x - /') 



(6.40) 



Nm r 2 +p{x -/•)'- 



(6.41) 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 



107 



Since the charge continuum which moves with the G frame is 
deemed to have the velocity c relative to the £ frame, to account for 
its uniform dispersion, the fact that the E and G frames move in the 
same orbit of radius r means that both move at velocity r/2. 

From (6.1), putting x as 2r, and Q as c\2r: 

m c 2 = 32naer 2 (6.42) 
Since space-time is electrically neutral, if d is the lattice spacing: 

e = ad 3 (6.43) 

From (6.42) and (6.43) : 

m c z - 32tt(/-/ dfe 2 jd (6.44) 

The evaluation of r\d is the prime task at this stage. It is readily 
found because, neglecting for a moment the space polarization 
energy y/ (mentioned at the end of Chapter 4), we know that the 
spacing between the charges e and a corresponds to zero electro- 
static interaction energy. 

The equation of electrostatic energy in space-time, neglecting the 
self-energy of any particles, is: 

E = T J_e 2 l2x - ^(ea/x)dV + ^{o 2 ;2x)dVd\ (6.45) 

The factors 2 in the denominators are introduced because each 
interaction is counted twice in the summation or integration. The 
summations and integrations extend over the whole volume V of the 
space-time system, x denotes distance between charge. The inter- 
particle lattice distance d is taken to be unity, as is the dielectric 
constant. 

Differentiation with respect to a allows us to set a so that E is a 
minimum. This minimum not only depends upon a condition almost 
exactly expressed by (6.43), but also depends upon the separation 
distance between the frames of e and a. 

The differentiation and equation to zero gives: 

2\{eojx)d V = \\{a 2 !x)d VdV (6.46) 
From (6.45) and (6.46): 

/: ^lie l '2x - ^\{ca 2 vk/C (6.47) 



108 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

This is zero, according to our set condition. To proceed, we will 
evaluate: 

$(eajx)dV-ye 9 -lx (6.48) 

as it would apply if the charge e were at the rest position. The 
calculation involves three stages. 

Stage 1: The evaluation of^e 2 jx between one particle and the other 
particles. 

Regarding d as unit distance, the co-ordinates of all surrounding 
particles in a cubic lattice are given by /, m, n, where /, m. n may have 
any value in the series 0, ±1, + 2, ±3, ±4, etc but the co- 
ordinate 0, 0, must be excluded. Consider successive concentric 
cubic shells of surrounding particles. The first shell has 3 3 - 1 particles, 
the second 5 3 - 3 3 , the third 7 3 - 5 3 , etc. Any shell is formed by a 
combination of particles such that, if z is the order of the shell, at 
least one of the co-ordinates /, m, n is equal to z and this value is 
equal to or greater than that of either of the other two co-ordinates. 
On this basis, it is a simple matter to evaluate He 2 /.\- or (e-ld) 
2(/ 2 + m 2 + /i 2 )-i as it applies to any shell. It is straightforward 
arithmetic to verify the following evaluations of this summation. 
S z denotes the summation as applied to the z shell. 

Si = 19-10408 

So = 38 -083 13 
5 3 = 57-12236 
S 4 = 76 -16268 
S- = 95-20320 

By way of example, S 2 is the sum of the terms: 

J_ 24_ , _24 12 24 8 
y'4 + V5 + \ '6 "\ 8 ' \ 9 ' \ 12 

Here, 6 + 24+24 + 12+24+8 is equal to 5 3 -3 3 . 

Stage 2: The evaluation of components of \(ea;x)dV corresponding 
to the quantities S z . 
The limits of a range of integration corresponding with the z shell 
lie between ±(z-\\ ±(z-l), +(z-l) and +(r + .\), : (z ■ .1). 
i(r + A). An integral of eaix over these limits is denoted ead 2 /,. The 
expression I z may be shown to be: 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 



109 



f z =2Az [ sinh 1 (1 \ v-) dy 

J 

Upon integration: 

/,-24z(cosh- 1 2-71/6) 

Upon evaluation : 

= 19-0406 19058z (6.49) 

Within the h shell there is a component l for which z in (6.49) is 
effectively 1/8. Thus: 

h = 2-380077382 (6.50; 

Stage 3: Correction for finite lattice particle size. 

The lattice particles have a finite size. They occupy only a small 
part of the unit volume under study, but we are dealing with the 
fundamental constants of space-time and the analysis has to be taken 
as far as is reasonable. 

Equation (6.43) is not strictly true if we allow for the finite volume 
of the charge e. However, for the purpose of the analysis in stages 
1 and 2 it is easier to define e so that it satisfies (6.43). In effect, e is 
made e + oV, where V is here the volume of the charge e. Allowing 
for this, the particles can be taken as point charges, except for the 
one at the origin of co-ordinates. Here, we must avoid including inter- 
action energy on the assumption that it is generated within the particle 
volume. The correction term to be subtracted from I is: 

b 

Anaexdx 

o 

where b is the radius of the particle. This is: 

2n(h:d) 2 (e 2 jd) (6.51) 

From (6.39) and (6.44): 

bicl = (diryj967t (6.52) 

Thus, in the units of e 2 ;d, the correction, found from (6.51) and 
(6.52), is: 

(<//r) 4 /46087r (6.53) 

Now, these three sets of results can be combined to complete the 
evaluation of (6.48). To relate (6.48) with (6.47), note that the two 



1 10 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTF.IN 



systems of opposite charge have been displaced relative to one 
another through the distance 2r from the rest position. For each 
charge e, this involves increasing the electrostatic energy by Anaexdx, 
integrated from to 2r. This is: 



The difference between the two summations in this expression is 
readily calculated by comparing (6.49) with the table of values of S z . 
The S terms are all slightly greater than the / terms, but the difference 
converges according to the following series. It starts with the differ- 
ence between Si and I\. 

-06346 + -00 1 89 + 0-00050 -t- -00020 + -000 1 ... 

To sum the series, note that the difference terms converge inversely 
as the cube of z. The matching convergent series, from z of 3 on- 
wards, is: 



This sums to 0-00105. However, note that above we have been deal- 
ing with the differences in large terms. Even this matching con- 
vergent series may be a little high-valued. Possibly a sum of 0-00100 
would be more appropriate. To proceed, it seems better to round off 
this estimate of the sum of leTms for z of 3 and above at 0-0010. and 
avoid taking the calculation through further digits. Then, collecting 
these data with (6.50), gives: 



Putting this in (6.54) and remembering that E is zero, if space-time 
has no priming energy <//, we obtain an equation in r;d which can be 
solved by ordinary numerical methods. It is found that: 



%ix(rer 2 



or, in the units of e- { d being used: 

%n{r\df 

The value of E given by (6.47) may now be written as: 

E - %n(rldf - 1 + (<//>) V4608ti - %h + 2S Z 



(6.54) 




or: 



0-00050 +0-00021 +0-00011 +0-00006 ... 



I<> + If* ~ !S Z = 2-380 1 - 0-0663 =2-3138 



r\d = 0-30289 



(6.55) 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 



111 



Space Polarization Energy 

If space has a polarization energy y/ per unit volume c/ 3 , and /// is 
expressed as y/ units of e 2 /d, this becomes equal to the expression in 
(6.54). E is then not zero. Provided yj is small, it may then be shown 
that rUi is increased thus: 

/■/r/ = 0-30289 + 0-0657y/ (6.56) 

At this stage, we could proceed by assuming that i// is zero. Then, 
the basic constant of space-time, this factor rjd, would be used 
extensively but would only be approximate. Eventually, our analysis 
will take us to an evaluation of yj in terms of quantities deduced from 
r',d. Then, a better value of r',d can be obtained and the whole process 
repeated until exact results emerge. In the interests of keeping this 
analysis as simple as possible, the author proposes to introduce the 
value of yj at this stage without proof. Later, it will be derived. It will 
be shown to be given by: 

i// =0-000456 (6.57) 

measured in units of e 2 Ul per unit volume d [] of the lattice. Hence, 
(6.56) becomes: 

r\d = 0-30292 (6.58) 

As is seen, the correction is very small. It demonstrates the very 
stringent accuracy demanded from this theory. 

Derivation of Planck's Constant 

In Chapter 4 a cubic lattice unit, termed a photon unit, was 
assumed to be in rotation to develop a pulsating disturbance in 
atomic systems. Compensation of these pulsations by the motion of 
an electron was the basis of the Schrodinger Equation. Our next 
objective is to determine the exact nature of this cubic lattice. Indeed, 
we will seek to explain why it is cubic in form and why it exists at all. 

Rotation of the lattice, meaning rotation of a group of particles 
w hich tend to stay in their relative positions, is a possibility. If energy 
has to be stored in quanta and two such units can have balanced 
angular momentum by their counter-rotation, it is likely that this 
can happen. At any rate, it is the assumption which has proved of 



112 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

such value in deriving a physical understanding of wave mechanics 
in Chapter 4. Also, it is this assumption which sustains the analysis 
of the magnetic spin moments in the next chapter. Now, to deter- 
mine the size of the photon unit, we will, only for the moment, make 
the assumption that there has to be symmetry in three dimensions. 
This will be proved below. Next, we will assume that the photon unit 
is as small as possible. To support this assumption, remember from 
equation (4. 18) that the electron which exchanges angular momentum 
with the photon unit moves at radius 2r about the centre of the unit. 
From (6.58), 2r is only 0-6 d. Thus, for the photon lattice unit to 
remain a rigid grouping of particles having a lattice spacing d, the 
unit must necessarily be the smallest possible. Otherwise the changes 
in angular velocity of the electron at radius 2r would cause sub- 
groups of lattice particles to rotate within the main unit. The radius of 
gyration of the unit, being equal to or greater than d, has to exceed 
0-6 d, but it really should be as near a match as is possible. This 
makes the determination of the true size of the photon unit a rela- 
tively simple task. The smallest unit is one having three-dimensional 
symmetry matching the two dimensional form shown in Fig. 6.1. 
The next smallest unit is a 3 by 3 by 3 array of particles as depicted 
in Fig. 6.2. The circle in Fig. 6.1 denotes the boundary of a sphere 




containing the charge belonging to the continuum, of charge density 
a. This rotates with the lattice unit and is of such size as to compen- 
sate its magnetic moment due to rotation relative to the E frame. A 
similar sphere of continuum charge contains the array in Fig. 6.2. 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 



113 




Fig. 6.2 



It is not shown. Note that, since the electrostatic interaction energy in 
space-time is virtually zero, there is no problem about any angular 
momentum due to such interaction energy. This is provided the lattice 
and the continuum rotate together. The absence of such angular 
momentum is probably a more basic feature of the system than any 
need to balance magnetic moment. Magnetic moment will be 
balanced, except transiently, but angular momentum is always 
conserved. This argument really amounts to saying that the only 
angular momentum possessed by a rotating photon unit is that due 
to the intrinsic mass of the lattice particles. In effect, however, from 
an expression such as (6.45) one could say that there are three other 
angular momentum quantities present but they are mutually com- 
pensating. The interaction energy between the particles adds a 
positive angular momentum. The self-energy of the spherical 
continuum charge adds a positive angular momentum. The mutual 
electrostatic energy between the particles and the sphere of con- 
tinuum is negative and provides the negative angular momentum in 
the balance. This is important if we explore the problem of the 
changes of rotation speeds. If the lattice changes its angular velocity 
by some interaction with the electron, how does the continuum pick 
up the same angular velocity? If the action is by direct contact, is 
there a time delay ? If it is indirect and operates by magnetic moment 
balance, is there not then a time delay because of energy transfers 
with the field medium? Assuming some delay in the process, it is 
suggested that the preferred photon system should have the best 
intrinsic ability to conserve its angular momentum transiently when 
the lattice angular velocity slips relative to that of the continuum 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



sphere. What this means is that if the photon lattice rotates and the 
continuum sphere does not, then the angular momentum is about 
the same as it would be if the continuum sphere rotated at the same 
speed and the lattice did not rotate. Tn either case, interaction ener- 
gies are ignored. This applies even between the particles in the 
rotating lattice because it is matched by some negative interaction 
energy, and though this latter energy may not be rotating at the same 
speed it will mitigate to some extent. Our analysis is not rigid here, 
anyway. The object is to find out which photon unit Nature has 
chosen, and, as indicated by the comments on radius of gyration, it 
is a small unit, the likely choice being restricted to those shown in 
Fig. 6.1 or 6.2 

Let Nd 3 be the spherical volume of continuum. The charge corres- 
ponding to this is Ne. The electrostatic energy of such a sphere of 
uniform charge is 3N 2 e 2 j5x, where x is the radius of the sphere. The 
mass of such a sphere is found by dividing by c-. Then, the moment 
of inertia calculation becomes a problem, because we have to work 
out where the mass is distributed, and guess how this mass distribu- 
tion might move as the charge rotates. To avoid this, let us just 
suppose that the total mass is about the same as that of the lattice 
particles encompassed by the sphere, or, more logically, the mass of 
the number of particles having the compensating charge. In other 
words, we equate the mass calculated above to Nm . 

From the above and (6.44): 

Nnioc 2 - 32n(rjd) 2 Ne 2 ;d = 3N 2 e 2 j5x 

Thus : 

N = \60n(rld) 2 xl3d 

Since Nd' A is 47r.\- :! /3, we can find N. (6.58) is used to replace rjd. N is 
29-5. 

This suggests that the system shown in Fig. 6.2, which has twenty- 
seven lattice particles, is more likely to exist than the one containing 
seven particles presented in Fig. 6.1. It also rules out larger photon 
units, which are unlikely anyway if they have to interact with the 
electron moving at radius 0-6 d. 

The very simple cubic 3 by 3 by 3 lattice is thus argued to be the 
fundamental photon unit introduced in Chapter 4. Below, it will be 
shown that three-dimensional symmetry as assumed above is a 
necessary condition for the moment of inertia of a photon lattice to 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 115 

be independent of the direction of the axis of rotation of the unit. 
This is consistent with the need to have photon radiation in any 
direction independent of the lattice orientation of general space- 
time. Before proving this, we will evaluate Planck's Constant. 

The moment of inertia of the photon lattice, when considered to 
rotate about an axis through the centre and parallel with a cube 
direction, is 36w c/ 2 . There are twelve particles distant d and twelve 
distant y'2 d from this axis. Since the standard photon unit, that is 
one rotating to produce pulsations at the universal frequency of 
space-time, has an angular momentum of h\2n as shown in Chapter 
4, we know that the moment of inertia of the photon unit must be 
h'lln divided by one quarter of c\2r. Thus, there is a relationship 
between m d- and h: 

36m d 2 = 4hrlcTz (6.59) 
From this and (6.44), we eliminate m and obtain: 

he 

2j^2= ]44n r i (l (6.60) 

From this and (6.58) : 

2^ = 137-038 (6.61) 

This is the reciprocal of the fine structure constant. It is exactly the 
value measured. Hence, this theory has led us to an evaluation of 
Planck's constant in terms of the charge of the electron and the 
velocity of light. 

We will now prove that the moment of inertia of the photon unit is 
independent of the axis about which it spins. 

Consider co-ordinates referenced on the centre of the unit. Imagine 
a particle with co-ordinates x, y, z distant p from the origin. Take 
spin about the x axis. The moment of the particle about this axis is 
v 2 rz 2 . This is p 2 -x 2 . Now take spin about an axis inclined at an 
angle 6 with the x axis. The moment about this new axis is p- sin- 0, 
or p 2 -p 2 cos 2 0. Let /, m, n denote the direction cosines of this new 
axis of spin, relative to the x, y, z axes. Then, the moment about the 
new axis, found from the direction cosine formula for cos 0, is: 

p 2 -{lx vmy +nz) 2 



If now we apply this to a group of particles having three-dimensional 



116 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



symmetry, there is a particle w ith co-ordinate -.y for every one with 
co-ordinate -> .y. Thus, cross-multiples of .v, v and z cancel. The above 
expression then becomes a summation, thus: 

Cubic symmetry means that it does not matter if x, v and z are inter- 
changed. Consequently, their summations must be equal. Then, since 
the sum of the squares of direction cosines /, m and n is unity, we find 
that the expression becomes the summation of p- - ■ x 2 for all particles 
in the group. This is independent of the direction of the axis of spin. 

Electron Mass 

From Chapter 4, when the electron moves at radius 2r its moment 
of inertia in its orbit is equal to that of the photon unit. Hence 
m{2r) 2 is equal to 36m d 2 . 
From this: 

m/ra = 9<7' 2 /4/-'- (6.62) 

From (6.58) we then have: 

m\m = 24-52 (6.63) 

This is a fundamental relation between the mass m of the electron 
and the mass m of the lattice particle of space-time. The lattice 
particle thus has a mass of about 3-7 10~ 2a gm. Such particles may 
have been observed in experimental work, but they have probably 
been passed by on the assumption that they are "holes". For ex- 
ample, Gait (1961) in a paper on cyclotron resonance presents data 
of measured pow er absorption coefficients in bismuth. A small peak 
occurred in his measurements at different frequencies and in pro- 
portion to magnetic field strength. At 24,000 Mc sec. the peak 
appears between 600 and 700 oersted. This corresponds to a mass of 
He 2njc, where we assume the electron charge e, the field is // and f 
is the frequency. The data give a value of mass of about 7 10~ 29 gm. 
He stated that this was due to the presence of holes. It is double the 
mass we have deduced for the lattice particle. Yet, if this can be 
passed by as a mere hole then perhaps direct evidence of such a 
particle has been overlooked. On the other hand, it may well be that 
the basic particle of space-time eludes any direct measurement 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 117 

inasmuch as it may perform a role of reference itself. Its disturbance 
when in a lattice characterizes a magnetic held. Hence, it may meld 
into that field and defy detection. 

It is of interest to calculate the mass density of the space-time 
lattice. From (4.1) we know that /• is 1-93 10 u cm. From (6.58). d 
then becomes 6-37 10~ n cm. This means that there are 3-87 10 :i0 
lattice particles per cc. From (6.63) this is equivalent to the mass of 
1 -58 10- 9 electrons or 144 gm/cc. This is almost exactly that expected 
from the analysis of Mercury's anomalous perihelion motion in the 
previous chapter. 

It is also worthy of note that if d had come out to be ten times 
larger than predicted above, the electron population of heavy atoms 
would have precluded photon formation as described. The photon 
units of about 10" 10 cm radius are a perfect dimension on the basis 
of known atomic sizes. If c/were one-tenth that found, it is not poss- 
ible to accept the angular momentum exchange between the photon 
unit and the electron while retaining the electron appropriately 
quantized. Quantitatively, the predicted dimensions of space -time 
seem to be in perfect accord with what one might term one's sense of 
things. Some theories lead to quantities which are so far removed 
from those experienced that it is difficult to accept them on this 
account alone. This theory has indicated the existence of a particle 
which is 0-0408 times the mass of the electron. Next, we will examine 
the other particle, already mentioned. This is the graviton. It will be 
seen to have a mass w hich is just right in that it is a little greater than 
the masses of the basic nucleons. Indeed, the basic principle we are 
approaching is that space-time comprises a heavy particle form and 
a light particle form and all matter exists as a kind of transient 
between these two forms as space-time expands and allows the spor- 
adic degeneration of the heavy particles. 

The Muon 

In presenting equation (6.38) we introduced the density p„ of the 
energy medium surrounding the lattice particles and keeping the 
pressure balance effectively binding the charge e of each particle. 
For each lattice particle the quantum of energy in the medium is the 
pressure P multiplied by the volume d' 3 - 4n/r\3. This is the unit 
volume of the lattice less that occupied by one particle. From (6.35), 
the energy quantum is: 



118 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



e 2 d 3 j47ib^e 2 l3b (6.64) 

Now, if K denotes the volume of the medium per lattice particle as a 
ratio to that of the particle, from (6.39) we see that the energy 
quantum just derived is: 

Km c- (6.65) 

To evaluate K, note that (6.44) applies for point charges e. The 
equation (6.43) really should be: 

e = KacPi(K i 1) (6.66) 

if e is true charge of finite size. Also, since a cannot exert force on 
itself owing to its balance of magnetic and electrostatic force, the 
finite size of the particle has no effect upon (6.42). The "hole" in a 
filled by e does not develop a force component. This means that 
(6.44) should be increased by the factor (K r 1)/A'. Then, from this 
and (6.39): 

<//> 96~(r (l)-(K 1 ) A (6.67) 

But, A' is 3d 3 j47:/r i - 1, so we can use (6.67) to evaluate A', bearing in 
mind that r\d is known from (6.58). It is found that K is 5062-0. From 
(6.63) and this result, the value of the energy quantum under study 
can be evaluated as 206-4 electron energy units. This happens to be 
the same energy as is possessed by the muon. This meson has a mass 
some 206-7 times that of the electron. 

What this means is that if something happens in space-time to 
cause a charge e, concentrated in a very small and therefore heavy 
particle, to expand to become part of the charge o filling space 
around the lattice particles, then it must deploy the energy of the 
muon to provide the energy of the added medium around the particles 
of the lattice. If space is full, ruling out the general expansion 
process, the lattice particles must share in a transient compaction. 
This involves displacement against the same pressure P of space- 
time and, accordingly, the energy of another muon is stored transi- 
ently on the lattice particles. This brings us into a line of thought 
which imagines a heavy source particle able to release its energy by 
creating pairs of muons and providing energy quanta which are 
somehow determined by (a) energy balance, (b) angular momentum 
conservation, and (c) space conservation. One is led into speculations 
such as, what is the total mass of electrons and positrons which 



SPACF-TIME ANALYSIS 119 

jointly share a volume equal to that of the lattice particle? From 
(6.39) and the fact that the electron satisfies equation (6) of Appendix 
I, the answer is the volume ratio (mjlrnuf. From (6.63) this is 1,843. 
We have a mass quantity only slightly greater than that of the proton 
or neutron. Then, one can speculate on an energy balance equation 
such as: 

xg = 2y (muon) + 2xX+y: Y (6.68) 

where x and y are integers and z is either zero or becomes unity if 
X is 1,843. g is the mass of the source particle in electron mass units 
and the muon quantity is the mass quantum 206 deduced above. 
When z is zero X is the size of a particle form produced as a by- 
product of the reaction. Otherwise, Y is the particle by-product. 
This is all empirical analysis, but it so happens that there is a value of 
g which gives the results tabulated below. 



X 


V 




X 


Y 


Particle 


1 


1 





2,326 




X' = 2,326 


1 


1 


1 


1,843 


965 




1 


2 


1 


1,843 


276 


tt = 276 


2 


1 


1 


1 ,843 


2,342 


£ =2,342 



The stated masses of the particles are those given in Kaye and Laby 
Tables, 12th Edition, with the exception of the mass of the pion. This 
has been put as 276 as the average of the following data sources. 
They are obtained from Marshak (1952), who has written authorita- 
tively on meson physics. 

The mass of the positive pion : 

277-4 J- 1 -1 (Berkeley workers) 
276T if 2-3 (Birnbaum et a/.) 
275-1 +2-5 (Cartwrighl) 

The mass of the negative pion: 

276-1 ±1-3 (Barkas et al.) 

The above table concerns particles which are among the most 
important in elementary particle physics. It is significant that they 
come out in such a neat form in the table. More significant, however, 
is the quantity g. It is 5,063. This is almost the same as the value of 
K. Indeed, it is K + 1. 



120 



PHYSICS WIT HOLT I I \S I ! l \ 



It is claimed that this result has significance. The basis of equation 
(6.68) is not explained, apart from the likely involvement of pairs of 
unions, and a guess at something w hich has led us to the figure 1,843. 
Even so, there can be no denying the curious and interesting result 
developed in the table. Even if the numerical values of certain particle 
masses are non-integral, there is very close agreement. The mystery 
becomes even more interesting when one examines the third item in 
the table. This shows that the energy g-2 (pion) is a package of 
energy surplus to the generation of a pair of pions. If this package of 
energy is absorbed by the proton, of mass 1,836 units, the resultant 
composite particle has a mass of 6,347 electron units or 3,245 MEV, 
when g is 5,063. Now, when protons are supplied to an environment 
in which pions are being produced, such a particle is actually formed. 
Krisch et a/. (1966) have claimed that this reaction produces the 
largest elementary particle to be discovered. They write: "We believe 
that this is firm evidence for the existence of a nucleoli resonance 
with mass 3,245 ±10 MEV. ... It seems remarkable that such a 
massive particle should be so stable." 

The author is tempted to claim that the above argument provides 
strong evidence favouring the existence of an elementary particle of 
5,063 electron masses. In Chapter 8 we will see how this can be ex- 
plained from basic principles. For the moment, our interest must turn 
to gravitation. This quantum could be the graviton. If it is. we can 
calculate the Constant of Gravitation from (5.12). From (5.10) and 
the corresponding formula for the electron, we know that .v is erg, 
w here a is the radius of the electron. From (4.1) and (6.60). /• can be 
eliminated to give: 

e 1 ;mc- = eljl2n (6.69) 

However, from the energy of the electron as given by (6) in 
Appendix I : 

(■' tin ' sei 2 (6.70) 

From (6.43). we can write (5.12) in the form: 

G [6-.v'r- c</"J- (6.71) 

Since v is erg, and since (6.69) and (6.70) combine to show that a is 
</,'1087r, we can then write G as: 



G = [4tt/( 1 08tt ) V]2(3ac 2 /2e) 2 



(6.72) 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 



121 



Replacing g by 5,063 and putting (6.70) and (6.72) together: 

(1087r) :i (5,063) 4 

Since e/m is 5-273 10 17 csu/gm, we can evaluate G. It is found to be 
6.67 10~ 8 cgs units. 

This is the measured value of G. This theory has. therefore, pro- 
vided a quantitative and qualitative account of gravitation. All the 
evidence points to the existence of gravitons, particles of charge c 
having a mass 5,063 times that of the electron. Further argument, 
and proof, of this will be provided in Chapter 8, after we have 
explored in more depth the nature of the atomic nucleus and the 
processes of matter creation. These involve a deeper study of spin 
properties and are best treated separately. Further, in Chapter 8, the 
account of the graviton reaction process from which the mass of the 
graviton is deduced is a good introduction to cosmic phenomena. 

Before leaving this chapter, it is appropriate to summarize the 
constituents of space-time. Also, we have to determine the value of 
the space polarization energy. Space-time comprises: 

1 . Graiitons. They have charge e and a mass about 5,063 times that 
of the electron. They are located in the G frame and they are the 
seat of the mass providing the dynamic balance for matter and 
the lattice particles. 

2. The continuum charge a. This is uniformly dispersed throughout 
space. A unit volume of the lattice has enough of the charge <i 
to balance an opposite polarity charge quantum e. The polarity 
of o is the same as that of the graviton charge. This charge is 
relatively insignificant from the point of view of dynamic mass 
balance. It moves with, and forms part of, the G frame. 

3. The lattice particles. These have a charge e opposite to that of the 
graviton. Each has a mass of 0-0408 times that of the electron. 
These particles form a cubic lattice which is the electromagnetic 
reference frame. They are the E frame. They arc in dynamic 
balance with the gravitons. Since the orbits of both frames are 
almost equal, there are about 124,000 lattice particles in space- 
time for every graviton. This explains why the graviton charge 
does not affect the electrical analysis of space-time presented 
above. 

4. The energy medium. This is the system of energy density />„<■- 



(6.73) 



122 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



which is at rest in the inertial frame and which provides the 
pressure balance for the lattice particles. It has no charge and it 
is the medium determining the propagation velocity of electric 
field disturbance. Its true nature is not understood. Nor is it 
understood how the heavier particles of charge forming matter 
or the gravitons, etc., are restrained from expanding to release 
their energies. They are subject to higher internal pressure than 
the lattice particles. However, this problem is no weakness. It is 
a problem confronting any theory which retains accepted laws 
of electric action. 
5. Electrons. On the assumption that the lattice particles have 
negative charge e, it is likely that there are electrons in the E 
frame. These have not been introduced above. They are needed 
to provide a kind of symmetry. There is one such particle for 
each graviton, that is, there are very few indeed of these particles 
under normal conditions, so the lattice system is not disturbed. 
Symmetry is needed because the mass of the continuum charge 
is effectively zero due to its involvement with the interaction 
within the lattice. Then, for each lattice particle we have 
5,062 units of mass in the energy medium, with charge balance 
from the continuum. Now, if we have the electrons as suggested, 
we have about 5,063 units of their mass in the graviton and the 
facility for direct charge balance. Without the electron, the 
graviton could not migrate relative to the lattice, to spread its 
mass effect, unless it moved a lattice particle with it. 

It is suggested that the electron is paired electrically with the 
graviton and migrates with it. 

The presence of the electron in the E frame provides a minor 
disturbance to the dynamic balance of the system of space-time. If 
we think in terms of kinetic energy and centrifugal force balance by 
electrostatic interaction with the G frame charge, we see that the 
electron tends to expand the E frame orbit because it is heavier than 
the lattice particles. The interaction between the electrons and the 
lattice particles will keep the electron in place, in the sense of 
the harmonious motion component of space-time. It must, if the 
electron is to be as near to rest in the E frame as is possible. However, 
if the electrons urge expansion of the E frame orbit, the lattice 
particles react to contract the orbit. It has been contended that such 
contraction is not possible because eleclrostatic interaction energy 



SPACE-TIME ANALYSIS 



123 



cannot be zero anywhere in space. Therefore, there must be only 
outward expansion and this must be due solely to the dynamic 
effects of the electron. The electron adds energy, in effect, to the 
interaction energy of space-time. It sets up a polarization energy 
equal to the electrostatic energy corresponding with this small 
orbital expansion. Again, since mass varies to keep mass energy 
constant as c varies, as was discussed in Chapter 5, we need only 
consider one of the energy forms, either electric or kinetic. This leads 
to the energy Jm(c/2) 2 for each electron. The E frame moves at this 
velocity c/2. Since there are 5,063 (w/m ) lattice particles per electron, 
the energy per lattice particle is: 

(6.74) 



8(5,063) 

Then, this has to be doubled because the G frame provides a centri- 
fugal balance and it must, therefore, contain the same energy. 
Doubling (6.74) we have, from (6.44), a total priming energy per 
particle of : 

Substituting the value of rid from (6.58), this becomes 0-000456(e 2 /</), 
as presented in equation (6.57). This energy is enough to sustain a 
magnetic field of the order of 10 10 oersted. Therefore, although it is 
small enough not to cause any significant disturbance of the space- 
time system, it will, nevertheless, not unduly limit the ability of space- 
time to carry strong magnetic fields. 



Summary 

In this chapter the difficult problem of analysing the aether has 
been confronted. The zero electrostatic energy condition has been 
the entry point to the subject. Minimum energy has been avoided, 
because it is relative, whereas space-time has to be absolute. This has 
given us the parameter r\d. This key quantity enables the evaluation 
of basic energy quanta. Masses matching those of the muon and 
other elementary particles emerge from the arithmetic quite easily, 
though a complete physical understanding has to await us in Chapter 
8. The fine structure constant, and, therefore. Planck's constant has 
been evaluated exactly. The constant of gravitation has also been 



124 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



evaluated exactly. These results can but speak for themselves. The 
chapter has also offered an account of the mechanism of the finite 
propagation velocity c. This is important qualitatively because it 
has helped us to develop a comprehensive understanding of the 
constituents of pure space-time. In the next chapter, our attention is 
turned to the atomic nucleus and the quantities involved in atomic- 
theory. We will seek to verify the concept of the deuleron presented 
in Chapter 1. The mass of the neutron and the proton will be evalu- 
ated. The results are as remarkable as those in the above chapter, 
particularly as we will go on to evaluate the magnetic spin moments 
of the particles under study. The difficult part of this w hole w ork has 
been covered in this Chapter 6. It is the real core of the whole theory 
in this book. It is a theory of the aether, an unpopular subject, but 
an inevitable one. It is difficult to accept, perhaps because, in a sense, 
truth can be harder to believe than fiction. Yet, any statement is 
fiction until shown to be truth. 



7. Nuclear Theory 



Electron-Positron Creation 

In Chapter 4 the process by which photons transfer momentum was 
introduced. When a photon event occurs an electromagnetic wave is 
propagated and a momentum quantum hjc times the radiation 
frequency v is imparted to space-time by matter releasing the 
photon. It is a statistical possibility that the reverse event will occur 
anywhere in the wave region. The likelihood of a photon being 
intercepted in this way probably depends on the wave amplitude and 
on the rate of flow of momentum locally. Another way of looking 
at this is to regard space as full of energy. If it contains a uniform 
distribution of energy, say E per unit volume, and is a veritable sea 
of energy which is ruffled by wave disturbances, the waves may 
travel at the high propagation velocity c but the displacement of the 
energy E„ to convey momentum will be slow. If a photon traverses a 
particular unit volume in unit time, the energy E in this volume (of 
mass Eojc-) will be moving at a velocity hvclE to convey an energy 
quantum per photon of E times this velocity divided by the photon 
velocity c. This energy quantum is, simply, //v. Hence, the energy- 
frequency relationship of Planck's law E = hv. 

Since E tends to be uniform, photons "tend" to move from their 
source to where they are absorbed. Energy quanta are merely ex- 
changed with the energy content of space-time in these photon events. 
One can say that energy is transferred, but this transfer is indirect 
and energy certainly does not travel at the velocity c. If it did it w ould 
have infinite mass, which would be absurd. The wave travels at the 
velocity c. Momentum quanta are transferred, as is energy, via the 
space-time medium. However, momentum is a vector quantity and, 
although statistically the preservation of the uniform energy distribu- 
tion in space will bring about momentum balance, it is not likely that 
a simple energy distribution mechanism can assure that all photons 
received have the same momentum vector as one emitted. Again, 
this leads to speculation and we will not dwell on this here.* The point 
* Enough was said on page 76. 



126 PHYSICS WITHOUT E I N S T 1; I N 

has been made that the photon mechanism involves emission and 
absorption of photon quanta in equal numbers if there is not to be a 
build-up of energy in space-time. 

When we consider photon events involving creation or annihila- 
tion of electron-positron pairs there are not only the questions of 
energy balance and momentum balance but, in addition, the 
problems of what happens to the electric charges and where they 
come from. These actions are photon events. The photon frequency 
is given by mc-=h\\ since two photons (or gamma rays) are involved 
in the reaction. Now, it is absurd for anyone to think that two 
electric charges, one positive and one negative, can possibly vanish 
into nothing. If this could happen there would be no physics because 
everything, if it ever existed, would be gone in one big bang. It is 
nonsense to think that the energy available could recreate charge and 
matter. There would be no structure, no nuclei on which to rebuild 
the system. Without the lasting existence of the discrete element of 
charge e we have no firm foundation to hold the physical universe 
together. Mass can vary and can come in numerous basic forms. The 
velocity of light varies according to the media it traverses and it even 
varies in free space. Planck's constant appears invariable, but would 
it if e varied? Physics and our existence depend upon something 
remaining constant and the electron charge is about all we can look 
to as providing this anchor. The electron and the positron might 
interact to become something else but their electric charges are 
conserved and at least one, be it the charge of the electron or the 
charge of the positron, must retain its discrete form. 

Having declared this we have an additional constraint governing 
the photon events involved in electron-positron annihilation and 
creation. We have also the constraint introduced in Chapter 1 and 
discussed in detail in Chapter 6. The volume of space available to 
house electric charge is limiting. This tells us that if an electron and a 
positron change into some other particle form, by expanding, then 
similar particle forms elsewhere must probably contract to create an 
electron and positron at that other location. If these two events do 
not occur simultaneously, the adjustments of the structure of space- 
time will need extra energy to act as a buffer. The transmutations 
involving electrons and positrons do take place in a highly energetic 
environment and this buffer action can be expected. However, on 
balance it is to be expected that for every electron-positron annihila- 
tion there is a matching electron-positron creation elsewhere. The 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



127 



process is akin to the photon transfer and, via the photon actions, 
momentum and energy are balanced also. 

With this introduction we can say that when an electron and a 
positron annihilate one another they meld into space-time, the 
negative charge of the electron becoming a particle of the E frame 
lattice and the positive charge of the positron melding into the uni- 
form continuum of charge density a. It follows that the energy 
needed to create an electron and a positron is not, in matter terms, 
2mc 2 . It is less than this because the constituent elements from which 
they are created have energy themselves. However, when we think of 
energy transfer and momentum transfer we have to remember that 
the adjustment in physical size of the background constituents in 
space-time cause supplementary energy and momentum transfer 
exactly as if the 2mc 2 energy was involved.* Thus, the frequency of 
the gamma radiation is exactly the frequency we would expect if 
there were total annihilation. This not only meets some of the per- 
plexing philosophical aspects of this problem but, in addition, there 
is quantitative evidence in direct support of the theory just pro- 
pounded. This will be presented below when we explain the results of 
Robson's experiments. 

Mass of Aggregations of Electric Charge 

In Chapter 4 it was noted that mass can vary according to its state 
of motion with the E frame of space-time. In this context the reader 
is reminded that the relative velocity of the space-time frames can 
vary slightly, adjusting the speed of light, and since energy (/: - Mc-) 
is conserved it follows that mass may vary. The E and G frames are 
therefore reference frames for mass quantities. The intrinsic mass 
energy of any particle is the same whichever of these two frames it 
occupies. Thus, if wc take positive charge in the G frame and 
negative charge in the E frame and these exist at these locations in 
discrete particle form, we have no difficulty analysing their respective 
mass properties. The problem comes when we consider the mass 
contribution of their mutual electrostatic interaction, particularly 
when they come together to form a composite mass aggregation in 
the E frame. If we know that the zero-reference ground state is w ith 
positive charge in the G frame and with negative charge in the E 
frame, the change of electrostatic energy in coming together is 

* Sec also discussion on page 204. 



128 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

calculable and the net mass energy of the aggregation can be evalu- 
ated. If we take the ground state to be their separation to infinity, as 
is normal in physical theory, we have postulated something which is 
out-of-line with reality. If we wander into philosophical argument 
and imagine that the universe came about by all electric charge 
starting at infinite separation and coming together, we face enormous 
problems. If everything started compacted together and then 
separated with a bang the analysis is even worse. Jt seems so neat to 
have derived a system of space-time in which an E frame formed by 
practically all the negative charge is effectively displaced by a 
definite distance from a G frame formed by practically all the positive 
charge. It seems logical that at the start of things, before some of this 
charge got out of place to create matter, all the negative charge was 
effectively spaced by the same distance from all the positive charge. 
However, logical or not, there is experimental evidence available to 
demonstrate that the ground state for mass calculation of aggrega- 
tions of charged particles is the condition in w hich opposed particle 
pairs are each separated by the separation distance of the E and G 
frames of the space-time system. This will now be presented in a 
more detailed analysis of the deuteron. 

The Deuteron Reaction 

At the end of Chapter 1 the form of the deuteron was discussed. 
It was shown that if it comprises electrons or positrons or both in 
combination with heavy fundamental particles and all have the 
charge quantum e then there is one favoured aggregation which 
could be the deuteron. This aggregation has a binding energy match- 
ing that actually measured. In this chapter this approach is taken 
further to develop a theory of the atomic nucleus and other basic 
particle systems. It is also to be noted that at the time of writing this 
book the author has not attempted to take the scope of this research 
further than that described in this chapter. The further potential of 
the theoretical approach being presented has, therefore, not been 
probed, although it does look highly promising. 

Fig. 7.1 shows possible forms of the neutron and proton, as well 
as the deuteron. Also show n is the expression for the mass of each 
particle in terms of the interaction energy quantities E\, /:'■_>, etc. 

In the case of the deuteron, E 5 has been evaluated approximately as 
-4-375 mc-. This approximation is due to two factors not allowed 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



129 



PROTON 



DEUTERO' 



proton-; 



KUT RC>N 



NEUTRON 



A 



B 



(0 + 

©OKi> 

©=© 

+•0© 

0K+*0 



M»-3rn+E 5 /c 2 



M»-2m+E t /c 2 



M+3m + N/c ? 



M+2m+ E,/c 2 




Fig. 7.1 



for in the analysis. Note that mc 2 is the rest mass energy of the 
electron or positron. M is the mass of the fundamental heavy 
particle deemed to be present in these basic particle aggregations. 
This heavy particle is termed an H particle. 

Since the mass M is about 1,836 times that of the electron, and 
since the radius of the H particle, being inversely proportional to 
mass, is 1/1,836 that of the electron, the particles forming the 
deuteron are spaced a little further apart than was assumed in 
Chapter 1. The result is that the estimated binding energy is reduced 
in the same ratio. The corrected value of £5 is then -4-373 mc 2 . 
Next, we need to consider the ground state correction. When the 
deuteron is broken by gamma radiation its constituent parts do not 
go off to infinity before recombining in another form. However, there 
is a fairly definite cut-off value of the gamma ray frequency which 
will disrupt the deuteron and this suggests that there is a fairly definite 
separation of the constituent particles w hich has to be reached before 
the transmutation is triggered. According to Wilson (1963), the 
measured binding energy of the deuteron is 2-22452 N4EV. Data 
sources differ on the proper conversion of MEV to units of mc 2 , but 
this measured binding energy seems to be approximately 4-352 mc 2 . 
The difference between this quantity and the theoretical value 
4-373 mc 2 is 0-021 mc 2 and can be taken as the error in assuming 
separation to infinity in the theoretical calculation. We take this as 
experimental evidence from which to deduce the spacing of the 
opposed-charge pair elements in the ground state. Thus, the three 
positive charges will go to their ground state each pairing with a 



'30 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

negative H particle or, for balance, an electron to form three particle 
pairs of interaction energy e-/v. If we equate 0-021 mc 2 to .V- v. we 
find the separation distance x from the experimental data! This 
shows that .v is close to 2/-, as expected, because 7>e~\2r is, from (4.1), 
3«wc 2 , where a is the fine structure constant. Since a is 0-007298, the 
2r spacing would give a correction 0-022 mc-. 

This result is remarkably close, having regard to the fact that it 
relies upon such a small difference between the measured binding 
energy and the uncorrected estimate from this theory. It must be 
taken as giving clear support for the postulated separate E and G 
frames of the space-time. Further, the analysis of the mass of the 
deuteron has been shown to be rigorously applicable. The deuteron 
binding energy is predicted by the theory with extreme accuracy and 
this encourages the further analysis of other particle aggregations. 

Experiment shows that when the deuteron is disintegrated a 
proton and a neutron are produced. This leads us to understand the 
composite nature of these particles. A step to be taken at this stage 
is to realize that for any stable nucleon to change its form, except 
transiently, there has to be a fundamental change in character of at 
least two of the constituent particles. The change we contemplate is 
one in which the energies of two particles of different mass are 
exchanged. This will be termed particle inversion. 

Particle Inversion 

Particle inversion is depicted in Fig. 7.2. Here, a positive H 
particle and an electron interchange energies to form a positron and 

00 ^ 

Fig. 7.2 

a negative H particle. This can only occur in a highly energetic 
environment, but when it has occurred the individual particles have 
adopted a stable form. Overall, there is no total energy change or 
change in volume of space occupied. Charge is conserved. The 
physical process has involved some other particle in the environment 
becoming compacted as it stores energy supplied. This makes a 
volume of space available which allows the H particle to expand and 




NUCLEAR THEORY 



131 



so release some of its energy. The electron can lake a little of this 
energy and be compacted a little in this process. The form to which 
this system will revert when balance is restored will probably depend 
upon which of the two particles, the H particle or the electron, is 
physically the larger when the reversion process begins. This action 
is, of course, highly unstable and it has to be remembered that there 
is no freedom for the various particles to adopt any mass value by 
appropriate sharing of space and energy. Fundamental particles have 
discrete forms and, although interchange between these discrete 
forms is possible, there are a limited number of such forms which 
can be adopted by a stable particle. We exclude unstable systems and 
mere particle aggregations in considering this limited number of 
particle forms, because, as is well known, there seem to be numerous 
varieties of elementary, though unstable, particles and there are many 
isotope nuclei. The important point under review is that unless there 
is particle inversion the disintegrated elements of a particle aggrega- 
tion will come together again to form the same unit. 



r- 






^ (jrcund 
( stale 



(energy interchange) 






J 



Fig. 7.3 



132 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



This leads us to the sequence of events depicted in Fig. 7.3. A 
gamma ray y acting on the deutcron results in kinetic energy being 
added to the deutcron. At a certain stage in the process energy 
inversion occurs, as noted, and this results in there being two heavy 
H particles of opposite polarity. This is facilitated if it occurs in the 
ground state, as depicted, because there can be balance, at least 
transiently, in a dynamic sense if there is a heavy H particle in each of 
the E and G frames. When this particle system reverts to a normal 
state we find that the product is a proton and a neutron. We are, 
therefore, able to investigate the forms of these newly-formed 
particles. 

The Proton 

The H particle cannot exist alone for very long. The reason is that 
an electron or positron, whichever has opposite polarity, will com- 
bine with it to form an aggregation having even less energy than the 
H particle itself. The binding energy exceeds in magnitude the rest 
mass energy of the electron. Such a neutral system must eventually 
come into collision with another charged particle. Then, further 
combination will occur because the total energy of the aggregation 
can be less than that of its constituent parts. 

Referring to Fig. 7.1, for neutron A we can calculate Ei as 
approximately - 1 -5 mc' 1 . This follows because the electrostatic 
energy of the electron is 2c 1 /3a, where a is its radius, and the electro- 
static energy of the coupling between the electron and a point 
charge e at its surface is -e-',a. This makes E\ 1-5 times the rest- 
mass energy of the electron. For proton A. £3 is -3 mc' 1 , doubling 
the above because there are two positrons involved, plus the inter- 
action energy between the two positrons of 0-75 mc' 1 , because they 
are at a spacing of 2a. Thus, £3 is - 2-25 mc' 1 . Similarly, for proton 
B, E\ is -1-75 mc' 1 . 

Since the binding energy of proton A is greater than that of proton 
B, proton A is more stable. However, there is a much higher proba- 
bility of forming proton B. This is because in an environment of 
H particles a combination of such a particle with an electron- 
positron pair is far more likely than a combination with tw o electrons 
or two positrons. Also, there are less positrons than electrons 
available in free form. When we discuss the origin of the H particle 
we will see that it is formed by pairing with an electron or positron of 



NUCLEAR THEORY 133 

opposite polarity. More electrons implies a greater likelihood of 
forming the positive H particle initially. Then, we have the increased 
likelihood of combination with the easily induced electron-positron 
pair. A less likely event is the combination of the positive H particle 
with two electrons to form an anti-proton of form A. Least likely, is 
the formation of proton A. 

Following this line of reasoning, wc have presented in Fig. 7.2 a 
proton form B as the product of the deuteron reaction. Therefore, the 
negative H particle formed by inversion has gone into the neutron 
product. Before discussing the neutron and neutron decay, it is to be 
noted that we have deduced a relationship between the mass of the 
H particle and the mass of the regular proton. Since E 4 is - 1 -75 mc' 1 , 
the proton mass, from Fig. 7.1, is M 0-25 m. Thus, the mass of the 
H particle is less than that of the proton by 0-25 electron mass units. 
Since, later, we will deduce the mass of the H particle from the teach- 
ings of this theory, we have thereby explained the mass of the proton. 
Note that spin is something which depends upon what is happening 
to a particle. When the proton is in an atom it has spin properties 
because of its interplay with the photon units and electrons in the 
atom. When the proton is isolated, spin cannot be precluded because 
it might depend upon what the proton brings with it from w herever it 
has been. Proton spin will be dealt with in detail later in this chapter. 

The Neutron 

It has just been stated that the positive H particle is the more 
fundamental. It is the most likely one to be formed. The fact that the 
deuteron models shown in Fig. 1.3 of Chapter 1 all comprise positive 
H particles with the exception of model C may seem inconsistent. In 
discussing the proton we argue in favour of the one having the least 
binding energy on the grounds that the H particle in positive form 
has abundance and ease of combination. Why arc things different for 
the deuteron? Why did we not choose between models A. B and D 
and ignore C, the one with the negative H particles. The reason is 
clear, now that H particle inversion has been explained. H particles 
are the origin of matter. They are as fundamental as electrons and 
positrons. Preponderantly, they are produced in positive form. They 
first form neutrons by aggregation with electrons or protons by 
aggregation with electron-positron pairs. Indeed, as will be shown, H 
particles can, in fact, be actually created in their association with an 



134 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



electron-positron pair. If anything, one would expect the proton 
really to be formed in much greater abundance than the neutron. It 
is easier to develop an electron-positron pair if there is an inflow of 
energy creating matter. Electrons are not produced in isolation. So 
far as they do exist they can combine with the positive H particle to 
form a neutral aggregation and then this will join another electron to 
form an anti-proton because this anti-proton has the least total 
energy compared with the neutron or the normal proton and has 
also the strongest binding energy. 

The result of this is that the process of matter creation has to be 
explained in terms of the creation of an abundance of protons of form 
B with a few anti-protons of form A. In an energetic environment 
some of these protons and anti-protons will undergo inversion and 
then combine to form the deuteron as illustrated in Fig. 7.4. Some 
protons will couple with an electron to form a hydrogen atom or go 
into the nucleus of a heavy atom. Some protons will undergo 
inversion and then aggregate with an electron to form a neutron of 
the form B, shown in Fig. 7.1. Then these will probably go into the 
formation of heavier atoms or decay back again by ejection of an 
electron. The anti-protons are possibly preserved until they invert, 
whereupon they are captured by inverted protons to form deuterons. 
If the protons and anti-protons aggregate before inversion of the 
latter they form something less stable than the deuteron and the 
process of disruption and regeneration can be expected to occur. In 
the basic matter creation process, the main product is the proton B, 
the neutron B and the deuteron according to model C in Fig. 1 .3 or as 
shown in Fig. 7.1. Fig. 7.4 shows how a proton and an anti-proton 
may invert and combine to form the deuteron, ejecting an electron. 
Then, with the input of a gamma ray, it is shown how this deuteron 
disrupts to form proton A and a neutron. The neutron may invert 
and couple with an electron-positron pair in view of the energy 
available and then may eject an electron, decaying into a proton B. 
Similarly, the proton A may invert to develop proton B. If the 
reaction does not go in the way outlined in Fig. 7.4, what are the 
alternatives? Firstly, could the proton combine with the anti-proton? 
It might form a particle aggregate, electrically neutral overall, and of 
the order of mass of the deuteron. Now, it will be contended* that 
any particle aggregate which has a mass of the order of three or more 
limes that of the proton and which is highly compacted cannot be 

* See page 203. 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



FYolon AnVi-nr.'.ton 




Deuteron + J^-rav 



Proton 



effectively balanced by the interaction of gravitons in the G frame. 
Two gravitons separated by the lattice dimension d of space-time 
might share in the balance of a double-proton sized particle, but it is 
unlikely that three could co-operate in this way. Thus, since we shall 
later see that one graviton is needed per proton mass unit, we have to 
preclude aggregations of three or more H particles of the same polar- 
ity. We allow but one, the most stable, aggregation of two such 
particles. At this level the most stable is the deuteron according to 
model C in Fig. 1.3. To keep the analysis general, but at the level of 
mass of the deuteron, we can show that model C is favoured even if 
we involve H particles of opposite polarity in the selection. The mass 
level requirement is dealt with by allowing the H particles to be no 
closer than the diameter of an electron. In Fig. 7.5 several possible 
combinations including two H particles are shown and the total mass 
value applicable to each is given. None has as low a mass as the 
deuteron according to model C. 

If the proton and anti-proton of Fig. 7.4 combine directly we expect 
the aggregation shown in Fig. 7.5(b). Tf the proton inverts its form 




Prcfen electron 



Fig. 7.4 



136 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

and combines with the anti-proton the model shown in Fig. 7.5(c) 
results. If the anti-proton inverts and combines with the proton 
another model not shown is produced, but all have greater total mass 
than that depicted in Fig. 7.5(e), which is the model C deuteron. It is 
a similar story when we consider the possibility of combinations of 
the products of the deuteron when disrupted by gamma radiation. If 
anything forms having a mass approximately that of the deuteron it 
must decay into a deuteron. Effectively, the gamma radiation is 
dispersed without an end product. If there is an end product we 
would expect protons and neutrons (in form B) because these are the 
product of the basic matter creation reaction. These emerge from 
nuclear processes. Neutrons of the form B have transient stability. 
They decay via inversion into proton B and an electron. 




Fig. 7.5 



An interesting speculation is whether the deuteron with all polar- 
ities reversed, the anti-deuteron, could form from two anti-protons 
or from some products of the reaction. Let us assume that the answer 
is affirmative. It is unlikely to happen because the anti-protons are 
scarce, but it can happen. The result could be an atom with a 
negative nucleus and a satellite positron. Such an atom would be a 
misfit in the system of matter we know. Probably such an atom would 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



137 



interact with a normal atom, with the electrons and positrons around 
their nuclei wiping one another out to develop energy which would 
stir up more reactions and work the "anti-bodies" out of the system. 
In the end, only one form of atom can win and that is apparently the 
one we have assigned a positive nucleus. 

The deuteron mass augmented by gamma radiation which puts it 
into the ground state is simply 2M -3m. Then, from the known 
reaction : 

D-»P + N 

which indicates that the deuteron D converts to a proton P and a 
neutron N, we can deduce the mass of the neutron. We note that 
the mass of the proton is A/ + 0'25w, as already shown, but subject 
to a small correction. The mass of the deuteron is really 2 U 3/» 
--4'373w • 3a/;;, the latter term being the ground state correction due 
to the triple pair of charge elements. Similarly, the mass of the proton 
B is M + 2m - VI 5m + 2<xm, because the ground state correction arises 
from interaction between two positive charges in the G frame and 
two negative charges, if we include the transient electron, in the E 
frame. It follows that the mass 2M + 3 m available can go to create a 
proton and will leave mass M + 2-15 in -2am as the mass we can 
associate with the neutron. Compared with the proton, we find that 
the neutron is heavier by 2-5 m -4am, or 2-4708 m. This is, of course, 
pure theory. An exact check with experiment is not possible because 
the absolute masses of these two quantities are not known to suffi- 
cient accuracy. Roughly, however, the predicted value seems correct. 
For example, if the proton-electron mass ratio is, say, 1,836-2. the 
neutron-mass ratio should be 1,838-67. These figures are fairly 
representative on existing data sources. 

If we consider neutron decay, there is a check on the analysis. The 
neutron can produce a proton and eject an electron, as mentioned 
above. However, as Fig. 7.4 shows, it has to create and absorb an 
electron-positron pair. This returns us to the rather complex problem 
of the energy features of space-time. It was stated early in this 
chapter that the energy needed to create an electron and a positron is 
not, in matter terms, 2mc-. It is less because the constituent elements 
from which they are created have energy themselves. We have to 
digress a little to analyse this. 

Firstly, the origin of the electron-positron pair is the lattice par- 
ticle and a unit volume of continuum in space-time. As was explained 



138 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

in Chapter 6, there is a difference between mass balance and energy 
balance when we think of these elements. Energy in the form of 
lattice particles has its proper measure of mass but these particles 
move in a medium which itself has mass. There is a certain buoyancy 
effect, the result of which is that dynamic balance in free space comes 
about from energy in the G frame which is only half that in the E 
frame, as far as the relatively large lattice particles only are con- 
cerned. Hence, if we take four units of energy from the lattice 
particle system we take two from the G frame system, and we can 
deploy these six units of energy to create matter and an equal energy 
balance in the G frame. Hence, for each lattice particle and its 
related G frame continuum substance deployed to create the electron 
and the positron there is available from space-time the energy of 
1 -5 lattice particles, half of which goes into matter form. That is, the 
energy of 0-75 lattice particles or 0-75(2e 2 ;3/?), where b is the radius 
of the lattice particle, is released to matter in the electron-positron 
creation process. From the equation (6.39) this is 1 -5 m„c 2 , where m„ 
has the value of 0-0408 m, as already shown. 

Thus, the energy needed to generate an electron-positron pair 
corresponds to a mass of 2m -0-0612 m or 1-9388 m. From the 
neutron we have 2-4708 m. If 1 -9388 m of this is used to create an 
electron and a positron, and we allow for the fact that the mass m 
of the positron has been included already in the mass assigned to the 
proton, we must subtract 0-9388 m from 2-4708 m to obtain the mass 
of the surplus energy. The surplus energy is, therefore, 1 -532 mc- and 
this is released alongside the electron and the proton as a decay 
product of the neutron. 

This energy quantity is 0-782 MEV, and this happens to be 
exactly the value measured by Robson (1951) from end point 
measurements in the beta spectrum derived from neutron decay. 
This result shows that the theoretical approach we are following has 
substantial experimental support. The minor ground state correction 
needed to understand the exact binding energy of the deuteron, and 
the energy corrections needed to understand the role of electron- 
positron creation in neutron decay, both give direct verification of 
the space-time system on which this whole theory is founded. These 
exact quantitative results are to be followed by many more in this 
chapter. Next, we will calculate from basic theory the mass of the 
particle H. Knowing this mass, we have, from the above analysis, the 
mass of the deuteron, the proton and the neutron. 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



139 



The Origin of the Basic Nucleons 

To explain the formation of matter as we know it, it is necessary to 
explain the origin of the basic nucleons, the H particles of the above 
analysis. The quantization of angular momentum is basic to atomic 
systems. With this in mind, it can be assumed that in a highly 
energetic reaction in space-time where nuclear actions are in process 
almost any energy quantum between that of the graviton and that of 
the lattice particle can be formed. However, even transient stability 
requirements pose the need for appropriate disposition of quanta of 
angular momentum. Owing to angular momentum criteria, certain 
energy quantized systems are favoured and from these certain stable 
particle forms can develop. Both the neutron and the deuteron 
featured in the above analysis contain a negative H particle. To be 
formed from space-time, the H particle is likely to come from the 
energy released by an expanding graviton. The graviton provides the 
gravitational property of the space-time lattice, even in the absence 
of matter. This is necessary in view of the argument leading to 
equation (5.6) in Chapter 5. The E frame has gravitational effects 
according to its mass density. Thus, when the graviton expands, and 
so loses energy and mass, it is less able to balance mass in the space- 
time lattice. Graviton expansion must, therefore, accompany some 
break-up of the lattice. Now, all that this means is that the trans- 
lational motion of a space-time system and graviton expansion both 
require lattice particles to be freed from their orbital motion with the 
E frame. Graviton expansion implies release of energy. This implies 
the formation of matter. Hence, translational motion of space-time 
has some fundamental association with the existence of matter. To 
provide dynamic balance and gravitational effects in an undisturbed 
space-time, the graviton must, before expansion, be effectively 
compacted through a definite volume from a gravity-free reference 
state. The compaction of the graviton through a certain volume 
produces a related electrodynamic effect causing gravitation. If the 
graviton provides a basic gravitational effect according to the mass 
density of the space-time lattice, it must already be compacted 
through the related volume. Since G is, apparently, the same for 
gravitation between space-time and matter, the volume compaction 
of the graviton from its zero-gravitation state to its normal con- 
dition must have a ratio to the graviton mass equal to its incremental 



140 PHYSICS WITHOUT I I VST UN 

rate of volume compaction to mass ratio. From simple analysis based 
on equation (5.10), it can be shown that the total volume compaction 
of the graviton is three times its final and normal volume. In other 
words, the action of balancing the space-time lattice causes each 
graviton to be a compacted version of its gravity-free form and to 
occupy only one-quarter of its gravity-free volume. The correspond- 
ing energy and mass states of the graviton are in the ratio of the cube 
root of one quarter to unity. Thus, if the mass of the graviton is 
5,063m in the normal gravitating state, it is 3,189 m in the non- 
gravitating state, that is, 1,874 m less. 

What this tells us is that, w hen a part of the lattice is displaced to 
the inertial frame to form free particles accompanying translational 
motion of the lattice, there is dynamic out-of-balance allowing 
graviton expansion to release energy in quanta of 1,874 mc~. The 
value of G has to be the same throughout such transitions, otherwise 
there would be problems explaining loss of gravitational potential. 
Hence, a quantum condition is imposed upon energy release. 

Remember that in deriving equation (4.4) it was assumed that any 
angular momentum of the G frame was part of the zero angular 
momentum balance of a particle in the E frame. When this part 
comes out of its E frame orbit it deploys the corresponding orbital 
angular momentum from the G frame graviton to cancel its spin. 
This applies to the electron, as was show n in Chapter 4. It may also 
apply to the lattice particles. Hence, the release of the energy by the 
graviton in the manner just described does not release any angular 
momentum so as to cause a surplus. The graviton itself has no spin. 
Furthermore, since the graviton has no spin and since the freed 
lattice particles or electrons, in the sense of Chapter 4, have no spin 
either, the basic formation of matter occurs under zero-spin conditions. 

Now , without elaborating further on the reasons, let us assume that 
a package of energy of up to 1,874 mc 2 is nucleated by a positive 
ch arge e and that an orbital electron having the basic ancular 
momentum h\2n goes into orbit around it. Note that the energy need 
not be wholly associated with the positive charge. It could develop 
electron-positron pairs by its catalytic action in promoting such 
events in space-time. We may assume that most of the energy does 
find itself stored by the positive nucleating charge.* Then, we have a 

* In Chapter 9 we will discuss the source of this positive charge. As will be 
explained, it is a positron. The source of the positron can be better understood 
when certain cosmic properties have been analysed. 



NUCLEAR THEORY 141 

simple problem. The nucleus thus formed needs to have some angular 
momentum itself. How does it get it? A dynamic system has been 
formed. There has to be balance. Space-time is not reacting in this 
case to provide the balance. The lack of angular momentum is the 
root of the problem anyway. Does it share some of the angular 
momentum with the electron. If so, how? It is not as if the electron 
originated from the central nucleus and developed the reaction. If 
interaction does operate to cause the angular momentum to be 
shared, which is the normal assumption, then the electron will not 
have the exact quantum hiln. 

The next problem with this system is that it will radiate electro- 
magnetic waves because of the electron motion unless we can provide 
a photon unit to compensate. This is not feasible because such units 
are located in the E frame and the electron is moving in the inertial 
frame, in the strictly relative sense. Therefore, the only answer to 
turn to is that the electron is moving at an angular frequency exactly 
equal to the universal angular frequency Q. Then there should be no 
radiation problem. 

This then raises other problems. There is motion relative to the 
E frame. This means that there are magnetic effects to consider. 
Curiously, however, it is possible for us to analyse the system with- 
out considering the magnetic force between the charges. There is, 
instead, a radiated wave of angular field momentum. This has its 
reaction in the system and this will be analysed. The proposition is 
that the electron retains its quantum angular momentum h\2n and 
that exactly the angular momentum needed by the nucleus is that in 
bal ance with the lield angular momentum radiated. There is a mass- 
dependence in the analysis. This condition is only met for a definite 
nuclear mass quantity. It is this quantity which leads us to the mass of 
the H particle, and Nature happens to make this quantity just a little 
less than the energy quantum of 1,874 m available for its creation. 

In Fig. 7.6 a charge e carried by a particle of mass M is depicted 
in a dynamically balanced state with an electron of charge -e and 
mass m. The motion of the electron in the inertial frame is circular 
and has velocity v in an orbit of radius .v. From the above intro- 
duction : 

mvx = /i;2n (7.1) 

The angular momentum of the particle of mass M w ill, therefore, be 
m M times //;2tt, from simple dynamic considerations. It is to be 



142 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



noted that Newtonian dynamics are deemed to be strictly applicable 
because we are not dealing with a translational motion through the 
electromagnetic reference frame. There is the cyclic motion at the 




Fig. 7.6 



frequency of space-time to consider. Tn fact, in some direction, say at 
angle to the line joining M and m, we must add the velocity vector 
r/2 to relate the motion in the inertial frame with one relative to the 
electromagnetic frame. The angle does not change during the 
successive cycles of the E frame since the motion of the E frame and 
that of the dynamic system under study are both at the angular 
velocity Q. Note that the nature of the forces holding the two charges 
in this mutual orbital condition are not to be discussed. One must 
presume some kind of electric field interaction with space-time as we 
did in considering the physical basis of the Schrodinger Equation. 
There is some distinct similarity because the orbital radius can be 
shown to be 2r from the data just presented and this is the same radius 
as that of the orbit of the non-transit electron discussed in developing 
the explanation of wave mechanics. 

It is shown in Appendix II that where there are two interacting 
current vectors in the same plane there must be a radiated field 
angular momentum equal to the product of the two vectors multi- 
plied by: 

1/71 1 \ . .. 

7[l2-9) sm0 ° (7 - 2) 
where o is the angle between the vectors. The two current vectors 
have, of course, to be developed by separate charges. Since a current 
vector is charge times velocity divided by c, the quantity of interest 
from Fig. 7.6 is: 

(.2 9^ I 1 u) 2 Mn (' V 2) (73) 
Note that r is the velocity of the electron and that the field angular 
momentum has two components because there are two pairs of 
interacting current vectors. 



NUCLEAR THEORY 143 

For maximum angular momentum reaction consistent with a 
minimum energy deployment to form the mass M, the angle must 
be zero. This gives the total field angular momentum as: 



(l2 9) 



m\ e-v _, „ 

..I - . (7.4) 



M Ic- 



On the principles introduced this quantity should compensate 
the angular momentum of M itself. That is, it should balance 
{mjM)hj2n. Since vjx is Q or cjlr, (4.1) and (7.1) show that v is. 
simply, c. Thus, putting this in (7.4) and balancing with the angular 
momentum of M, we have a relation which can be rearranged as: 

M he 2 

— -^-9 1 (7.5) 



12 9 

Upon evaluation, simplified by the fact that 2ne-',hc is the dimen- 
sionless fine structure constant (approximately 1 137), we find that 
M\m is 1,817-8. 

Later in this chapter it will be shown that particles having this 
mass of 1,817-8 m have an important role to play in the nuclei of 
heavy atoms. Such particles, being of extremely small radius, can 
readily combine with other particles, mesons, electrons, positrons, 
etc. For the moment, our interest must turn to the event in which an 
electron-positron pair, developed as the particle is actually formed, 
participates in the angular momentum reaction in the field. The 
proton is the prime system under study, so we will analyse the 
system presented in Fig. 7.7. 

Tn Fig. 7.7 an electron-positron pair is shown to be in the near 



4-1 - - 

a 




Fig. 7.7 



144 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



vicinity of the heavy particle and the electron. This heavy particle, 
termed the H particle, moves in balance with the electron as described 
already by reference to Fig. 7.6. The electron-positron pair forms its 
own dynamic balance system and also rotates about its own centre 
of inertia at the angular frequency Q. These motions are about par- 
allel axes and are synchronous in the sense that the velocity vectors of 
the particles in the two systems are at all times mutually parallel or 
anti-parallel, but in such relative direction as to assure the maximum 
combined angular momentum reaction in the field. 

The purpose of this analysis is really to determine the mass of the 
heavy particle formed in the event of its creation being in close 
association with an electron-positron pair. The previous analysis led 
us to the mass of such a particle when created in isolation. Also, 
before proceeding too far, it is as well to realize that later we w ill be 
confronted with the problem of how, once the heavy particle is 
formed, it ever gets into the £ frame to become normal matter. It will 
need angular momentum then in much larger quantities than can be 
induced by reaction with the field radiation. This problem will be 
discussed in Chapter 9. 

Now, referring to Fig. 7.7, it is necessary to calculate the angular 
momentum of the field radiation due to the mutual interaction of the 
four particles. Any particle will react with the compounded c'2 
current vectors of the other three. The result is four terms in the 
angular momentum expression: 



It is noted that the paired electron has a radius a. and therefore a 
velocity vector aQ, whereas the positron has a velocity vector aQ. 
Since they have opposite polarity charge they combine to provide 
unidirectional current vectors. 

As before, the value of x is 2r, and v is (m, M)2r. w here U is now 
the mass of the H particle. From (6.60), (6.69) and (6.70), the electron 
radius a is 4 3(«/-), or /•, 103. Q is c'2r. Thus (7.6) is simply: 



As before, we equate this in magnitude to (in M)h;2n and find that 
M m is 103/102 times the value given by (7.5). It is thus deduced that 
M is 1,835-6 m. The mass of the H particle we seek is about 0-25 m 




(7.6) 




(7.7) 



NUCLEAR THEORY 145 

less than the mass of the proton. The mass of the proton is about 
1,836-2 m, so the // particle mass should be about 1,835-9 m, say. 
This is near enough to exact agreement with the theoretical value, so 
it can be said that very probably this analysis is well founded. The 
mass of the H particle has been derived from fundamental principles 
and it has been shown that there are two such heavy particle forms. 
They both are likely to have positive charge e. The heaviest is formed 
in close association with an electron-positron pair and has a mass a 
little less than 1,836 m. The lightest is formed in isolation and has a 
mass of about 1,818 m. This happens in the presence of an available 
energy quantum of about 1,874 m released from the graviton, which, 
possibly, provides the nucleus for the formation of these heavy 
particles. As might be expected, the electron-positron pair can join 
w ith the H particle once formed to create the proton form B, already 
deduced as being the most prevalent in the process of matter creation. 

Atomic Nuclei 

Before studying the spin properties of the proton, neutron and 
deuteron and providing further verification of the theoretical 
approach so far followed, it is convenient to pause here to explain 
the nature of the binding forces in heavier atomic nuclei. 

The atomic nucleus comprises an aggregation of elementary 
particles. Principally, the nucleus is composed of protons and 
neutrons. We believe this because all atomic nuclei have masses 
which increment by approximately the same amount relative to their 
neighbours in the atomic mass scale. This mass increment is approxi- 
mately the mass of the neutron or proton. Mass incrementation by 
the addition of a proton increases the electric charge of the nucleus 
by the unit e. It follows that if a nucleus has charge Ze it is most 
likely composed of Z protons. If its atomic mass is approximately 
A' times that of the proton (after adding a little to account for binding 
energy) it is most likely composed also of X - Z neutrons. 

Our problem is to determine how the mutually repulsive charges 
are held together and to examine what other elementary particles 
are in the nuclear composition. This problem is readily answered by 
this theory and is supported by the appropriate quantitative and 
qualitative findings. 

The analysis of the deuteron has shown how nuclei might be 
formed from elementary particles. There is, however, a problem in 



146 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



suggesting that heavy nucleons can become closely compacted. This 
is the problem of gravitational balance. It was shown in Chapter 6 
that the gravitons in the G frame provide the gravitational mass 
balance in space-time. These particles have a mass which is about 
2-7 times that of the proton. Further, these gravitons, being mutually 
repulsive, cannot compact without losing their space-time character. 
The statistical probability of the proximity of a graviton to any 
element of matter is related to the mass of that element so that the 
balance condition is assured. The gravitons are effectively melded 
with the distributed charge of the continuum element of space-time. 
They have a distribution which makes the mass density of this 
continuum G frame system uniform save where mass of matter 
present requires some concentration. The gravitons are, therefore, 
spaced apart on some statistical basis. However, the closest spacing 
where balance is needed within a well-compacted atomic nucleus is 
deemed to be the metric spacing d, the spacing of the lattice forming 
space-time. This will be discussed further in Chapter 9, since it 
involves possibilities which arc a little speculative but, suffice it to 
say, we will assume that the proper spacing of gravitons in a nucleus 
has a lattice form with spacing d. The gravitons can move about in 
their statistical pattern but favour certain relatively spaced discrete 
positions matching the spacing of the space-time system. On this 
basis, we will also preclude more than two heavy nucleons from 
forming a compacted nucleus. The gravitons cannot balance three 
nucleons in a closely compact state. Further, in atomic nuclei 
containing more than two heavy nucleons, it seems more logical for 
them to have the regular spacing introduced above. In short, our 
hypothesis is that a loosely compacted nucleus can be formed of 
many nucleons provided it has a dynamic affinity with a graviton 
spacing matching the lattice spacing of the particles forming the E 
frame of space-time. This allows the nucleons to occur singly (or 
perhaps in pairs as well) in an atomic nuclear lattice also of cubic 
form and of spacing d of 6-37 10~ n cm. 

We may then portray an atomic nucleus as in Fig. 7.8, where the 
bonds between the nucleons are all of length d and are aligned with 
the fixed directions of the space-time lattice. This means that an 
atomic nucleus lattice cannot spin, even though the individual 
nucleons may spin about their own diameters and the whole nucleus 
can move linearly or in an orbit relative to the E frame lattice. The 
nucleus lattice retains its fixed spatial orientation. 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



147 




Fig. 7.8 



Nuclear Bonds 

What is the form of the nuclear bonds? Each of the six nucleons 
in Fig. 7.8, three protons, say, and three neutrons, identified by 
the full bodied circles, has a bond of its own providing one of the 
links. These bonds are the real mystery of the atomic nucleus. We 
will assume that their most logical form is merely a chain of electrons 
and positrons arranged alternately in a straight line. The reason for 
the assumption is that electron-positron pairs are readily formed in 
conjunction with matter, and we have seen how an in-line configura- 
tion of alternate positive and negative particles has proved so helpful 
in understanding the deuteron. Stability has to be explained. Firstly, 
the chain is held together by the mutually attractive forces between 
touching electrons and positrons. Secondly, it will be stable if the 
ends of the chain are held in fixed relationship. This is assured by the 
location of the nucleons which these bonds interconnect. In Fig. 7.9 
it is shown how the bonds connect with the basic particles. In the 
examples shown, the nucleons are positioned with a chain on either 
side and are deemed to be spinning about the axis of the chain. 
Intrinsic spin of the chain elements will not be considered. It cancels 
as far as observation is concerned because each electron in the chain 
is balanced by a positron. In Fig. 7.10 it is shown how, for the 
neutron, for example, the spin can be in a direction different from 
that of the chain. Also, it is shown how another chain may couple at 
right angles with this one including the neutron. Note, that the end 
electron or positron of the chain does not need to link exactly with 
the nucleoli. Therefore, it need not interfere with the spin. 

We will now calculate the energy of a chain of electrons and posi- 
trons. For the purpose of the analysis we will define a standard 



148 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 





soi n 
Fig. 7.9 

energy unit as e 2 j2a. This is the conventional electrostatic energy of 
interaction between two electric charges e of radius a and in contact. 
Since 2e 2 j3a is mc 2 , as applied to the electron, this energy unit is 
0-75 mc 1 . On this basis, a chain of two particles has a binding energy 
of - 1 unit. If there are three particles the binding energy is the sum 
of - 1, ', and - 1, since the two outermost particles are of opposite 
polarity and their centres are at a spacing of 4a and not 2a. 




Fig. 7.10 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



149 



For vV particles, with N even, the total interaction energy is: 

( N n {N - 2) (N ~ 3) 2 _J 

V 2 3 (A 2) (A 1) 

which is -N log 2, if N is large. If N is odd, the last term in the 
above series is positive and the summation, for /V large, is 1 - .V log 2. 
To find N we need to know how many particles are needed for the 
chain to span a distance d. <7can be related to m by eliminating /• from 
(4.1) and (6.60). Then d\2a is found using 2<? 2 /3a = ?nc 2 . It is 547r, so 
A/ may be, say, 169, 170 or possibly 168, particularly if A' has to be 
even and there has to be space for any nucieons. For our analysis we 
will calculate the binding energy of the chain and the actual total 
energy of the chain for all three of these values of A'. The data are 
summarized in the following table. 



A" 


168 


169 


170 


- N log 2 


- 1 16-45 


- 117-14 


- 1 17-83 


Binding Energy (units) 


116-45 


- 1 16-14 


- 1 17-83 


Binding Energy (me 2 ) 


-87-34 


-87-11 


-88-38 


Add Self Energy (mc 2 ) 


168 


169 


170 


Total Chain Energy 


80-66 


81-89 


81-62 


Ground State Correction 


0-61 


0-62 


0-62 


Corrected Energy (mc-) 


81-27 


82-51 


82-24 



In the above table the binding energy has been set against the self 
energy of the basic particles and a correction has been applied of 
amc 2 per pair of particles to adjust for the fact that mass is not 
referenced on separation to infinity, as was discussed earlier in this 
chapter. The total mass energy of the chain is seen to be about 81 
or 82 electron mass energy units, depending upon its exact length. 

This shows that while the electron-positron chain proposed will 
provide a real bond between nucieons linked together to form an 
atomic nucleus, it will nevertheless add a mass of some 81 m per 
nucleoli. This seems far too high to apply to the measured binding 
energies. Furthermore, it is positive and the nature of binding energy 
is that it must be negative. This can be explained by introducing the 
n meson or pion, as it is otherwise termed. 

The Pion 

When an electron becomes attached to a small but heavy particle 
of charge e, the interaction energy is very nearly -e 2 \a or 1-5 times 



150 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

the energy unit mc 2 . This means that the mass of the heavy particle is 
effectively reduced when an electron attaches itself to it and becomes 
integral with it. If we go further and seek to find the smallest particle 
which can attach itself to a heavy nucleoli to provide enough 
surplus energy to form one of the above-mentioned electron-positron 
chains, we can see how this nucleoli plus this particle plus this chain 
can have an aggregate mass little different from that of the initial 
nucleon. This can reconcile our difficulties. The fact that an electron 
can release the equivalent of about half its own mass indicates that 
to form the chain of mass 81 m we w ill need a meson-sized particle of 
the order of mass of the muon or pion. To calculate the exact 
requirement we restate the inverse relationship between the mass m 
of a particle of charge e and its radius a: 

2e-,'3a = mc- (7.8) 

This applies to the electron, but it can also be used for other particles 
such as the meson and the H particle. 

It may then be shown that if two particles of opposite polarity 
charge e are in contact, their binding energy, e' divided by the sum of 
their radii, is 3c 2 /2 times the product of their masses divided by the 
sum of their masses. Let M be the mass of the meson involved and 
M be the mass of the H particle. The following table then shows the 
value of the surplus energy: 

3M Mc- ,, ., 

Moc- (7.9) 



2(M +- M ) 



in terms of units of mc' 2 , for different values of M n m and the two 
values of M of 1,818 m and 1,836 m. 



M \m 



230 
240 
250 
260 
270 
280 



M= 1,818 m 



76-1 

78- 

79- 7 

81- 2 

82- 6 
84-0 



M = 1,836 m 



76-4 
78-3 

80- 

81- 5 

83- 

84- 5 



NUCLEAR THEORY 151 

This shows that the energy of the formation of the meson will be 
adequate to form the chain if the meson is in the mass range of 
M„:m between 260 and 270. The only meson available in this range is 
the neutral n meson of mass 264-6 ±3-2 w, according to Marshak 
(1952). However, this is a neutral meson. The best available meson, 
that is the one of lowest mass and having a charge but yet sufficient 
to form a chain of energy 82 mc 2 , is the charged n meson which has a 
measured mass of about 276 m. According to the above table, this 
affords an energy of slightly less than 84 mc~, which is sufficient to 
torm a chain while providing a surplus of one or two electron mass 
units. This means that the combination of such a meson, a nucleon 
and a chain has a total mass which differs from that of the nucleon 
itself by only one or two electron mass units. The total mass will be 
less by this amount so that this really is a measure of the binding 
energy involved. 

This gives us an approach to calculating the mass of an atomic 
nucleus. The nucleus can be regarded as an aggregation of some 
protons containing H particles of mass 1,818 m or 1,836 m or a 
mixture of both, some neutrons which may also comprise either H 
particle, and as many n mesons and chains as there are nucleons 
(except for the deuteron and the hydrogen nucleus). There is the clear 
indication that the n meson has an important role to play in nuclear 
physics. In fact, it has been believed for some years that it is involved 
in the binding mechanism of the atomic nucleus, and this theoretical 
finding is, therefore, by no means unexpected. 

It is of interest to speculate about the electron-positron chain 
coming free from the nucleus. With an even value of A' the chain 
would be a neutral entity having a mass of 81 -27 or 82-24 times that 
of the electron. If this latter energy is deployed to remove a meson 
attached to an H particle of mass 1,836 w, the above table shows that 
it could develop a meson of mass 265 m. If the meson came from the 
lighter H particle, it would be 267 m. It is possible, therefore, that the 
nuclear chain could be created by the formation of a charged n meson 
of mass 276 m, as the latter comes into aggregation with the H 
particle. Energy of some one or two electron mass units is surplus 
from this reaction. However, in the reverse direction, it might happen 
that the n meson can, in nuclear reactions, expand to lose some of its 
energy and, then, just as it reaches the stage where a chain can 
collapse to provide the energy needed to drive the meson away from 
the H particle, it is released. At this stage its mass would be about 



152 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

265 m or 267 m. Although it would still have a charge, it could be 
that this process has some relation with the formation of the neutral 
n mesons. These do have this lower mass value. 

This is, of course, mere speculation. It is open to criticism because 
it is not clear how a long series of electrons and positrons can just 
vanish and release all their mass energy. If they meld into space 
time, as with the annihilation of the electron-positron pairs, there is 
still about 3% of the energy of mc- of each electron and positron 
needed to sustain the charge in its new form (see page 138). Thus, 
about 5mc 2 is to be subtracted from the energy released by the chain. 
Also, if we examine Fig. 7.9 closely and ask how a meson is attached 
to the heavy H particle in each of the systems shown, we see that it is 
easy in the case of the proton but in the case of the neutron or 
deuteron an oppositely-charged particle would make it difficult to 
have the particle configuration shown. Even in the case of the proton, 
the presence of a negative meson attached to the positive H particle 
opposite the electron-positron pair, would alter the polarity sequence 
of the chain ends. 

These are not problems which invalidate the theory. They are 
indications that we cannot expect to have the atomic structure lit 
together easily to provide simple and convincing results. It is possible 
that we should not be thinking in terms of protons and neutrons 
when we analyse heavy atoms. Perhaps we should consider only H 
particles connected by chains and having the mesons attached to 
them, possibly in the chain. The answers can probably best be found 
by indirect analysis. For example, the spin properties of the proton 
and neutron can be studied under different conditions. This type of 
approach seems more appropriate at the present stage of develop- 
ment of the theory. 

Proton Spin 

The nuclear theory presented so far in this chapter might seem to 
be elaborate in certain respects. However, it has been supported by 
the following quantitative results: 

(a) The derivation of the observed binding energy of the deuteron, 

(b) The derivation of the observed energy of the electron ejected 
in neutron to proton decay, 

(c) The derivation of the observed mass of the n meson, in the 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



153 



approximate sense and on the assumption thai the n meson 
serves a prime role in nuclear binding, 
(d) The derivation of the mass of the H particle from first principles, 
this quantity being then available to obtain from this theory 
the masses of the neutron, proton and dcuteron, all stated as a 
ratio in terms of the mass of the electron. 

The question now faced is whether these same principles guide us 
to the magnetic moments and spin angular momenta of these nuclear 
particles. 

Consider the spin condition of the proton shown in Fig. 7.1 1. The 
spin condition is deemed to be that in which a particle rotates about 
a centre within the particle. Thus a single sphere of charge rotating 
about a diameter is said to spin. An aggregation of such charge 
spheres rotating about the common centre of mass can be said to 
spin also. Intrinsic spin will be used to represent the sum of the spins 
of the individual spheres of charge in such a particle aggregation. 
Thus, in Fig. 7.11 we denote the spin angular velocity about the 




Fig. 7.1 1 



point X as Q - X is the centre of mass of the proton and is distant 
approximately two H particle radii from the centre of the Ff particle. 
The particles in the proton are deemed to be in rolling contact. Let 
coi, 0)2, oz denote the angular velocities of the H particle, the electron 
and the positron in the inertial frame. Then, relative to the line of 
centres which rotates at Q , the angular velocities become oi -Q , 
o)o -Q , v>3 -Q respectively. For rolling contact, taking radii as 
'"l, '"2, ''3 respectively: 

(on -Q )r\ = -(w2-fioh=(w3 - Q )rz (7.10) 

The spin angular momentum of each component particle is pro- 
portional to its mass, angular velocity and radius squared. Since 
mass is inversely proportional to radius, spin angular momentum is 
proportional to v)\r\ , c>>/'2, 0)31-3 for the three particles respectively. The 



154 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



intrinsic spin angular momentum of the proton is thus proportional 
to the sum of these quantities. This spin angular momentum is 
assumed to be zero, as will be discussed later. Accordingly: 

Wl/'l -t- OW-2 + W3>'3 =^ (7. 1 1 ) 

Now, r > and /- 3 are respectively the radius of the electron and positron, 
both denoted a elsewhere in this book, n is the radius of the H 
particle and is (m/M)a, where mlM is the mass ratio of the electron 
and H particle. Since M is about 1,836 m, in can be assumed neglig- 
ible for a first analysis, making on very high and allowing (on - Q„)r\ 
in (7.10) to be replaced by onn. From (7.10) and (7.11) it is then 
simple algebra to show that on, a> 2 , « 3 are respectively - 2Q (M ; ?n), 
3^o, ~Q . 

We can now consider the magnetic moment of the proton. From 
Appendix I the spin contribution of each component particle is 
e;6c times angular velocity and radius squared. For orbital motion 
e:6c has to be replaced by <?/2r, as is well known. Also, it must be 
remembered from Chapter 2 that, strictly, these quantities may have 
to be increased by a factor to explain certain anomalous behaviour. 

The spin contribution just mentioned is one-third that of the 
related orbital contribution simply because the charge within the 
sphere is distributed over its volume. Accordingly it cannot be 
regarded as all being at the specified radius, as it can in the case of 
orbital motion. In evaluating the spin magnetic moment of the 
composite particle shown in Fig. 7.1 1, we find that there is a com- 
ponent due to the intrinsic spin and a component due to the spin 
about the point X. This latter component is evaluated from the above 
mentioned orbital formulation. Thus, it consists approximately of 
only two major elements, ejlc times 9a-Q for the positron and 

-e'jlc times a-Q for the electron. Note that r 2 +2r 3 is 3a. The H 
particle makes a very small contribution to magnetic moment and it 
can be ignored. Due to intrinsic spin, there are also two major 
elements, e!6c times a 2 o> 3 for the positron and - e,"6r times a 2 o> 2 
for the electron. Again, the H particle can be ignored. Since c; 2 is 
3Q and oj-a is -Q u the total contribution due to intrinsic spin is 

-4(e 6c)a-Q . Collecting the components due to motion about X 
gives $(ei2c)d-Q . Thus the total magnetic moment should be 
20(e l 6c)d 1 Q„ times the appropriate anomalous factor. Putting this as 
7 we have a proton magnetic moment of : 

20y(el6c)a 2 Q o (7.12) 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



155 



In connection with Fig. 4.4 it was explained how the nucleus of an 
atom has an angular momentum exchange relationship with a 
nuclear photon unit. Applying this to the proton, it is to be expected 
that the rotation about the point X will be synchronous with the 
rotation of the photon unit. The reason is that the proton has a non- 
symmetrical distribution of its charge. A small electric disturbance 
developed by the rotation of the proton can probably be compen- 
sated by an appropriate but very small perturbation of the motion of 
the associated electron. This tells us that: 



where co now has the meaning given in Fig. 4.4. The sense of "syn- 
chronous", as just used, therefore means that the rotation frequency 
of the proton about its centre of mass is exactly four times that of 
the photon unit. The reason is that the photon unit generates four 
pulsations every revolution. For the standard photon unit, o is 
Q,4 and Iv> is h'.ln. For the simple electron-proton system, (4.21) 
shows that Ioj is ah\2n. This shows that (7.13) becomes: 



The magnetic moment of the proton is evaluated from (7.12) and 
(7.14). To test this analysis it has to be noted that the measured 
magnetic moment involves a pre-knowledge of the proton spin 
angular momentum. This angular momentum is finite, even though 
we have assumed a total intrinsic spin component to be zero. There 
is a basic angular momentum quantum of hjAn. In interpreting proton 
magnetic moment measurements this quantum is assumed to apply. 
However, remembering the mechanism presented in Fig. 4.4, wc 
have to note that an angular momentum e is transferred between the 
electron and the proton. This quantity i; is Ie> in (4.21). Thus, it is to 
be expected that the proton angular momentum is really ( I t 2a)h An 
and the electron angular momentum (1 -2a)hAn in this particular 
system. The magnetic moment of the proton is measured by a 
resonance technique in which the ratio of the actual magnetic mo- 
ment and the actual angular momentum is observed. If the angular 
momentum has been underestimated then the measured magnetic 
moment will be too high. To facilitate comparison with reported 
measurements based upon the assumed half-spin quantum, the 
proton magnetic moment given by (7.12) and (7.14) should be 



Q = 4(<»o-o>) 



(7.13) 



Q -(\ a)Q 



(7.14) 



156 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

adjusted by multiplying it by (1 +2«). Thus, the proton magnetic 
moment can be written as: 

20"/(c / '6f)fl2(i -«)(i +2a)Q (7.15) 

At this stage, we pause to introduce a result derived in Appendix 
III. The value of> is 9-6, a quantity much higher than the factor of 2 
derived for the large-scale orbital motions in Chapter 2. It seems that 
in order to generate the kinetic reaction effects in the held medium 
the spins of elementary particles have to be higher than one would 
expect from normal theory. This result is deduced from the analysis 
of the balance conditions of magnetic field and angular momentum 
in the space-time system. It can be put to immediate test in applying 
(7.15). 

Putting )- as 9-6 in (7.15) and noting that a r is 4a 3, Q is c 2r and 
a is 1/137, the expression for the measured proton magnetic moment 
becomes: 

256 

ya'(l -«)(! + 2a)er 

where er is the Bohr Magneton. When evaluated this gives: 

1-525 I0" 3 

Bohr Magnetons, which is very close to the measured value of 
1-521 10- 3 . The fact that the H particle has been taken to be of 
negligible size may account for the slight difference in these results. 
Certainly, it seems that there is evidence to support the proton form 
presented, besides affording verification of the theoretical evaluation 
of y. 

Neutron Spin 

To calculate the spin properties of the neutron we have to know the 
form assumed by the neutron in the experimental environment of 
nuclear resonance. If another electron is added to the proton system 
in Fig. 7.11 on the left-hand side of the H particle and the proton 
spins are retained, we can easily calculate the neutron magnetic 
moment. In the case of the proton magnetic moment the electron 
contributed - 6 units to the parameter 20. Thus, for the neutron just 
developed the parameter 20 in (7.12) becomes 14. The ratio of the 
neutron magnetic moment to that of the proton should therefore be 



NUCLEAR THEORY 



157 



about 14 20 or 0-7. In fact, from experiment it is -0-6850. The minus 
sign means that we should have inverted all the polarities in the 
neutron model just proposed. It must comprise a negative H particle, 
two positrons and one electron. It has the form used in Fig. 7.4 and 
as depicted as form B in Fig. 7.1. 

It is possible that when the ratio of the magnetic moments of the 
proton and neutron is measured they are so close together that the 
proton is not bound by the photon unit coupled with the electron 
action but the neutron is. The neutron does not really qualify for 
pairing with an electron, and thereby being detected, since it has no 
resultant charge. However, it can assert an association with an 
electron if it is paired with a proton and if it takes over the electron 
associated with the proton. The affinity between the neutron and the 
electron may be favoured from their magnetic interaction. This 
means that the proton will have the half spin quantum IvAn whereas 
the neutron will take the angular momentum (I + 2a)h'An and rotate 
with a photon unit to comply with (7.14). We then expect the 
measured ratio of neutron and proton magnetic moments to be 
-0-7 times (1 <; ) ( 1 -via) or -0-6849. This seems close enough to 
the measured value of -0-6850 to give adequate satisfaction. It is 
further gratifying because in evaluating a ratio we avoid dependence 
upon the parameter y. 

We now turn attention to Figs. 7.9 and 7.10. The neutron is there 
shown in its bound state in the atomic nucleus coupled to the 
electron-positron chains by attachment to the positron terminations 
of the chains. These illustrations were merely diagrammatic. The 
coupling needs to be considered more closely. In Fig. 7. 12 an electron 
and a positron are shown attached to the neutron along the spin axis. 
They are ready to form the connections with any chains in the nucleus. 
It may be shown that a pair of electrons or a pair of positrons cannot 




Fig. 7.12 



'->o PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

replace the added electron-positron pair and yet form an arrange- 
ment in which the forces between the component particles will hold 
things together. We must assume, therefore, that a neutron can 
capture an electron-positron pair to form the system shown in 
Fig. 7. 1 2 or, at least, that it joins to nuclear bonds through an electron 
on one side and a positron on the other. If the neutron spins there 
will be rolling contact with these end particles. For no slip they must 
rotate and so become a feature of the neutron spin. This is the other 
reason why they should have opposite polarity. Their magnetic 
moments will cancel and so not affect the above analysis. 

Neglecting the finite size of the H particle, and remembering that 
the adjacent particles have spin at 3Q besides rotating about the 
neutron spin axis at Q , we see that the contact with the end particles 
causes them to spin on the neutron spin axis at -2Q . The point 
about this is that for electrons or positrons on a spin axis an angular 
velocity of 2Q is to be expected. 



Deuteron Spin 

The deuteron has symmetry and is therefore not involved in a spin 
governed by photon units. The problem, therefore, is to decide how 
to determine any spin of the three positron constituents in its 
composition. From the foregoing comments one could guess that 
each positron may have a spin of 2Q where Q is put equal to Q. 
The parameter of magnetic moment is then 6 units compared with 
20 for the proton and - 14 for the neutron. Alternatively, since the 
deuteron is little different from a proton and a neutron combined 
we can possibly combine 20 and - 14 to obtain the same parameter 6. 

To apply this to experiment we note that in terms of a measured 
separate proton resonance for which the proton magnetic moment 
parameter is slightly less than 20 and its spin angular momentum 
slightly more than h;4n, the deuteron magnetic moment is: 

2 ( j ) (l i 2u)/(l - a) (7.16) 

Upon evaluation, this is 0-3066, which compares with a measured 
value of 0-3070. Again, allowing for the fact that the dimensions of 
the H particle are ignored, this result is excellent. 

The difficulty with the deuteron is to understand how it contributes 
to the magnetic resonance experiment. Are we even certain that the 



NUCLEAR THEORY 159 

deuteron which performs in such experiments is quite the same as the 
one which undergoes transmutation in nuclear processes? May it 
not be that a proton and a neutron have become locked together in a 
state of spin ? Going back to the basic deuteron model, let us examine 
what has to happen to a neutron and a proton for the compacted 
deuteron to form. In Fig. 7.13 the neutron and the proton are shown 




side by side spinning about the same axis. Note that the spin motions 
of the outer electron in the neutron and the outer positron in the 
proton are identical from the foregoing analysis. Since these two 
particles have opposite polarity they effectively cancel one another's 
magnetic moment. Now, if the neutron and the proton become 
locked together in a spin motion state, the combined magnetic 
moment is independent of the presence of the electron and positron 
just mentioned. If the neutron and proton fuse together and eject 
the electron and the positron we have the inverse process to that 
shown in Fig. 7.4. There, the deuteron absorbed an electron and a 
positron to form a neutron and a proton. Here, once the electron and 
positron are removed, we are left with the same total magnetic 
moment. Also, by the inversion of the positive H particle and its 
electron, we can expect aggregation to form the deuteron comprising 
two negative H particles and three positrons. If each positron adopts 
a 2Q spin, or thereabouts, sharing the magnetic moment of the 
neutron and proton, the magnetic moment of the deuteron is still as 
given by (7.16) in comparison with that measured for the free 
proton. It follows that it is possible to explain spin magnetic proper- 
ties of the deuteron in terms of the same model as was used to 
calculate the binding energy. This affords a double check on the 
nature of the deuteron and its constituent nucleons. 



160 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



Electron Spin 

Before leaving this chapter we must consider the rather compli- 
cated problem of electron spin. 

Tn the analysis in Chapter 4 it was found appropriate to assume 
that the total angular momentum of a basic particle (the lattice 
particle or the electron) is zero. This meant that there was a spin 
component and an orbital component compensating each other, as 
formulated in equation (4.4). It will also be found in Appendix III 
that we will apply this concept of total angular momentum being 
zero for the lattice particle when we analyse the residual spin fre- 
quency of the particle. Quite apart from angular momentum balance, 
we will there use the particle spin to explain the source of a magnetic 
moment balancing the magnetic moment of the continuum charge in 
space-time. The latter moves cyclically relative to the electromagnetic 
reference frame set by the lattice particles. Now. the balance con- 
ditions just mentioned are subject to small residual effects. In the 
main these can be ignored in the analysis. However, to explain 
certain phenomena and discrepancies in quantitative analysis we do 
have to pay attention to them. 

The anomalous spin properties of the electron may be due to this 
cause. For the orbital electron we have seen in Chapter 2 that an 
angular momentum ofh;2n can develop a magnetic effect equivalent 
to that of two Bohr Magnetons. The magneto-mechanical ratio is 
e mc and this leads to a magnetic moment based on h 2n of twice 
eh Anmc, the Bohr Magneton. It was there shown that reaction effects 
cancelled half the field, thus making the apparent magnetic moment 
of an orbital electron of angular momentum k in seem to be that of 
the Bohr Magneton. When we turn to the problem of spin we find 
evidence of half-spin quanta of angular momentum h 4n and the 
measured magneto-mechanical ratio of the electron appears still to 
be ejmc, though only approximately. Indeed, the anomaly factor of 
2 becomes, when measured, slightly higher than 2 by the factor 
1 -001 146 , 0-00001 2 or 1 -00 1 1 65 ±0-0000 1 1 . Sommerficld ( 1 957) has 
presented the experimental data and mentions these two conflicting 
measurements. The anomalous component in this factor is assumed 
to be in the magnetic moment and not in the angular momentum. 
Also, Farley et al. (1966) have measured the same anomaly for the 
negative muon and found the anomalous component to be 
0-0011653 ±0-0000024. 



NUCLEAR THEORY 161 

There is. therefore, a fundamental problem to answer. It is 
associated with spin, and yet spin seems to be some property merely 
attributed to the half-quantum ///4tt, whereas the main anomalous 
effect is associated with the mysterious doubling of the magneto- 
mechanical ratio. The anomalous properties of the electron may still 
be seated in what can just as well be termed orbital motion. 

Quantum electrodynamics already provides an answer for the 
anomaly. By a rather complex treatment, which has not been wholly 
accepted by the physicist, quantum electrodynamics gives a value of 
a/In or 0-001 161, subject to slight upward revision to allow for higher 
order terms in the calculations. As before, a is the fine structure 
constant. It is therefore not really necessary to challenge this explana- 
tion in this work. Quantum theory is linked to the concepts newly 
introduced in the previous pages. Thus the anomalous magnetic 
moment of the electron and the not-unrelated phenomenon known 
as the Lamb Shift which already have explanation in physics need 
not strictly be pursued here. However, the author has relied upon the 
space-time reaction as offering explanation for the anomalous factor 
of 2 in electron magneto-mechanical studies. Also, the quantum 
electrodynamic explanation presents some doubts. Therefore, the 
reader may be interested in a little speculative enquiry into the anom- 
alous electron spin properties. 

In the analysis of the formation of the H particle it was found that 
some field angular momentum due to radiation would be developed. 
Thus, there can be change in angular momentum according to the 
different states of transmutation of the system of particles involved. 
A basic angular momentum quantum due to field radiation is that 
given by (7.4). Ignoring the small component m\M and introducing 
the value of r, this expression gives the angular momentum quantum: 




(7.17) 



This angular momentum quantum has some association with the 
existence of the H particle. Now, consider an H particle and an 
electron as shown in Fig. 7.14 spinning in rolling contact and turning 
at the universal angular velocity Q about their common centre of 
mass. Neglecting terms in m\M, the mass ratio of the electron and H 
particle, the angular momentum of the system is md ! Q or 
hnaia:rf, which is h(hl4n)(4al3) 2 . 

We thus have, as it were, a need for these small angular momentum 



162 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 





+ 

Fig. 7.14 

quantities when we think of the transmutation of particles involving 
heavy nucleons, the H particles, in motion at the angular velocity Q. 
The motion states considered involve balance with an electron. Con- 
sequently, it may be that these angular momenta have some residual 
association with the electron even when it has transferred to perform 
other roles. Guided by the quantitative implications, we will evaluate 
the two angular momentum quantities just derived . That just presented 
is simply 8 9 divided by 137 squared in units of h'An. This is: 

'000049 

(7.17) is simply evaluated since e-\2c is u(hAn). It is: 

0-001100 

Together, the angular momenta total 0-001 149 half-spin units which 
could possibly be an anomalous angular momentum component of 
the electron. Furthermore, as already discussed, the electron par- 
ticipating in balance in magnetic nuclear resonance measurements 
can have an angular momentum of (1 -2a)h'An owing to transfer 
action with the nucleus. This is mentioned in deriving (7.15). On this 
basis it is possible that in some situations the anomalous parameter 
0-001 149 is referenced on 1 ~2a instead of unity. This would increase 
its effect, as a ratio, to 0-001166. 

This is mere speculation. No attempt is made to explain the 
physical processes by which the electron acquires its residual spin 
properties. Further, no attempt is made to explain the true nature of 
the magnetic moment of the electron. There are problems remaining. 
Suffice it to say that we need not be surprised that the electron 
behaves anomalously. It may be coincidence that the analysis just 
presented leads to anomalous factors of 0-001149 and 0-001166 
according to the two possible states of the electron in its nuclear 
balance role. The fact that two conflicting measurements of 0-001 146 
and 0-001165 have emerged in practice is certainly of interest. 
Although, as yet, the argument presented is not conclusive, it is 




NUCLEAR THEORY 163 

possibly sufficient to show the reader that the success of the quantum 
electrodynamic approach may not be the last word on the subject. 
What is offered here may lead to a better explanation. 

The outcome of this review is that residual spin properties are a 
feature of the electron produced in transmutations. Apart from this, 
the zero total angular momentum condition is retained and can be 
applied both to the space-time lattice particles and, at least to close 
approximation, to the electron moving with the E frame. The half- 
spin quantum h,4n remains standard either as the basic approximate 
quantum of electron spin or as the balancing orbital effect due to E 
frame motion and G frame balance. The proton in the E frame has 
zero intrinsic spin. Other heavy composite particles, the neutron and 
the dcuteron, for example, appear to have a small intrinsic spin. Thus, 
it appears that, apart from any intrinsic spin, heavy particles con- 
taining nucleons have a total spin property not merely set by their 
mass and not merely in balance with the E and G frame motion 
components. These particles somehow get primed with spin angular 
momentum in multiples of h\An. The proton has a spin angular 
momentum of /;/4tt in spite of its zero intrinsic spin. The neutron has 
the same spin angular momentum with non-zero intrinsic spin. The 
deuteron has a spin angular momentum of h\2n. This topic will be 
discussed further in Chapter 9. The quantum nature of the spins of 
heavy particles has been assumed in the above analysis of spin 
magnetic moments. There were minor modifications of the spin quan- 
tization to allow for transfers of angular momentum. These involved 
the fine structure constant a. Accordingly, though it is claimed 
that an adequate account of magnetic moment of the spin states of 
nuclear particles has been developed, there is no explanation given for 
the angular momentum quantization. Also, the heavy particles con- 
taining nucleons do have angular momentum from their motion w ith all 
matter in the £ frame. It is not true to say that their angular momentum 
sums to zero. Thus an out-of-balance of the angular momentum is a 
feature of the presence of matter in space -time. It is not surprising, 
therefore, to find astronomical bodies turning without there being any 
apparent balance of angular momentum amongst matter. 

The problem of the spin magnetic moment of the electron has not 
been analysed directly. It will be shown in Appendix III that a lattice 
particle develops, by spin, a magnetic moment equal to two Bohr 
Magnetons. Perhaps the electron does the same for the same reason 
when it is set in the E frame. Perhaps, however, since this magnetic 



M 



164 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



moment is locked in a fixed direction in space and is acting to cancel 
that developed by other electric charge in space-time, this property 
passes undetected. We do not need to speculate about it further. 
Little is likely to emerge. It is true that spin magnetic moment of the 
electron has been explained on established theory as being due to two 
separate components of charge differently distributed over the 
electron. One is deemed to rotate while the other remains at rest. 
This is bold assumption, indeed. It is analysed by Page and Adams 
(1965). It is demonstrative of the difficulties which the physicist has 
given himself by refusing to have anything to do with a real space- 
time medium and retaining inflexible electrodynamic principles. 

Summary 

The ideas developed in Chapter 4 on the wave mechanical model of 
the atom have been melded with the thoughts on the electron and 
deuteron presented in Chapter 1 . The object has been to provide an 
insight into the structure of the atomic nucleus. The nature, mass and 
magnetic moment of the proton, neutron and deuteron have been 
explained. It is to be expected that the properties of atomic nuclei, as 
aggregations of protons and neutrons, should become explicable on 
this theory. Though this remains to be explained, progress has been 
made in finding the bonds between such nucleons. These bonds 
appear to be electron-positron chains and this is evidenced by the 
essential role played by the pion in their formation. The pion latches 
on to a heavy basic particle, a nucleoli, and so releases a binding 
energy which is enough to account for the self-energy of the pion and 
provide a surplus needed to create the chain. The result is that the 
mass effect of the binding energy, being negative, just over- 
compensates the mass of the pion itself and that of the related chain 
forming one of the bonds between the protons and neutrons. The 
result, of course, is that any atomic nucleus appears from its mass 
relation with other atoms to be a mere aggregation of neutrons and 
protons and little else. The fact that pions, which have significant 
mass, can appear to come from nuclei is, therefore, no longer per- 
plexing. This problem has been overcome, with the most encouraging 
result that the length of the electron-positron chains forming the 
bonds has to equal the lattice spacing of space-time for the pion 
binding energy to a nucleon to provide the right answers. 

The calculation of the energy released in neutron to proton decay 



NUCLEAR THEORY 165 

has been an important feature of this chapter. The prediction of the 
existence of a fundamental particle, the so-called H particle, is 
important. The indication that it can have two forms, one slightly 
less massive than the other, can have important bearing upon the 
explanation of the packing fraction curve in further development of 
this account. 

Electron spin has been discussed. Anomalous properties of the 
electron are consistent with the ideas presented in the analysis of 
the magnetic moments of the proton, neutron and deuteron. Also, the 
argument was linked with the explanation of the gyroinagnetic ratio 
presented in Chapter 2. This in turn involved further support for the 
basic features of space-time as outlined in Chapter 6. since the 
analysis in Appendix III has a basic dependence upon these features. 

We must next turn attention to the magnetic properties of much 
larger bodies. Terrestrial magnetism can be explained without 
difficulty from the same principles as used above. This is pursued in 
the next chapter. It shows that gravitation is not the sole link in the 
application of this new concept of space-time to both the atom and 
the cosmos. 



8. Cosmic Theory 



Geomagnetism 

The discovery of the pole-seeking properties of the lodestone ante- 
dates the discovery of the phenomenon of gravitation. It is quite 
remarkable that the great progress of physical science in the past 
hundred years has not been marked by a wholly acceptable account 
of these two fundamental properties of the earth. Tn this w ork, new 
comprehensive explanations for gravitation and ferromagnetism 
have been presented, but to meet the challenge of the lodestone we 
now need to understand geomagnetism. Even though ferromagnetism 
can be explained, whether by Heisenberg's theory or the author's 
theory in Chapter 3, we have no explanation of the earth's magnet- 
ism. It is true that there is a theory of hydromagnctism. but this 
has hardly been accepted. Large astronomical bodies rotating at 
significant speeds all exhibit intrinsic magnetism. Some, the sun is 
an example, exhibit a magnetic moment which reverses direction 
from time to time. Such behaviour is hardly accountable for in terms 
of hydromagnetism. Hydromagnctism has been reviewed in detail 
by Elsasser (1955, 1956). 

It is of interest to see whether the theory introduced in the fore- 
going pages can offer a better explanation. There is some encourage- 
ment to believe that it may, because there is the immediate question 
of what happens to the Hypothesis of Universal Time if the "clock", 
meaning the cyclic motion of the lattice particles, is rotating, as w ith 
the earth. Clearly, as the earth rotates, the space-time within the 
earth rotates as well. The particle lattice rotates as a whole and so 
does the continuum. Thus, there is basically a balance of charge in 
motion. The gravitons. electrons and energy medium do not have to 
share this earthly rotation, any more than they share the linear motion 
of the space-time lattice. These latter space time constituents 
define the inertial frame of reference. Apart from this, the lattice 
particles do have to rotate at their universal angular velocity Q to 
keep in register w ith the harmonious motion of all space. Now, how 
can the particles w ithin the earth's aether do this if the w hole lattice 



COSMIC THEORY 167 

which they form has to rotate with the earth? The answer to this is 
simple. To keep in register they have to undergo a slight radial dis- 
placement. This will be understood by reference to Fig. 8.1. 




Imagine a particle to be describing its regular orbit at a distance X 
from the centre of the earth as it moves with the earth about the 
earth's axis of rotation. The axes of the two motions are deemed to 
be parallel. Then, compounding the two components of particle 
velocity, we find that, as the particle rotates, its orbital speed in its 
space-time orbit varies between cjl+oX and c/2 -oX, where cj is 
the angular velocity of the earth. For constant angular velocity of the 
particle relative to the inertial frame, a condition we associate with 
the harmonious motion or in-register state of the particles, the 
variation of the above speed has to be accompanied by a proportional 
variation of the radius of the particle orbit. The radius is found by 
dividing the orbital speed by the angular velocity c'lr. Thus, the 
radius varies betwen r{\ + 2c»X;'c) and r(l 2<»X;c). It follows that 
the whole orbit of the particle behaves as if its radius remains 
unchanged but its centre has been displaced radially with respect to 
the axis of the earth by an amount SXof2cjXr!c. This means that the 
effect of the charge c is changed as if the charge w ere simply displaced 
by this amount. 

Now, although the charge continuum and the lattice particles are 
aether rotating with the earth, there is good reason for believing that 
there are unbound particles moving through the earth and com- 
pensating its linear momentum effects of its space-time due to its 
motion about the sun. This was implicit in the explanation of the 
perihelion anomaly in Chapter 5. Thus, we are free to expect that the 
electrostatic effects of the charge displacement can be wholly bal- 
anced by an appropriate distribution of these free charges. The 



168 



PHYSICS WITHOUT FINSTPIN 



electrical balance is assured, but the magnetic effects of the displaced 
charge will not be balanced. The free particles are not moving with 
the earth as it rotates. They move through the earth to compensate 
the motion of the earth in its orbit around the sun. This means that 
there will be some magnetic effect set up due to the rotation of the 
space-time in the earth. 

We will calculate the magnetic moment of this displaced charge. 
The change in magnetic moment due to one displaced particle is 
\{elc)S(ojX 2 ) or ecoXdXjc. Since SX has been evaluated as 2cjXr,c, 
the elemental magnetic moment arising from a single particle is 
2ecj 2 X-r'c-. Since R may denote the radius of the earth's aether, 
following the same argument as we used in Chapter 5 for perihelion 
anomalies, and since there are 1/c/ 3 particles per unit volume of the 
earth's aether, the magnetic moment of the earth should be: 

1 6n _ - „ , ... n 

-jyer/JW-W-V 2 (8.1) 

This derivation has involved integrating the function in X over the 
whole volume of the earth's aether. 

The expression can be evaluated quite readily. From (4.1), er is 
the Bohr Magneton, known from experiment to be 9-27 10 21 cgs 
units. From (6.58), we know that rjd is 0-30292. This tells us that d is 

6- 37 10 11 cm, since e is known to be 4-8 10~ 10 esu. We know c. It is 
3 10 10 cm sec. For the earth co is 7-26 10~ 5 rad/sec. The radius of the 
earth is 6-378 10 8 cm, but since the earth's aether evidently termin- 
ates somewhat above the earth's surface, say in the ionosphere, we 
could round R off at 6-45 10 8 cm. This puts the earth's aether 
boundary 72 km above the earth's surface, at the locality of the 
lower ionosphere layer. These data give an estimate of the geo- 
magnetic moment, since, from (8.1), our theory suggests that it is 

7- 9 10' 25 cgs units. In fact, the measured geomagnetic moment is 

8- 06 10' 25 . Again we have excellent results. Of course, it is not exact. 
We have made some assumptions and these need rectifying. Firstly, 
it has been assumed that the earth's axis is parallel with that of the 
motion of space-time. The earth's axis rotates itself. It changes 
direction by precessing about a mean direction over a long period of 
time. The earth's axis tends to be tilted relative to a reference direc- 
tion normal to the plane of the earth's motion about the sun. Thus, 
one has to accept that there is some angular displacement between 



COSMIC THEORY 169 

the axis of space-time and that of the earth. If is this angle of tilt 
and it is the angle measured relative to the perpendicular to the orbit, 
is 23-5°. This will reduce the estimate of the geomagnetic moment 
given by (8.1) in proportion to the factor cos 23-5°. This is 0-917. 
Then, if we also use the uppermost ionosphere layer as the boundary 
of the earth's aether, which is 250 km above the earth's surface, the 
geomagnetic moment becomes 8-25 10 25 cgs units. Clearly, one 
correction reduces the original estimate, which was slightly low, and 
the other more than compensates. It seems that if the successive 
ionosphere layers represent different boundaries of slip of the earth's 
aether relative to the aether surrounding the earth, then the geo- 
magnetic field can be explained exactly. 

There is also the question of whether the field will be of the right 
form. The magnetic moment might be correct, but will the shape of 
the field match that measured? Wi 1 1 the seat of the magnetic moment 
match that observed ? This has been discussed elsewhere by the author 
(1966), but it is important to note here that the earth's magnetic 
moment comprises the quantity deduced in (8.1) and a quantity in 
the opposite direction which is exactly double and so gives the same 
numerical result when combined. This is because we are talking about 
charge which is displaced, but only displaced in effect. The result is 
that there is an effective charge density distributed throughout the 
earth due to this displacement and the balance of this charge is 
found at the ionosphere layers. This balance is opposite in sign and 
will generate its own magnetic moment. In fact, the magnetic 
moment of a charge at the surface of the ionosphere, as displaced 
from the volume enclosed, will be opposite and exactly double that 
calculated above. The total magnitude therefore remains unchanged. 
Note that the radial displacement of charge is from the axis about 
which the earth rotates. It is not radial from the earth's centre. For 
this reason, the effective radius of gyration of the earth's distributed 
charge is l/y'2 times the radius of the earth's aether. Remember that 
although there is magnetic moment, the electric field effects of this 
charge displacement are not apparent because there are free lattice 
particles in motion along set paths through the earth, due to the 
translational velocity of the earth in its orbit about the sun. These 
charges do effectively compensate the electric field. They do not 
compensate the magnetic field because they do not share the earth's 
rotation. This is the whole basis of the account of the anomalous 
perihelion problem, as explained in Chapter 5. 



170 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



Jupiter 

It is reasonable to ask if we can explain the magnetic moments of 
other planets. The problem is the provision of adequate data. We 
need to know the magnetic moment of a large planet spinning at a 
high rate. Otherwise the magnetic fields produced are too small to be 
measured. For a large planet, the estimate of the magnetic field mav 
also be indirect. It may depend upon other theory and this could be 
defective. For example, consider the planet Jupiter. A problem 
confronting radio astronomers is the nature of radio emission by 
Jupiter. Whereas thermal action can be regarded as the energy 
source for generating radio emission by stars, the planet Jupiter has 
a temperature of - 143 C and, analysed as a "black-body" radiator, 
it is found that at a wave-length of 100 cm the actual radiation is 
1,000 times stronger than predicted theoretically (sec New Scientist, 
March 17, 1966, p. 702). This hardly confirms one's belief in the 
sources of radio emission by stars. The question is seemingly still an 
open one. However, looking elsewhere for the explanation, the above 
article refers to theoretical analysis which attributes the radio 
emission to "synchrotron emission" produced by electrons moving at 
highly relativistic speeds close to the velocity of light. On the same 
analysis the polar magnetic field of Jupiter is believed to be about 
60 gauss. 

Now, on the author's theory of magnetic moment, as presented 
above, we see from (8. 1) that magnetic moment is proportional to the 
fifth power of radius and the square of speed of rotation. Jupiter has 
ten times the radius and 2-4 times the rotation speed of the earth. 
Since polar field varies inversely as the cube of radius, the polar 
magnetic field of Jupiter should be about 600 times that of the earth. 
This is, say, 300 gauss, which is five times that estimated on the basis 
of Relativistic electron emission. However, the radio emission of 
Jupiter may not be attributable to electrons assumed to move at 
ultra-high velocity. Instead, on this theory, it could be due to the 
reaction effect of electrons responding to provide the reaction energy 
associated with Jupiter's field. A cyclotron frequency corresponding 
to an angular velocity of cH\mc does occur and, assuming that this is 
the source of Jupiter's radio emission, the wave-length will be 
10,700/// cm. 

It will be remembered that in discussing the reaction effect of 



COSMIC THEORY 



17! 



electrons or other charge carriers in the presence of a magnetic field 
in Chapter 2, the kinetic energy of this reacting charge was deemed to 
be equal to the magnetic field energy. The operative equation was: 

Hev mv- i<i~>\ 
<■ R 

where e and m apply here to the electron. The angular velocity is the 
ratio of the velocity r of the electron to the radius R of its orbit w hen 
reacting to the field H. This angular velocity is then seen to be ell me. 
as used above. 

For Jupiter, if 77 is 300 gauss the emission frequency will be at a 
wave-length of 35 cm. If H varies over the disc of Jupiter, decreasing 
away from the poles, then this wave-length will also vary over a 
range slightly above 35 cm. Radio emission from Jupiter does appear 
to be strongest over a range of frequency corresponding to such 
wave-lengths. Therefore, reacting electrons could well be its cause. 
However, it is not necessary to expect the electron velocities to be 
"relativistic". In so far as they can develop motion in harmony they 
will develop magnetic disturbances and wave radiation. We are not 
concerned with their emission of energy on this theory. 

It is concluded that there is a feasible explanation for the magnetic 
moment of the planet Jupiter. The account presented explains a 
rather higher magnetic moment than has been observed indirectly 
from studies of radio emission. However, it is based upon the same 
analysis as that used to explain the earth's magnetic moment. Also, 
it is shown that there is another way of interpreting the indirect 
evidence of radio emission experiments. Also, this other interpreta- 
tion adds support to the concepts of space-time on which this work 
is based and does not involve any assumptions about electrons mov- 
ing at ultra-high velocities in Jupiter's field. 



The Sun 

We can next test the theory of magnetic moment of astronomical 
bodies by applying it to the sun. The sun rotates once every 25 days 
and has a radius 108 times that of the earth. Its magnetic moment 
should then be (108) 5 /(25)- that of the earth's magnetic moment, or 
1-9 10 33 cgs units. Estimations of the solar magnetic moment have 
to take into account sporadic magnetic fields produced in sun spots. 
A reliable estimate of solar magnetic dipole moment was probably 



1 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTKIN 

made by Sakurai (1959), who measured it as 5 10 32 cgs. This is less 
than predicted, but there has been evidence that the solar magnetic 
field changes with time. It is believed that in some stars the magnetic 
field reverses cyclically, in some cases every few days. Thus, though 
the explanation offered for the solar field is of the right order, it is 
perplexing to seek to explain the possible reversals. Presumably this 
variable magnetic moment rules out any question of the magnetism 
depending upon thermal-electric effects. The theory presented is no 
worse in this regard than one depending upon magneto-hydro- 
dynamic possibilities. On the other hand, it is at least much better 
since it gives the right quantitative results. Further, perhaps the 
reversals can be explained, particularly as the magnetic moment 
developed on this account is produced by the difference between an 
effect within the rotating system and one at its surface. We will come 
back to this problem later in this chapter. 

The Zodiacal Light 

The zodiacal light is a dim glow visible in the night sky in the region 
of the ecliptic shortly after the sun has set in the evening and shortly 
before it rises in the morning. It is seen as a cone of light which may 
rise halfway to the zenith and extend at its base along the horizon for 
an angular distance of normally some 20° to 30° but sometimes as 
much as 45° each side. Under other conditions the light is evident as 
a zodiacal band running along the ecliptic normally some 5 to 10° 
wide but sometimes as much as 20° wide. 

Along the zodiacal band at a point directly opposite the sun there 
is a region where the band is both brighter and wider than at any 
other point. This brighter region is known as the gegenshein, or 
counterglow, and is sometimes seen when the band itself is not 
visible. The nature of this light is still an enigma. One theory stipu- 
lates that it is a reflection of light from millions of tiny metcoritic 
particles, but this puts the source of light well away from the earth's 
atmosphere and makes it difficult to reconcile some of the character- 
istics of the phenomenon. 

The new ideas presented in this book could provide an answer. 
Might it be that the slip between the earth's space-time and the 
surrounding space-time occurring in the ionosphere regions can 
generate light? On the theory developed, a cubic lattice of space- 
time rotates within a surrounding cubic lattice. If the slip occurs 



COSMIC T II HO R Y 



173 



neatly and is not spread over a region of turbulence, there could be a 
disturbance of the electromagnetic reference frame as the lattices 
'notch along' relative to one another. If there were turbulence, we 
might have to expect something to go wrong with the laws of physics 
over this turbulent region. Since there is no evidence of this, one can 
reasonably expect an electromagnetic disturbance to be produced 
at the boundary of the earth's space-time. To calculate the frequency 
of this disturbance is quite simple. Consider Fig. 8.2. At a point A at 
the boundary of the earth's space-time, positioned over the equator, 
the lattice structure of the inner and outer space-time sy stems are in 
register. The disturbance frequency here is (oR'd, w here o is the earth's 



-f — ! — ^ — 

f : -f ■ 

1 






~~\— 






— 1 




















i i 

! / 










to 














1// 
























■ 

h 


/ 


/ 




/ 








K 








1 










^_ 










\ 




\ 




■ — - 














1 ! 
1 






-v 












/ f 

/ / 




















/ / 














































y 






1 

1 


J 


-i-i- 












■ — r- 

1 — H 



Fig. 8.2 



angular velocity, R is the radius of the earth's space- time, and d is 
the lattice distance parameter. Since oj is 7 - 26 10~ 5 rad sec and R is 
about 6-5 10 8 cm, we find that the frequency of the boundary ripple is 
74 10 1 1 cycles per second. This corresponds to a wave-length of 
4,060 Angstroms. However, this is an upper limit. When die earth has 
turned through 45 relative to the surrounding space-time lattice, the 
ripple action at the boundary will be less, because successive lattice 
particles are spaced at y'2 d. Also, there are factors such as the tilt of 
the axis of rotation of the earth's space-time, the reduction in 
frequency if the sky in non-equatorial regions is examined and the 
possible successive stages of ionosphere slip. Even so, there w ill be 
generation of visible radiation in the night sky. It is submitted that 
the above explanation is the answer to the problem of the zodiacal 



174 PHYSICS WITHOUT I I NS I I I \ 

light. The phenomenon has the following features, all of which are 
consistent with the theory. 

1 . T he visible light frequencies appear to vary in certain regions of 
the night sky according to different occasions of viewing. This 
may evidence the interaction of the outer space-time system. The 
orientation of the lattice of space-time outside the earth system 
is a factor in determining the frequency of the light generated. 

2. The fact that the phenomenon is manifested more in the 
direction of the ecliptic is consistent with the theory. At 
positions over the earth where there is high latitude the 
boundary velocity of the earth's motion is reduced. This means 
emission of light at lower frequency. 

3. The gegenshein phenomenon is more readily explained if the 
light causing it is generated where it is seen and not reflected 
from the sun. Assuming that the zodiacal light is generated by 
the boundary slip process described, it would be more easily 
seen in the absence of diffused light from the sun, that is, it 
would be more evident in the region of the gegenshein. Also, 
however, it would be seen on the horizon owing to the increased 
intensity resulting from viewing a slip region obliquely. 

It is of interest to note that the form of light generation suggested 
here is different from the action of the photon. It is possible, therefore 
that such light cannot be traced to any original photon quanta. It is 
possible that its absorption in photon form will occur, because the 
photon action is concerned with generation and absorption, but not 
propagation. The result could be that anomalous effects may occur if 
one thinks in terms of energy conservation and Planck's radiation 
law. In short, Planck's law need not, and probably does not, apply to 
radiation in the form of the zodiacal light. 

The Solar System 

The orbital angular momentum of the planets is almost wholly due 
to Jupiter (94%) and Saturn (3-8%). In comparison, the sun has 
negligible orbital angular momentum and an angular momentum due 
to rotation of less than 1 % of that shared by the planets. By recog- 
nizing that the space- time in the sun is rotating too and that it has a 
mass density of 100 times that of the sun, we see the possibility that 
the sun might have nearly as much angular momentum as the planets. 
Ideally, these angular momenta should be equal and opposite. This 



COSMIC THEORY 



175 



must be the case if the planets came from the sun by some action 
wholly contained by the matter of the solar system as we know it. 
Apparently, this is not possible because the sun appears to rotate in 
the wrong direction. The reader might feel that there is too much 
speculation involved in arguing that the core of the sun might be 
rotating in the direction opposite to that observed at its surface. 
The surface happens to rotate at different angular velocities at 
different latitudes. Since angular velocity is not constant, it is not 
impossible to imagine that the hidden core moves at a different 
angular velocity to its surface. If this can happen, then it may even 
rotate in the opposite direction. This is speculation, but we need to 
understand the problem of balance of angular momentum and the 
alternative is possibly greater speculation. If the planets were ejected 
as particles of cosmic matter which has been collected in the locality 
of the planets, it is curious that all this matter should rotate about the 
sun in the same direction. Unless, of course, it was thrown off" the sun 
in the direction in which the sun rotates at its surface. The reaction 
effect is in the sun as a whole. Tf matter is ejected from a near-rigid 
sun, the sun would have to rotate in the opposite direction to keep 
the angular momentum balance right. However, on this basis the 
successive emissions of cosmic matter would tend to be in random 
direction and the sun would tend to be at rest. Also, the matter might 
eventually come back to the sun without going into orbit. By having 
the core of the sun rotating in the opposite direction to its surface, 
even before any matter is ejected, we have a system which can prevail 
and increase in its spin as matter forming the planets is thrown off. 
This idea can be taken much further, with very interesting conse- 
quences, but it is beyond the scope of this work and is, undeniably, 
speculation, though interesting speculation. 

For the time being, the reader may prefer to accept the more 
conventional ideas involving the influence of some star no longer 
with us. For example, there is the thought that the planets are all 
that is left of a large star companion to the sun which exploded. When 
the dust settled, the earth and the other planets were left behind, 
sharing the angular momentum of the exploded star. On such a theme 
Hoyle( 1950) wrote: 

So this is the sort of thing that happened to the patent of" our 
planets. Calculation tells us a good deal about its state just before 
the outburst. The collapse must have gone on very far before this 



176 PHYSICS WITHOUT I INS I I l\ 

happened. In spite of the enormous amount of material in the 
companion star, it must have become considerably smaller in 
volume than the earth. It emitted hard X-rays from its surface into 
surrounding space. It was so enormously dense that a match-box 
full of material taken from its central regions would have con- 
tained about 1,000,000,000 tons. Its surface rotated with a speed 
of about 100,000,000 miles an hour. And the time required for its 
catastrophic outburst was as little as one minute. 

Ideas such as this stimulate the imagination. However, the thought 
of 1 ,000,000,000 tons of matter being compacted into a match-box is 
really taking liberties with Newton's discovery of the law of gravity. 
It is bold assumption to imagine that, whatever gravity "is, the 
constant of gravitation G will, in fact, remain constant under all 
conditions. The ideas about gravitational collapse are all suspect 
until we can explain the reason behind the constancy of G and the 
limitations on its constancy. The analysis presented in this work has, 
at least, provided an explanation of the nature of gravitation coupled 
with an evaluation of G. Thus, we can have the boldness and confi- 
dence needed to explore what happens in dense matter. We find that 
space-time has a density itself. It is not going to be compacted by 
gravitation in matter, because it provides this gravitation. Its dis- 
turbance is the phenomenon of gravitation. It is impossible to have 
matter compacted to a density of the order of 100 gm cc and still 
expect G to be constant. Such an idea has no support from experi- 
ment and it only comes into modern physics because mathematics 
allow it and can be applied freely until the physicist discovers the 
limits to be imposed on the laws formulated. It has to be remembered 
that so much of theoretical astrophysics is founded upon the physics 
we know in the laboratory that, if and when limitations are found to 
be necessary, these may have a profound effect upon what it is 
believed is seen to happen in the outer parts of space. Gravitational 
collapse is an interesting idea, but to think that massive stars can go 
on and on collapsing to become a point in space, at which matter of 
infinite mass density could form, is hardly credible. Yet, if one can 
believe that sort of thing, one could be prepared to believe that the 
sun might have a core rotating in the opposite direction to the gases 
at the radiating surface. Then, the balance of angular momentum in 
the solar system becomes possible and progress can be made towards 

our creation. 



COSMIC THEORY 



177 



Quasars 

The quasar is a star which exhibits a tremendous red shift. The 
spectral displacement in some cases is found to exceed 0-5. To explain 
this in terms of doppler effects resulting from the expansion of the 
universe and the related motion of the star and our system is ruled 
out. The stars exhibiting the anomaly appear too close for this. To 
explain the shift as a gravitational red shift, on the theory presented 
in Chapter 5, requires, for constant G and a mass of the order of that 
of the sun, that the density of the star should be about 10 16 times that 
of the sun. The quasar is then a potential anomaly, even on this 
theory. 

We have an answer, however. Gravitation has been shown to be 
an electrodynamic property. It is due to the disturbance of electric 
charge in the G frame of space-time arising indirectly from matter in 
the E frame. We have not considered the effect of a charge which 
happens to be pushed into the G frame. Our study of the break up of 
the deuteron in the previous chapter showed us that in such nuclear 
situations charged matter could move transiently over to the G 
frame. We will thus analyse the effect of a charge e, sitting in the G 
frame and constituting a disturbance. Immediately, since the polarity 
of the charge is the same as that of the continuum in the G frame, we 
see that there is an effective gravitational mass due to e of e \ G. 
Remember that the G frame moves at velocity c relative to the E 
frame. The force between two parallel-moving charges e is then e- at 
unit distance, ignoring electrostatic action. This is equivalent to G 
times the product of their effective gravitational masses. Now, if the 
particle of charge e is a positron, we see that transiently its presence 
in the G frame will increase its mass by the factor e ?>i\/G, as 
measured gravitationally. This is 2 10 21 . 

It follows that if, say, one part in 2,000 of an atom makes such a 
transient contribution in a nuclear situation, 10 18 is a measure of the 
increase of the effective constant of gravitation if all atoms are in this 
nuclear state. Now, to explain a red shift of 0-5, if one of this magni- 
tude existed on the sun, we would need G to be greater by a factor of 
250,000. Thus, one atom in 10 13 , say, would have to be in the nuclear 
reaction state. This, then, may be the difference between the sun and 
the quasar. It is merely a question of the degree of nuclear activity in 
process.. 



178 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



The Origin of Matter 

Nuclear processes must occur in stars. However, this does not 
mean that the creation of matter on a really fundamental basis 
involves nuclear action. Nuclear action is the transmutation of matter 
between its various elementary forms. It is known that atoms can 
change their form and release energy. Hydrogen is an atomic form 
able to release energy by forming other elements. Accepting that there 
is hydrogen already in existence in a star we can expect that there will 
be energy available for radiation as the hydrogen converts into 
heavier atoms. This leads to the belief that a star radiates energy by 
virtue of the nuclear processes of atomic transmutation. Neverthe- 
less, this belief is founded upon assumption. If it is necessary to 
recognize that there is a more fundamental process by which hydro- 
gen itself is created, it is not improbable that there could be energy 
surplus to this non-nuclear reaction. Then, on the assumption that a 
star may be in its creation phase, it is possible that energy available 
for radiation may, indeed, have its origin, for the most part, in a 
really fundamental process, different from that currently accepted. 

The idea of space-time already presented requires the presence of 
electrons, negative lattice particles, positive gravitons, an expanded 
uniform continuum of positive charge and an electrically-neutral 
energy medium. The latter medium forms the inertial frame, whereas 
the negative charge constituents define an electromagnetic reference 
frame, the E frame, and move harmoniously about the inertial frame 
in balance with the positively-charged substance forming the so- 
called G frame. The gravitons are compact and have a high energy 
content. As space-time expands, the gravitons can expand. Energy is 
available. However, there is a fundamental balance between the 
number of gravitons and the number of lattice particles in the space- 
time system studied. The analysis has shown that we can calculate 
the relative masses of the lattice particle, the electron and the graviton. 
Due to the dynamic balance conditions, the ratio in the numbers of 
these particles in the E frame and the G frame is a definite quantity. 
It cannot change merely because space-time expands. The graviton 
cannot change into some other form, unless this condition of balance 
is kept. It can be retained provided the transmutation of the graviton 
is accompanied by the related large number of lattice particles mov- 
ing out of their normal E frame positions. This corresponds to a 



COSMIC THEORY 179 

linear motion of the space-time lattice with the reverse flow of free 
lattice particles, already discussed in Chapter 5 by reference to the 
perihelion anomaly of Mercury. It is also the key to reconciling the 
Michelson-Morley experiment with the aether form of space-time. 
The only problem with this graviton energy release process is that it 
implies an ever increasing translational motion of the space-time 
lattice in the vicinity of the graviton. It appears that the motion of a 
space-time lattice is a characteristic associated with matter in motion. 
Consequently, the gravitons in the vicinity of matter are the favoured 
ones to accept the expansion possibilities accompanying the expand- 
ing universe. Matter is created from space-time in the vicinity of 
other matter. The velocity in space of such matter has to increase to 
keep the balance condition. On this basis, stars should have a trans- 
lational motion through space-time. They could be the scat of energy 
transfer from space-time to matter form, and their translational 
velocities should constantly increase. If they are clustered together, 
their increasing velocities will cause them to move in a spiral sense. 
This may explain the spiral form of some galaxies. 

It is natural to suppose from this that in a star the process of 
deriving matter energy from space-time energy is proceeding 
steadily. What is the property, however, which determines the nature 
of a star? It is suggested that there is something special about a star 
which is conducive to the graviton expansion process. Possibly other 
bodies, such as the planets, can increase their mass slowly by a less 
active participation in the graviton decay process, but, in a star, a 
large and highly energetic system has passed through a critical size 
and the graviton decay has become accelerated. A high energy state 
might permit polarity inversion in space-time itself, and this might 
allow rapid graviton reaction. By polarity inversion of space-time 
we mean polarity change from a space-time in which there are 
positrons and positive lattice particles forming the E frame, and 
negative gravitons and negative continuum forming the G frame. The 
E frames of the two types of space-time would need to move 180" out 
of phase to keep gravity acting across the boundaries, with the 
harmonious motion condition of universal time unaltered. This 
brings us to the hypothesis that the sun might comprise, in addition 
to its matter content, systems of space-time of both polarities. By 
having this, there are two advantages. Firstly, there is scope for 
explaining the reversals of the solar magnetic field. Secondly, there is 
scope for considering reactions involving graviton decay in the 



180 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



presence of electrons, positrons, and lattice particles of both polar- 
ities. This is the only feasible way one can come to provide the sources 
of the electron-positron chains, deduced in Chapter 7 as key com- 
ponents in atomic nuclei. 

Terming the two space-time forms positive or negative, one can 
say that if positive space-time rotates clockwise whilst an adjacent 
negative space-time rotates anti-clockwise then both will develop 
magnetic moment in the same direction. Equation (8.1) shows that 
magnetic moment of the rotating space-time is proportional to 
volume times peripheral velocity squared. Thus, for a system of 
regions of space-time in general contact so that their peripheral 
velocities are all about equal, the total magnetic moment will be the 
same as if the whole space-time volume rotates with the same 
peripheral velocity. This is provided positive space-time rotates in 
the opposite direction to negative space-time. If this is not assured 
because the polarities can invert cyclically for some reason, then the 
magnetic moment can fluctuate and can have either direction, subject 
to the limit on the total magnetic moment as calculated from (8.1) 
on the basis of a single space-time form. In Fig. 8.3 it is shown how 



different forms of space-time may be formed in the sun. The outer 
space-time shell is assumed to be of negative form rotating as is seen 
from inspection of the sun's surface. The core of the sun comprises 
positive space-time rotating in the opposite direction. Intermediate 
space-time zones rotate with a kind of idler-wheel action. If these 




Fig. 8.3 



COSMIC THEORY 



181 



zones comprise negative space-time, the maximum magnetic moment 
is to be expected. If, however, the polarity fluctuates in a system, 
which, of course, will be turbulent and by no means as simple as that 
depicted, fluctuations of magnetic moment are bound to occur. The 
angular momentum must remain constant, but could be oppositely 
directed from that judged by observation of surface velocity. Also, if 
the core is substantial in size, the angular velocity of the core would 
be somewhat higher and in the opposite direction to that observed 
at the surface. This would be highly consistent with the requirements 
for balance of angular momentum in the solar system. 

Such thoughts are mere speculation. Our objective is really to 
justify bringing electrons and positrons as well as lattice particles of 
both polarities into account in the matter creation process. The fact 
that we have come to expect this to occur at the boundaries between 
positive and negative space-time, and that such boundaries are to be 
expected within the sun, is the result emerging from the speculation. 
This introduces the analysis of the true mass of the graviton. It has 
to have a certain energy to be able to undergo transmutation at the 
boundary between the two types of space-time. 

Derivation of Graviton Mass 

It has been suggested in Chapter 6 that the formation of the muon 
is connected with graviton expansion. Also, in Chapter 7 we have 
seen how large numbers of electrons and positrons are required to 
provide bonds in the atomic nucleus. It will now be supposed that 
at the boundary between the two polarity forms of space-time two 
gravitons of opposite polarity react together to store the energy of 
a muon on the lattice particles in the E frame. The loss of the 
gravitons makes a great many lattice particles of both polarities 
unstable in their £ frames. Many become free and many are available 
to absorb the surplus energy released by the graviton expansion. 

The buoyancy of the lattice particles storing the muon energy is 
reduced by their compression. This means that, not only has the 
muon energy quantum to be balanced by a similar quantum in the 
G frame, but, also, extra energy in equal measure is needed in the 
G frame to balance this loss of buoyancy. It follows that the energy 
of three muons 5062 m c 2 is deployed from the two gravitons, leaving 
the remainder of the energy surplus to provide electrons and 
positrons. 



182 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



When several lattice particles are compressed slightly to store 
the energy of the muon, their total volume reduction is cP -4nlr l j3. 
The two gravitons and, of course, their associated electron and 
positron expand to determine two new units of volume d 3 in forming 
two new lattice particles and related continuum. Two units of 
expanded space-time are generated when two gravitons decay in the 
manner described. Matter is formed as a product of this space 
accommodation process. Allowing for the volumes of the initial 
electron and positron, the volume of space required for the deploy- 
ment of the surplus energy is d 3 -4nb 3 j3. 

Let g denote the energy of the graviton. Then 2g - 3(5,062) m (l c- 
is the energy needed to compact enough lattice particles to lake up the 
volume d 3 -47iZ> 3 /3. When one lattice particle is compressed into an 
electron or positron its volume is reduced by 4n(b 3 - a 3 ) 3 and the 
energy required is 2mc 2 -3 m c-. This energy requirement follows 
because the electron needs its own rest mass energy and the secondary 
energy to sustain the G frame balance. As explained in discussing 
the processes in which electrons and positrons are transmuted, the 
energy available from a lattice particle is 2 m c 2 from the E frame and 
m c 2 from the G frame. This is due to the buoyancy effect of the 
energy medium, which makes the dynamic mass of the lattice particle 
only half that found for other particle forms on the basis of their 
electrostatic energies. 

It is seen from the above that we can write: 



where A' is the number of lattice particles converted to electron or 
positron form. Note that to conserve charge we must have A' as an 
even integer. Also note that in this process we have taken lattice 
particles from the E frame. If we take lattice particles from the 
inertial frame, that is the unbound particles in free motion, we are 
involved in many difficulties of angular momentum and energy 
balance. It seems that the energy relation (8.3) is best kept in the E 
and G frames to conserve angular momentum. This means deploy- 
ment of E frame lattice particles in the initial reaction processes. 
However, the muons are unstable and there has to be deployment of 
E frame lattice particles anyway, since many go into the free state, so 
our equations look well founded. From the data we have for d, b and 



2g - 3(5,062) m c- = A'(2wc 2 - 3w c 2 ) 



(8.3) 



d 3 Ardr-y 4zS(h 3 u^y 



(8.4) 



COSMIC THEORY 183 

a, (8.4) gives a value of iV slightly less than 5,065. If A has to be an 
integer, one then sees from (8.3) that? is slightly less than 5,064 mc 2 . 
This result is consistent with the empirical value of 5,063 mc 2 pre- 
sented at the bottom of page 119. In a reaction in the laboratory 
environment we must expect single gravitons, with their associated 
electrons, to provide the nuclear energy quantum. In such reactions 
the electron is separated and must take with it an amount of energy 
adequate to provide the G frame balance originally provided by the 
graviton. The energy left is 5,063 mc 2 . 

A value slightly less than 5,063 mc 2 gives the right answer for 
the constant of gravitation in (6.73). Therefore, this evaluation of the 
energy of the graviton is reasonably satisfactory. However, even the 
small difference thus obtained requires explanation. The best explan- 
ation which the author can offer is that there has been error in 
neglecting the presence of free particles. The constant of gravitation 
G is measured in the solar system. It may be very slightly dependent 
upon the general motion of the solar system in the galactic reference 
frame. Also, the energy of the graviton may, indeed, vary with this 
motion. After all, the graviton is carrying the secondary G frame 
energy due to the presence of matter. If its energy can be so varied as 
matter passes by it, then its base energy quantum, which is the unit 
under analysis, may have some dependence upon the motion state 
of the space-time present. To calculate this, let there beatranslational 
motion of the space-time lattice at k times the speed of light c. Then, 
since the reverse motion of free lattice particles is at the velocity c 2, 
the orbital velocity they have when in the E frame, there are 2k free 
particles for each bound particle in the lattice. These free particles 
will distort the lattice in their vicinity. Assuming that 2k is small, 
there will be substantial regions where one can ignore the presence of 
free particles and there will be localized regions where significant 
distortion will occur. Above, we arc trying to calculate the value of 
the graviton mass energy, as set initially. The graviton energy is being 
calculated from analysis of the reaction process, but it does not 
depend upon this process. The factor A' will affect N as derived from 
(8.4), unless we can apply the analysis to regions devoid of free 
particles. This seems logical. The value of.? cannot vary according 
to the presence of free particles. Hence, it must have the value of 
something just smaller than 5,064 mc' 2 , notwithstanding the factor k. 
Accepting this, we turn back to Chapter 5. It is seen that G, as given 
by (5.12), is increased in proportion to the square of er. Now, a does 



184 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

depend upon the presence of free lattice particles. It has to be greater, 
the more free particles there are, to allow the general analysis to 
remain applicable. It must be greater in proportion to 2k. Then, G 
is increased in proportion to 4k, whereas, to keep G the same, the 
mass of the graviton has, according to (5.12), to be increased by one- 
eighth of 4k. In other words, all is well with the analysis if the dis- 
crepancy between 5,063 and 5,064, which must be explained to 
reconcile (6.73) with the above evaluation of g, is simply equivalent 
to the factor 0-5 k. This means that k has to be two parts in about 
5,064, or that the space-time velocity involved is this fraction of the 
velocity of light. The velocity of the space-time system has to be 
about 120 km/sec. This, of course, is only rough approximation, but 
the theory does indicate that the earth should have a motion relative 
to surrounding space-time of this general order. This means that 
cosmic background radiation referenced on this space-time electro- 
magnetic frame, if isotropic, should evidence a relative motion by 
the earth of this order of 120 km/sec* 

On this evidence, one can see that this theory has tremendous scope 
for application to cosmic phenomena. As shown, the value of the 
mass of the graviton can be deduced from the theoretical foundations 
of the theory, and, indeed, the right value is obtained to provide the 
quantitative explanation of the constant of gravitation. This is a 
result which is totally beyond the scope of the Theory of Relativity, 
and one on which the author bases his beliefs that the theory under 
review is the correct theory of gravitation and that the Theory of 
Relativity has nothing to contribute to the understanding of gravita- 
tional phenomena. 

Perihelion Motions 

From (6.69), the value of the lattice spacing d can be calculated in 
terms of the known parameters of the electron. From (6.63), the 
mass of the lattice particle is known in terms of the mass of the 
electron. Hence, we can calculate the mass density of the lattice of 
space-time. It is 144 gm/cc. Note that it was shown from (5.9) that 
the anomalous motion of the perihelion of the planet Mercury could 
be explained if the mass density of the space-time lattice were to be 

* It is reported in Nature, June 7, 1969, page 971 by E. K. Conklin that 
measurements of the cosmic background radiation show the earth to be travelling 
at 160 km/sec. 



COSMIC THEORY 



185 



about 150 gm/cc. The theory has, therefore, excellent support from 
the perihelion anomaly. 

It is appropriate to check (5.9) as it applies to the earth. Using the 
value of space-time lattice density of 144 gm/cc, and noting that the 
earth has an average mass density of 5-52 gm/cc and a radius of 
6-378 10 8 cm, the value of the earth's "anomalous" perihelion 
motion should be given by; 



The perihelion motion is given in seconds of arc per century. R is the 
radius of the earth's space-time lattice. One has to conclude that the 
theory indicates a perihelion advance of perhaps 5-4 seconds of arc 
per century. This compares with the observed anomaly according to 
Clemence (1948) of 8-62 seconds of arc per century. The earlier- 
derived anomaly according to Doolittle (1925) was 2-52 seconds of 
arc per century, but Doolittle used an assumed mass of Mercury, in 
calculating the perturbation of the earth's motion, of 1 7,500,000 
times the solar mass. Rabe (1951) has shown that the mass of Mer- 
cury is 1/6,120,000 times the solar mass. The effect of this is to 
increase Doolittle's estimate of the earth's perihelion anomaly to 
5-0 seconds of arc per century. Funher, since Clemence used an 
assumed mass of 1/6,000,000 times the solar mass, his figure should 
be reduced slightly. It has to be remembered that the measured 
anomaly is hardly accurate on such analysis. It can be said, however, 
that the explanation afforded by this theory is better than the 
value of 3-83 seconds of arc per century afforded by Einstein's 
theory. 

For the planet Venus, this theory gives a value of the order of 
15 seconds of arc per century for a radius of about 6,000 km. 
Clemence obtained a value of 15T5 seconds of arc from observation, 
and the radius of Venus is somewhat greater than 6,000 km, probably 
6,100 km. Nevertheless, bearing in mind the uncertainties in obser- 
vation and the indirect analysis in such observations, it is appropriate 
to claim that this theory does offer a feasible account of the anomal- 
ous perihelion behaviour of the planets. 



perihelion 
motion 



R 

6-45 10 8 
6-50 10 8 
6-55 10 8 



5-2 
5-4 
5-6 



186 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



Summary 

After demonstrating the power of this theory in explaining 
phenomena associated with the atomic nucleus, we have come in this 
chapter to the problem of the cosmos. The concept of a large volume 
of space-time in rotation with an astronomical body has been 
explored. The principle that the harmonious cyclic motion of the 
lattice is retained, notwithstanding such rotary motion, has provided 
an explanation of the nature of intrinsic magnetism in such bodies. 
The geomagnetic moment has been explained quantitatively, with 
remarkable results. The principles have been extended successfully to 
Jupiter and the sun. The idea that the earth has a space-time lattice 
terminated in the ionosphere has been explored in relation to the 
zodiacal light. An explanation of the generation of light at the 
boundary between the earth's space-time and surrounding space- 
time has given the right quantitative results. Jn considering the solar 
system, further support for the theory has emerged since the balance 
of angular momentum in the solar system is feasible, if we recognize 
the presence of space-time. The reversals of the magnetic field of 
the sun have been explained. An account of the extra-gravitational 
properties of the quasar has been outlined. Also, we have been led to 
consider the origins of matter and to the thought that there are 
opposite-polarity forms of space-time. In this way the reactions 
which are the source of matter, and probably cosmic radiation, have 
been analysed. The mass energy of the graviton has been deduced 
and found to be in agreement with that derived empirically earlier in 
this work. Finally, a little more has been said about the perihelion 
anomalies of the planets. These have been of such importance in 
supporting Einstein's Theory of Relativity that they have deserved 
rather special attention in the analysis. In fact, the observational data 
is in such doubt that exact analysis has not been possible. Yet, 
exact analysis is a real strength of this theory, as has been shown in 
earlier chapters where basic physical constants have been calculated. 
It is concluded that this theory will have potential in the cosmic held, 
and that it can claim to be a unified theory since it does embrace 
basic principles of field behaviour and has application from the sub- 
atom to the galaxy. This concludes this work, save for a discussion 
of some general features of the theory in the light of recent dis- 
coveries. This discussion is the subject of the next chapter. 



9. General Discussion 



Relativity 

The theory presented in the foregoing pages has developed steadily 
over several years. It will continue to develop, no doubt, at least as 
long as the author can see scope for its further advancement and has 
not been confronted with any refuting evidence. Certainly, the theory 
is not in its final form. This book is a stage in its development. In this 
final chapter some features worthy of review and which have emerged, 
in the main, after the previous chapters were written, are presented. 
Some are reserved for this last chapter because they have not yet 
stood the test of time and are perhaps more speculative than the 
main body of this work. This chapter is also the place where some 
questions can be asked. The anticipation of a few questions might 
help the reader's understanding. 

Proceeding in this vein, we first pay attention to the subject of 
Relativity. Relativity is synonymous with the name Einstein. This 
book is entitled Physics Without Einstein because the theory presented 
offers an account of physical phenomena which does not need 
Einstein's theory at all. However, the author was not motivated to 
produce an alternative to Einstein's theories when he embarked upon 
these researches. The motivation was the understanding of a problem 
in magnetism and the pursuit of an idea concerning ferromagnetism, 
a subject not remotely related to Relativity. What is described in this 
book emerged as the author came more and more to believe in the 
aether medium. It was this belief which made Einstein's theory a 
factor to consider. According to Relativity, we can get by without 
speaking of the aether, though, as some say, Einstein's theory is a 
theory of the aether. Mathematically, there is no need for the 
physical aether. According to the author's theory, we can get by 
without speaking of Relativity. Physically, there is no need for sterile 
mathematical principles. It all depends upon one's outlook, and the 
reader can only be guided by whatever it is that suits him best. In 
this book, the author has made extensive use of the words "space- 
time". These words are used instead of "aether" simply because the 



188 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

reader might find them more acceptable. A well-known physicist 
advised the author that it was better to use "space-time". He said: 
'There is an aether, but it gets people's backs up to refer to it; it is 
better to call it 'space-time'." Having said this, the author does offer 
one comment to correct any false impression. The aether has come 
to have a classical meaning in people's minds. There are fixed ideas 
about the properties of the aether of the last century. It is a kind of 
mechanical medium providing the single and absolute reference 
frame in space. Yet, the aether should really be nothing more than 
that something which fills space. Its properties are a matter for 
observation, not preconception. All that has to be believed is that 
space is not a void, it is a kind of plenum. The words "space-time" 
imply a less definite notion of what it is that permeates space, and 
their use is, therefore, more consistent with the author's objectives. 
The question of whether space is a void or a plenum is not a matter of 
opinion. Philosophers can go wrong in wrestling with such a problem 
in the absence of factual information. The early Greeks believed 
that there had to be a void as, otherwise, there could be no motion. 
Commenting on this, Bertrand Russell (1946) has written in his 
History of Western Philosophy : 

"It will be seen that there was one point on which everybody so far 
was agreed, namely that there could be no motion in a plenum. In this, 
all alike were mistaken. There can be cyclic motion in a plenum, 
provided it has always existed.'''' 

The author's theory has shown how everything observed in 
fundamental physics can point to the existence of a cyclic motion, 
harmonious, universal and constant through cosmic time. Bertrand 
Russell's observation is, therefore, most important. He points out 
that philosophers can be wrong in interpreting the physics of space, 
even when using simple words as explanation. How much scope is 
there then for error in the mathematics of Relativity? Mathematics 
can be wrong when incorrectly applied just as words can be mis- 
leading if wrongly used. Can we really accept Hoyle's comment, 
quoted in Chapter 5, that "there is no such thing as gravitation apart 
from geometry" ? The answer to this is that scientists have accepted 
Relativity as the explanation of gravitation. Perhaps they are a little 
unhappy with some of the recent discoveries, which do cast some 
doubt upon the theory, but it is still common belief that Relativity, if 
in a slightly modified form, is the tool for explaining the phenomenon 
of gravitation. 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 



189 



This introduces the next comment in a discussion. The question is 
why any alternative to Relativity is needed. If it gives satisfaction, 
why develop a new theory which lacks the elegance of Relativity and 
which presents ideas of a tangible aether having special properties 
which seem to depend upon too much hypothesis. Logically, whether 
or not there is an aether is not a matter of mere choice to a true 
physicist. It could be optional to a mathematician. If there is a tan- 
gible substance filling space, we may or may not need to refer to it in 
our efforts to unify physics. Relativity tries to avoid it, almost by 
cancelling its effect out of the mathematical equations. This is all 
very well, but the unification we all seek has not been forthcoming. 
There are too many mysteries in fundamental physics. Gravitation 
and electromagnetism were not unified by Relativity, much as 
Einstein and others have tried. In the field of elementary particle 
physics there is developing frustration because the theories are not 
advancing fast enough to cope with the experimental discoveries. 
The thought of unification in physics seems, therefore, that much 
more remote. Relativity has to advance rapidly if it is to adapt to the 
wider developing spectrum of fundamental physics. 

The author's theory is an alternative to Relativity and, as has been 
seen, it covers the whole spectrum of physics, from the nature of 
elementary particles to gravitation on a cosmic scale, besides cover- 
ing field theory and wave mechanics. However, where does this leave 
Relativity, if the author's theory comes to be accepted in its present 
or a modified form? One comment conceded by the physicist today 
is "General Relativity may be wrong, but Special Relativity is as 
firmly established as ever." It would be an easy matter to pass over 
this question of the validity of Special Relativity. In the words of 
Einstein (1921), the "principle of special relativity" can be expressed 
in the following proposition: 

"// K is an inertia! system, then every other system A", which mores 
uniformly and without rotation relatively to K, is also an inert ial 
system; the laws of nature are in concordance for all inertial systems." 

Newton's mechanics can be used to show that this principle 
applies to mechanics. The question is whether it really applies to 
electromagnetic phenomena. A practical aspect of the principle is 
that it is not possible, if the principle is true, to determine the 
velocity of a system in uniform motion, without reference to some- 
thing outside the system. Any measurement within the system should 
not permit evaluation of motion of the system relative to something 



190 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTKIN 



else. Now, in the previous chapter, it was suggested that a very small 
difference between the mass of the graviton expected from the set 
number ratios of space-time and the mass needed to explain the 
value of G, as measured on earth, can be explained by the motion of 
the solar system in our galaxy. This means that analysis and experi- 
ment wholly performed in the earth laboratory can indicate the 
velocity of about 120 km/sec of the earth system in galactic space. 
This velocity can be measured separately from a study of the optical 
behaviour of surrounding stars. The fact that a similar result is 
obtained from direct observation and from the internal observation 
and analysis, if given credence, is wholly inconsistent with the 
assumption that special relativity precludes the determination of 
motion of one inertial system relative to another. 

Einstein has jumped from an observation based upon mechanics 
and inertial frames of reference to one which involves electromagnetic 
wave propagation and electromagnetic frames of reference. The 
Michelson-Morley experiment is his key support. However, this 
experiment relates only to the observed behaviour of electromagnetic 
waves in the test apparatus of the laboratory. In detecting the velocity 
of the solar system, we can use the whole of the system as our 
laboratory. The velocity of light transmitted between the planets is 
our concern. Does this move at the velocity c relative to the solar 
system or relative to the space-time medium permeating space 
between the planets? There is new experimental data of importance 
to this question, and it may well disprove Einstein's Special Relativity. 
It stems from some unexplained problems in observations made by 
new radar measurements, as will be explained below. 

The author has explained the Michelson-Morley experiment on 
the basis that an astronomical body might have its own aether, or 
space-time, rotating with it and having a boundary some distance 
above its surface. This idea might sound old fashioned, but it is 
different from the idea of aether drag. Aether drag implies a slip or 
turbulence of the aether medium at the surface of a body. It is 
reminiscent of the attempts of Miller (1925) in performing the 
Michelson-Morley experiment at high altitude on Mount Wilson. 
Miller did not obtain the null result found normally. However, the 
results, though definite, did not indicate the full slip to be expected if 
the experiment were performed fully outside the earth's aether. It 
may be that the Theory of Relativity had become so well accepted 
by then that it did not fit the pattern of progress to pay attention to a 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 



191 



small aether effect, which, notwithstanding the experimental care and 
skill of Miller, could be left for possible verification and likely reject- 
ion by others. This remark should be read in conjunction with some 
comments by Whittaker (1953), who writes: 

"The idea of mapping the curved space of General Relativity on a 
flat space, and making the latter fundamental, was revived many 
years after Whitehead by N. Rosen (1940). He and others who 
developed it claimed that in this way it was possible to explain more 
directly the conservation of energy, momentum, and angular 
momentum, and also possibly to account for certain unexplained 
residuals in the repetitions of the Michelson-Morley experiment 
(reference to Miller. 1925)." 

One may well wonder about the support for Special Relativity 
in the face of admitted weaknesses in General Relativity. If General 
Relativity collapses, the residuals in the Michelson-Morley experi- 
ment cannot be dismissed in this way. Then surely Special Relativity 
is open to question. 

Now, to avoid this type of discussion, we can argue that, though 
there could well be some degree of aether slip between the earth's 
surface and the ionosphere, it would be risky speculation to explore 
that topic here. The author's theory does not require anything other 
than the null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment so long as 
it is performed anywhere in an earth-based environment. The earth's 
ionosphere is the boundary of the earth's aether. This is not an 
assumption made by the author to dispose of the Michelson-Morley 
problem. The quantitative analysis of the geomagnetic moment made 
it necessary to have the earth's space-time boundary at the appro- 
priate height. Even so, a critic may then ask whether we can detect 
the motion of the earth's space-time. Would not a radio wave grazing 
past the earth through the earth's space-time not travel faster or 
slower, according to its direction, in comparison with one travelling 
just outside this medium? The answer is affirmative and, of course, 
the author's theory stands to be tested from such experiments. 

We can consider whether experimental data are available from the 
delaying of radar waves grazing past the sun's surface. This is 
particularly interesting because it has bearing upon the recently 
reported tests of the Dicke-Brans theory, put forward as an alter- 
native to the General Relativity of Einstein. Early in 1968, it was 
reported that a new and fourth test to verify Einstein's General 
Relativity quantitatively had been made by Shapiro and his 



192 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

collaborators. This is summarized by Gwynne ( 1 968). The experiment 
consists in measuring the effect of the sun's gravitational held on a 
radar beam passing close to it. General Relativity predicts that the 
gravitational field should slow down the beam. The delay for the 
return journey of a radar pulse passing the sun in transit between 
earth and Mercury, a journey lasting about 25 minutes, should be of 
the order of 160 microseconds, depending upon how close the beam 
comes to the solar surface. As Mercury moves into and out of 
conjunction with the sun, the delay should rise gradually to a peak 
over several days and then fall in a similar manner after conjunction. 

Now, before commenting upon what was actually observed, the 
reader is asked to consider two separate possibilities suggested by the 
author's theory, but which have, of course, not been taken into 
account in the reported analyses. Firstly, if the solar system is moving 
at a high velocity through space and if light waves travel relative to 
the medium in space, the sun will move appreciably during the period 
between the close transits of the outward and inward beams. If the 
sun has an aether extending some distance above its surface then it 
could be that one direction only of the beam might pass through this 
aether, causing the beam to be retarded or accelerated in its overall 
journey. Note that a transit distance of some half-million miles 
through the sun's aether rotating at a peripheral velocity of about 
1-25 miles per second, the surface velocity due to the sun's rotation, 
implies a delay or advance of about 18 microseconds. This is found 
by noting that the beam is in transit at the extra velocity of 1 -25 miles 
per second for a little less than three seconds, the time taken to tra- 
verse half a million miles at the speed of light. The time of 18 micro- 
seconds is the time taken to cover the 3-4 miles added in these few 
seconds. It follows that any errors of the order of 20 microseconds in 
the experimental observations are of interest to the author's theory. 
Secondly, if the sun moves through space at a high velocity, the path 
of the outward beam will not be where we expect it to be. It is the 
return beam which is seen in proper relation to the position of the 
sun. The distance of the beam from the sun in its close transit is 
important to the estimation of the Relativistic estimate of the delay, 
or to any estimate dependent upon the effect of solar gravitation. If 
the beam is not where we believe it to be, the theory is misdirected. 
To understand this, consider Fig. 9.1. Assume that the whole solar 
system moves steadily relative to the surrounding medium through 
which radar waves are propagated at a velocity c subject to solar 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 



193 



EARTH 



MERCURY 






SUN 



Fig. 9.1 



gravitation, as explained in Chapter 5. In the figure, the earth is 
deemed to be at Pi, when it transmits a radar signal to Mercury. This 
signal is reflected when Mercury has the position shown, so the 
reflected radar signal returns along the linear path shown. Since light 
travels at the same speed as radar waves, the sun has the apparent 
position shown, at the time the radar beam passes it on its return 
journey. The return beam reaches the earth when the earth is 
at P 2 . The radar beams are not truly linear near the sun, owing to the 
gravitational deflection, but we assume that this is allowed for in the 
separate calculations made in connection with the experiments. Also, 
the planets are moving within the solar system and doppler effects 
have to be accounted for. Our objective is only to consider corrections 
to be imposed upon the measurements if the motion of the solar 
system through a surrounding aether medium is introduced. From 
Fig. 9. 1 it can be seen that the motion of the solar system is accounted 
for by the motion of the earth from Pi to P 2 . Because of this displace- 
ment between Pi and Po, there is a separation of the outward and 
inward radar beams adjacent the sun. However, we only see the 
position of the inward beam in relation to the position of the sun. 
Consequently, depending upon the direction of motion of the solar 
system, and depending upon which side of the sun the planet Mercury 
is seen, the outward radar beam will pass closer or further away from 
the sun than we believe. The result should be an increased overall 
delay of the radar signal on one side of the sun and a decreased over- 
all delay of the radar signal on the other side. In any event the peak 
signal will be reduced in its total delay indication, because when one 
beam direction grazes the sun, the other is spaced away from the sun. 
This tells us that the observed delay should be less than that pre- 
dicted and also that it should be shifted in phase as measurements 
are made over the period when the planet Mercury passes through 
conjunction. Furthermore, the results will depend upon the time of 



194 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

year when the observations are made. The solar system is moving in 
a certain direction in our galaxy. Sometimes this direction will have a 
maximum component, possibly at right angles to the radar beams. 
At other times it will have a minimum component in this direction. 
Thus, sometimes there will be a significant phase shift, whereas at 
other times of year there will be a less significant phase shift.* If the 
solar system moves at 230 km/sec, as believed, then since the two 
transit times between the sun and Mercury total about 400 seconds, 
we are speaking of a distance which could be as much as 90,000 km. 
This is enough to modify the gravitational calculations of the effect 
of the sun upon the radar beams by one or two per cent. This is 
small but, probably more important, could be the effect of bringing 
one beam outside the sun's own space-time. 90,000 km is significant 
enough for us to expect this. Then there could well be the 18 micro- 
second effect mentioned above and it would also correspond to the 
phase-shift just mentioned. Furthermore, if the velocity of the solar 
system were directed along radar beam paths, then, on such occasions, 
the outward and inward beams would both pass inside or outside the 
space-time of the sun. Then, there would be no modification of the 
delay. 

It may be concluded that any evidence of anomalous delays of 
20 microseconds or so is evidence possibly pointing to the galactic 
motion of the solar system and the rotation of the sun's own space- 
time. Any evidence of a phase-shift of the delay on some con- 
junctions and not others is strong evidence in support of both these 
features. If these properties are found then we may have means for 
estimating the speed of the solar system in our galaxy as well as its 
direction. If the measurements are made wholly within the frame of 
reference of the solar system, as they are, then we have evidence 
disproving the Principle of Relativity and proving the existence of the 
aether. 

In the reports of Shapiro's 1967 experiments, as quoted by 
G wynne (1968), it is clear that: 

1. The measured delay was about 10% less than that predicted on 
Einstein's theory, 

* There will also be a doppler shift and a slight deflection when a plane wave 
passes through rotating space-time. The doppler shift will result in an amplitude 
pulsation at very low frequency due to wave interference effects. A pulsar may be 
a star seen through a rotating space-time region located between the earth and the 
star. 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 195 

2. The April-May measurements showed a lower peak delay and a 
distinct phase-shift of one or two days between the observed 
delays and those predicted from the apparent positions of the 
sun and the beams, 

3. The August-September measurements gave higher results and 
showed little or no phase-shift, and 

4. It was claimed that there were a number of "slowly varying 
systematic differences in the results {about 20 microseconds on 
average)", and stated that these have not yet been explained. 

The author merely suggests that these radar experiments might 
provide the long-awaited test of aether theory. It might be that, 
quite apart from the author's interpretations providing a possible 
alternative to Relativity, we already have the elements of the proof 
that Einstein's theories are invalid. It should not, however, be over- 
looked that the author's theory does give the same result for the 
gravitational deflection of light waves and the gravitational delay of 
radar waves in transit past the sun. What the author is pointing out is 
that there are corrections which have to be made to overcome the 
scatter on the measurements. These corrections are not available to 
Einstein's followers. Their use depends upon the recognition of a real 
aether medium. When they are made, it looks as if the formulae of 
the Einstein analysis and the author's analysis are correct, but 
Relativity has then lost its coherence. The author's theory may then 
have to be favoured. In making the corrections and finding a cor- 
rected result in line with Einstein's values, a result will emerge which 
is out-of-line with the proposals of the new Dicke-Brans theory, 
which predicts a smaller delay in the radar experiment of about the 
right order, but which does not explain the phase-shift effects. 

Returning to the problem of the effects of aether drag, it has been 
suggested to the author that the assumption of a local aether is 
contradicted by the observed aberration of fixed stars. Due to the 
motion of the earth about the sun, distant stars appear to move in 
orbits approximately 20-5 seconds in angular radius. This is to be 
expected since the orbital velocity of the earth of 10" 4 c gives a value 
of the angle through which the star appears to move of arc tan 10 4 , 
in agreement with observation. It is contended that if aether is 
dragged by the earth no such aberration would be expected to occur. 
Also, the author has been told that the Fizeau effect provides evi- 
dence supporting Einstein or Lorentz theories. Experiment shows that 

o 



196 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



with respect to the laboratory the velocity of light in water moving 
with velocity u is increased by u(\ - 1 jp 2 ), a result predicted from the 
relativistic addition of velocities, p denotes the refractive index of 
water. With aether drag it is supposed that the velocity increase 
would either be the velocity u of the water or zero, according to 
whether aether is merely being dragged by the earth or dragged by 
water. Now, if this type of comment is typical of the general reaction 
to the author's proposals, the author can but ask the reader to take 
note of the fact that many phenomena were explained once in terms 
of aether theory. The aether has gone out of fashion and new text- 
books have been produced with all kinds of proofs that Relativity 
can be applied to explain phenomena. So much so, that even 
phenomena which once supported aether theory are taken to prove 
the validity of Relativity. Books on electrodynamics are regularly 
based upon Relativity as the starting point. The results are fascinat- 
ing, but they cannot displace history. Aberration was discovered in 
1725. If Bradley's aberration experiment ruled out the thought of 
aether, would there have been the tremendous interest in the nine- 
teenth century that was displayed in aether theory? The light from 
the star is refracted at the boundary between the earth's aether and 
surrounding aether. Bradley's result fits the author's theory very 
nicely. The Fizeau result was explained on aether theory before 
Einstein was born. The velocity of light w ithin a transparent medium 
in motion is determined partly by the properties of the substance and 
partly by the properties of the aether. Refractive index p is c/a, 
where ci is the velocity of light measured relative to the substance 
and c is the velocity of light in vacuo. Then, two densities can be 
specified. The density p of the aether medium in vacuo and p\, the 
effective density of the combined medium of aether and the material 
substance. In this sense, we can take density as something pro- 
portional to (1 +cp) in equation (6.32), so that, from this equation: 

Pi=H 2 P (9.1) 

As Whittaker (1951, c) explains, Fresnel assumed (9.1) and that when 
a body is in motion the part of the total density in excess of that of 
vacuous aether is carried along with it, whilst the remainder remains 
stationary. Thus, the density of aether carried along is (pi - p) or 
(p 2 - \)p, while a quantity of aether of density p remains at rest. The 
velocity at which the centre of gravity of the aether within the body 
moves forward in the direction of propagation is therefore (p 2 - l)/// 2 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 197 

times the velocity of the substance, u. As Whittaker also explains, it 
was many years later that Stokes arrived at the same result from a 
slightly different supposition. He supposed that the whole of the 
aether in a body moves together but that, as the body moves, the 
aether entering in front augments the substance of the body to cause 
the aether within it to have a drift velocity -up\p\ relative to the 
body. This leads to the same result for the velocity of light relative 
to the body. This is also consistent with the author's proposal, which 
admits the space-time lattice to have mass energy associated with it 
so as to modify its propagation properties. The propagation velocity 
is fixed relative to the lattice frame in vacuo, but when matter is 
present, the disturbance of the lattice depends upon the energy of 
such matter and motion of this matter relative to the lattice. The 
predicted results of Fresnel and Stokes were verified experimentally 
by Fizeau in 1851, long before Einstein's ideas about Relativity. 

At this stage in the discussion it is necessary to draw the distinction 
between large bodies, such as the earth, which can take their lattice 
with them as one rigid unit, and small bodies, such as the moving 
column of water, which cannot. This distinction is essential, other- 
wise it would be possible to detect aether properties from measure- 
ments on gyroscopes, pendulums, etc. The earth has been rotating 
long enough and is large enough to have its own special aether. 
Small bodies in the laboratory are not so priviledged. The author 
cannot explain, as yet, where the line can be drawn to determine 
whether a body has its own aether system or not. More experimental 
research, particularly in outer space, will help to resolve this question, 
but it is another matter to explain the reasons for any line of demark- 
ation. It is safe to say that in the environment of earthly laboratory 
experiments the aether lattice appears fixed with that of the whole 
earth. Aether drag cannot be detected in the laboratory. It cannot be 
expected to occur. In the Fizeau experiment there is really no special 
motion of aether. It is simply that the velocity of light is governed 
jointly by the presence of aether at rest in the earth frame and by 
matter at motion with a body. To an extent, then, velocity of light 
can be said to be determined partly with respect to its material source, 
if it is generated in the earth frame. A gas atom excited to radiate 
light will, in its own reference frame, "see" the propagation velocity 
of its waves have some dependence upon its own velocity relative to 
the earth. For this reason, although the space-time lattice does not 
move relative to it, there can be doppler frequency shifts according 



198 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTHIN 



to its velocity relative to an observer. This is in spite of the fact that, 
as shown in Chapter 4, the photon action is formed in the lattice of 
space-time whilst the atomic electrons are in their non-migratory 
state about the nucleus. More will be said about this in the next 
section. 

Electromagnetic Energy Transfer 

Not only is Relativity in trouble today. There are increasingly- 
apparent difficulties with the problems of electromagnetic radiation. 
The duality of wave and particle theory is a contradiction in physics 
which has come to be accepted without concern. However, there are 
other questions. When a photon travels through a material medium 
is its momentum hvjc or does it change as the propagation velocity 
in the medium changes? The same problem posed by the electro- 
magnetic waves is a matter of concern to Penfield (1966). Cullwick 
(1966) analyses this momentum difficulty and calls the resulting 
discrepancy in the formulations "virtual momentum", because "it 
cannot be regarded as true momentum". Waldron (1966) shows little 
patience with wave theory by presenting a new corpuscular theory of 
light; photons and even energy quanta in radio waves are deemed to 
travel as ballistic particles. These references are all of recent date. 
They do serve to demonstrate that there is something lacking about 
our understanding of the processes of electromagnetic energy trans- 
fer. The author is, therefore, very much in line with the trend of 
looking for something better to provide answers to the conflicts 
surrounding the subject. In the early chapters of this book it has been 
suggested that waves do not convey energy at their propagation 
velocity. This sounds heretical, but it is logical if we retain the 
duality theory. Energy quanta, or, more correctly, momentum quanta, 
are a feature of the author's ideas about energy transfer. The photon 
action has been explained in a manner consistent with the evaluation 
of Planck's constant and the derivation of the basic formulation of 
wave mechanics. All that the reader is asked to accept is that electro- 
magnetic waves are a mere disturbance of the energy already per- 
meating space. Waves travel without carrying the energy along with 
them. It is not a new idea. Indeed, the idea that waves need not carry 
momentum or energy was put forward long ago by de Broglie 
(1924). It was also proposed by Bohr, Kramers and Slater (1924). The 
waves become mere disturbances of space and are able to trigger off 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 199 

events involving quantized interaction with space itself. Experi- 
mental facts, such as electron-positron creation from the vacuum 
state, or theories such as Dirac's (1958) ideas about holes in a "sea of 
charge", all fit together in a pattern encouraging the belief that space 
itself provides the action and the energy associated with wave pro- 
pagation, whereas the photon event is merely triggered by these 
waves. The phenomenon of energy transfer in quanta was expressed 
quite simply by Eddington (1929, b) when he contrasted his "col- 
lection box" theory with his "sweepstake" theory. When waves are 
intercepted, do we have to wait until enough energy has arrived and 
been collected to trigger the photon event? Do we collect energy 
separately for each frequency before releasing the quanta ? Eddington 
argued that the photoelectric effect disproved this. Instead, he sub- 
mitted that the waves contribute energy to "buy a ticket in a sweep- 
stake in which the prizes are whole quanta". Even here, the physicist 
has an answer. Experiment has shown that photoelectrons do not 
accumulate energy transmitted to them by electromagnetic waves, 
nor do they exchange energy in a kind of sw eepstake. The time scale 
needed for such exchanges makes the idea untenable (see discussion 
of Yoffe and Dobronravov experiments by Kitaigorodsky, 1965). 
All the evidence shows that energy transfer is in discrete quanta. The 
energy transfer is between matter and space or space and matter. In 
space, electromagnetic waves do certainly appear to exist. Wave 
theory is so successful in explaining interference and diffraction 
phenomena. Where the energy quanta come from or go to in photon- 
wave interaction is not discussed in modern physics. The best we 
have is the problematic Poynting vector, our tool for understanding 
how energy is transported by electromagnetic waves. However, we 
have no insight into the way in which this energy collects and is 
focussed to generate the quantum. The author has oilered an 
explanation and supported it by quantitative evidence. The reader 
who does not like what the author is offering in Chapters 1 and 2 has 
an uncertain alternative in what is already available. 

The author has contended that it is absurd to expect there to be 
energy radiation from the accelerated electron. The absurdity is 
underlined by pointing out that no accelerating field is allowed for in 
the analysis and that remote from the electron one relies upon 
assumptions about energy transfer which have no foundation in 
truth. Why should we assume that an electromagnetic wave conveys 
energy? Experiment shows energy transfer to be in quanta. The 



200 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



reader who cannot reject the formulation tor the energy radiated by 
the accelerated electron should ask if it is ever used. Surely, it is used 
in numerous theoretical treatments. Yet, has it ever been verified? 
If the formula is applied to a typical radio transmitter and all the 
conduction electrons in the aerial co-operate in developing a high 
current at a high frequency it will be difficult to derive enough 
radiated energy to sustain one photon per minute or per million 
wave-lengths. To apply the radiation equation and arrive at sensible 
results, one has to assume collective oscillation of the collective 
charge of all the electrons. Their interaction is vital to the analysis. 
Therefore, why do we talk about electrons radiating energy? 
Electric current oscillations generate electromagnetic waves. These 
are energy oscillations in the aether. The waves are propagated and 
the waves are the catalyst in the process of energy transfer. 

A wave will seldom be produced by one single photon event at the 
source. In practice, millions of photons of similar frequencies con- 
tribute to develop wave radiation. Further, their actions overlap in 
time, either because the energy release mechanism has a finite life- 
time or because the energy is released at different positions in a 
radiating source and the wave takes time to travel from one such 
position to the next. This means that even if all the photons produce 
exactly the same frequency radiation, it is likely that their occurrence 
is conditioned by the wave itself. The first photon in a series will 
presumably release its energy without experiencing any external 
conditioning action, but the wave component developed by this 
photon must affect the timing of energy release by other photons. 
Otherwise, their occurrence at random phase will substantially cancel 
the wave amplitude by their mutual wave interference. It is essential 
that the existing wave disturbance of the same frequency must 
influence the time of each photon event contributing to the wave 
component at this frequency. The photons will, therefore, tend to 
develop radiation in phase with one another, and will inject their 
momenta into the radiation field additively. 

Now, bearing in mind that photons are liberated from excited 
atoms, and that such atoms may be moving at velocities of the order 
of 10 4 em'sec owing to their thermal energy oscillations, the actual 
frequency of the wave in the observer's reference frame will differ 
from that sensed by each atom. This arises from doppler effects. To 
understand this it is better to think in terms of the key quantity, 
photon momentum. The frequency of a photon in the space-time 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 201 

reference frame is determined by the momentum imparted to the 
frame in the energy transfer process. If the atom is moving, the release 
of more or less energy is needed to develop the same momentum 
reaction because, relative to the atom, the photon will move at more 
or less than the speed of light. It moves at the speed of light relative 
to the frame determined by the space-time lattice and any bulk effect 
of matter present (a reference to the Fizeau experiment). The 
frequency of the photon is dependent upon the velocity of the atom 
emitting it, since momentum has to be velocity-dependent for energy 
quantization in the transfer process. It is not surprising, therefore, to 
find a thermal broadening of spectral lines generated by hot gas. The 
point of this discussion is to show that waves arc an essential part of 
the process of forming photons. The timing of the emission of a 
photon is conditioned by the phase of waves of similar frequency. 
The timing of the absorption of a photon is similarly conditioned. 

Although it is not necessary to wait until enough energy is col- 
lected from a wave before a photon can be absorbed, a certain very 
small time must elapse. The weaker the wave amplitude, the longer 
the period during which the absorbing electron is absorbing mo- 
mentum. In this time the momentum of the electron can change, and 
in its interaction with the wave one could expect to receive a slightly 
weaker photon, meaning less momentum transfer or lower frequency, 
due solely to the very weak wave. It is possible that there could be a 
frequency shift apparent when waves transmitted over long dis- 
tances are intercepted. It is absurd to think that the frequency can 
change in transit between two points not in relative motion. We 
should, however, not be surprised if measurements of very weak 
signals indicate an apparent frequency reduction. This is worthy of 
note here because there have been some recent claims that there is a 
frequency shift of spectral lines in passing massive objects, it being 
implied that light from stars is caused to lose some of its frequency 
in grazing past the sun. Such a phenomenon is outside the scope of 
the author's theory, though it is consistent with the author's opinions 
to believe that possibly with very weak signals one appears to receive 
a lower frequency than is really received. 

As indicated in the footnote on page 194, the pulsar may possibly 
be nothing more than a star which happens to be seen through a 
rotating space-time region. Since it has been shown that an astro- 
nomical body can have its own electromagnetic reference frame 
rotating w ith it, light in close transit will undergo both gravitational 



202 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



deflection and doppler shift. The two effects will interfere, causing 
the transmitted light to be amplitude-modulated and pulsate at a 
low frequency. Pulsars are rare because their line of sight has to pass 
close to a massive non-radiating, but rotating, astronomical body. 
The doppler frequency shift incurred by the wave is a function of 
angle of incidence between the wave and the space-time velocity at 
interception. But for the gravitational deflection in transit through 
the rotating space-time, the doppler shift at exit would cancel that 
at entry. However, the small angle of gravitational deflection causes 
a small doppler shift in the stellar light seen after transit. This shift 
varies across the light beam. As a result, parts of the wave interfere 
at a frequency which is very small. This causes the radiation from 
the star to pulsate at this low frequency. 

The fact that the pulsar is causing such problems to theoretical 
physicists at this time is merely an indication that they really should 
rethink some of their ideas about the aether. The above explanation 
is, of course, rather speculative, but it seems to be more in keeping 
with the rest of physics than some of the current ideas on the cause 
of pulsar behaviour. 

The Nature of Spin 

Spin angular momentum is one of the most perplexing problems. 
The standard half-spin angular momentum quantum has been 
assigned to particles without regard to the direct effect on magnetic 
moment, though with regard to its effect on the measured ratio of 
spin magnetic moments. Much of Chapter 7 has been founded upon 
such analysis. Now, how is it that spin angular velocity and spin 
angular momentum need not be directly related for the right answers 
to emerge from these studies? An attempt at a reconciliation will be 
made below, though not without reliance upon hypothesis. 

First, in Chapter I the electric charge in linear motion was con- 
sidered and found to have kinetic energy, magnetic energy and a 
velocity-dependent electric field energy. These energies were all of 
equal magnitude, but one was negative. A separate electric field 
energy exists in association with the charge. It moves with the charge 
and it determines its mass. One of the positive velocity-dependent 
energies moves with the charge. It causes mass to increase "relativis- 
tically" with increasing velocity. The other two compensating velocity- 
dependent energies belong to the field or space-time. They are a 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 



203 



mere field disturbance. If now such a charge is deemed to be spherical 
and at rest in the electromagnetic reference frame, what happens if it 
rotates about an axis through its centre? Is there any magnetic 
effect? There must be, because we found the right answers for mag- 
netic moments on this assumption in Chapter 7. Since there is no 
charge outside the spherical surface bounding the charge, the 
magnetic spin moment must originate within the sphere of charge. 
On the other hand, mass, which is a scalar quantity, unlike magnetic 
action of a current vector developed by the motion of charge, is 
related to the electric field energy, the total of which is fixed with the 
mass and does not depend upon spin. Therefore, when we talk of 
spin, meaning that the charge is spinning, we expect magnetic effects, 
but need we expect mass effects or angular momentum? If we do 
think of angular momentum, are there two components, one due to 
rotation of charge and contained wholly within the charge sphere, 
and the other due to rotation of field energy outside the sphere? 
It can be shown that if we merely assume that all the field energy, 
within and outside the sphere, rotates with the charge at the same 
angular velocity, then the angular momentum is infinite. Therefore, 
we are forced to recognize that any rotation of the field energy out- 
side the charge sphere must involve a limiting boundary or a slip 
action by which the angular velocity decreases with radial distance. 

It seems very probable that there is an angular momentum within 
the charge sphere due to the charge rotating with its electric field. 
Also, there must be scope for another angular momentum com- 
ponent determined by the angular velocity and extent of its effect 
upon the electric field outside the charge. This latter component of 
angular momentum may well be independent of that possessed by 
the charge itself within the charge sphere. This argument is consistent 
with the use of the zero spin condition and its inter-relation with mass 
in the composite particle forms discussed in Chapter 7. It is also 
consistent with the assignment of a standard half spin angular 
momentum quantum to such a particle form. All that this means is 
that the surrounding field has its own rotation pattern. See also 
Appendix III. 

It is of interest to ask how the proton and the neutron acquire their 
half spins. In discussing the origins of nucleons it must be remembered 
that the creation process involves graviton expansion. If one graviton 
expands to its lower quantum state of mass 3,189 m (see page 140) 
and then stores the energy of a nucleon of mass of the order of 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTFIN 

1,836 w, this graviton can provide dynamic balance and gravitation 
for the nucleoli while still having a total mass and an angular mo- 
mentum with the G frame roughly equal to those of the normal 
graviton. This leads to the rule that there is one graviton in close 
association with each nucleon. The nucleon assumes the spin h'An 
because it takes up a place in juxtaposition with a graviton and thus 
replaces an electron of spin hJAn. In taking up this position it 
probably exchanges its zero angular momentum state, developed 
during its creation, with that of the electron. On this basis, the 
neutron and proton each have a spin of hjAn, but the deuteron has a 
double half spin, probably because it forms in the manner depicted 
in Fig. 7.13 and needs two gravitons to balance it. 

Where does the E and G frame angular momentum of the nucleon 
come from if it only has a spin hjAnl The lattice particle and the 
electron have been presumed to have zero or negligible total angular 
momentum, because spin was in balance with the E and G frame 
orbital quanta. The quantum h\An is the spin needed by the electron 
for balance. It is insufficient for a heavy nucleon. By the action of 
formation of the approximately normal graviton, just described, 
a quantum of energy of 1,874 mc 2 is released, but this order of energv 
has to be reabsorbed if the graviton is to provide proper gravitational 
balance and dynamic balance for a nucleon and other E frame 
substance. In fact, it is inappropriate to imagine that there are both 
normal and "approximately" normal gravitons. All gravitons are the 
same. It is just that, for each nucleon accounting for about 1,874 mc 2 
as gravitating mass energy, there is a certain continuum volume 
adjustment, that is, a continuum charge which can be allowed in the 
gravity calculation. The gravitational effect of the nucleon mass can, 
therefore, be catered for without special compaction of a graviton 
beyond its normal size. Minor volume differences will exist between 
gravitons in the presence of matter, but on balance the gravitons will 
retain their basic size, corresponding to their mass of about 5,064 m. 
It follows that any angular momentum considerations involve us in 
examining the action of full graviton expansion to form the charge 
continuum or, at least, some well expanded form such as the posi- 
tron. Now, the angular momentum of such a graviton is really taken 
away by the lattice particles which come out of motion with the E 
frame. They have zero total angular momentum, including their 
claim to that carried by the balancing graviton. As long as these 
lattice particles remain lattice particles, there is no angular momen- 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 



205 



turn available. The graviton energy can be deployed into forming 
some lattice particles as electrons or positrons. This has been 
suggested in Chapter 8. However, this will do nothing for our 
angular momentum problem because electrons and positrons have 
little, if any, residual angular momentum when spin, orbital E frame 
and G frame balance are considered. Finally, if we use the energy to 
form nucleons, there is still no angular momentum available to 
prime the E frame motion. This problem will not be answered. It is a 
matter for further speculation. Possibly there is a clue from the fact 
that stars rotate. Where does their angular momentum come from? 
Can it be that their formation involves a reaction by which the E and 
G frame angular momenta of matter and even some of the space- 
time substance itself is set in balance? This is hypothesis, and best 
left for the future. 

A question of more immediate importance is the explanation of 
how graviton energy can exist without direct evidence other than the 
nuclear processes or gravitation. Why is it that matter can move 
without there being evidence of energy of gravitons moving also? 
How can the extra energy in space-time which is needed to provide 
the G frame balance for matter in the E frame move with this 
ordinary matter and go undetected? The simple answer to this 
question is that, when matter moves, electric charge constituting 
such matter is in motion. Mass in motion requires charge to be in 
motion. When the energy of G frame balance moves, it is being 
transferred from one graviton to another. Possibly, even, the 
gravitons are not migrant charges but migrant energy quanta which 
settle at successive locations by forming the charge continuum into 
singularities corresponding with the existence of the graviton. Energy 
in motion need not develop momentum. It has to be carried by 
electric charge to convey momentum. In this regard the photon is 
carried by the E frame lattice, which is a metric formed from lattice 
particles, an array of electric charges. It is submitted that one 
graviton can form by compaction of electric charge as another 
expands. If the volumes sum to the same amount, before and after 
this event, then energy has been transferred without the motion of 
electric charge. 

Another problem might seem to be that of gravitational effects of 
free migrant lattice particles. Such particles are needed to provide the 
reverse motion balancing the general motion of a lattice. If the free 
particles are loose in the inertial frame, there is motion relative to the 



206 PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 

E frame. How is it that this does not upset the gravitational analysis'.' 
Firstly, relative to the £ frame the linear motion balances that of the 
continuum charge. There is no resultant electromagnetic effect due 
to linear motion. There is, in theory, an effect due to the apparent 
motion of the free particles at the angular velocity Q relative to the 
E frame. The free particles have deployed their velocity in the E 
frame orbit into a linear motion in the inertial frame. Hence, they 
move relative to the E frame in an apparent orbital sense which 
should develop an electromagnetic effect interfering with grav itation. 
To answer this, remember that the linear motion of the space-time 
system which causes the particles of the lattice to be freed is, in fact, 
only caused by graviton transmutation. The continuum volumes are 
adjusted in this process, as matter is created. In fact, the basic 
parameters of the space-time effects are readjusted. It must, there- 
fore, be assumed that in this process the electromagnetic effects of 
any free charge are allowed for in the balance, just as the effects of the 
graviton charge are allowed for. 

Electrodynamics 

In Chapter 2 the distinction was made between primary charge 
and reacting charge. The analysis leading to equation (2.8) can be 
criticized on the ground that reacting charge will have a velocity 
component in the direction of the applied magnetic field. This makes 
it difficult to contend that the term K n is the true kinetic energy. In 
fact, this problem is merely part of the greater problem that the 
actual kinetic energy of charge present and av ailable to react may 
exceed the magnetic field energy requirements. The answer to this 
difficulty appears to be that Kn is a component of kinetic energy 
added as a result of the application of the magnetic field. Further, 
not all free charge can be classed as reacting. All charge is presum- 
ably primary unless it is needed for reaction purposes. Heavier free 
particles will react in preference to lighter ones of the same polarity, 
but only a proportion of the heavier free particles present may be 
deflected by the field to become reacting. 

This is tantamount to saying that not all free charge in motion 
in a magnetic field is subject to electrodynamic force action, at least 
at the same instant. Undoubtedly, this is a difficult proposition to 
accept, but, if Nature is pointing in this direction, we should not be 
unwilling to explore its further meaning. Also, the reader is reminded 



GENERAL DISCUSSION 207 

that in this book we are confronting electromagnetic problems, many 
of which are hidden unnoticed in the subtleties of mathematics in 
other treatments. 

One currently accepted argument is that the diamagnetic moment 
of free charge is constant (see, for example, Handbook of Physics, 
2nd edition, 1967, McGraw-Hill, p. 4-193). Analysis shows that 
as the applied magnetic field increases, electric field induction occurs 
along the orbit of the reacting charge. This is deemed to accelerate 
charge to keep the angular momentum, and so the magnetic moment, 
constant. Kinetic energy increases to keep in proportion to the 
applied field strength, as equation (2.7) requires if the reaction 
magnetic moment is not to change. 

Now, what does this prove? Does it mean that free electrons in a 
metal are not diamagnetic? It merely indicates that a single electron 
will provide a definite magnetic moment in opposition to an applied 
magnetic field. Diamagnetism, as such, has to do with a multiplicity 
of electrons. We are concerned in (2.7) with a summation of all the 
effects of many reacting charges. The reacting or non-reacting state 
of a particular charge can be determined selectively, as suggested 
above. Hence, whereas the above regular argument proves that there 
should be a constant magnetic moment opposing any applied field 
action, if all charges behave alike, the author prefers the statistical 
selection as a better alternative. It then becomes irrelevant to argue 
that the reacting moment of a single electron is unchanged by 
changing field. 

Some authorities require all charge to react in the same way and 
then invoke statistical argument to explain an overall compensation 
of magnetic moment. This is contrary to the authority of the above 
reference which specifies that free electrons react to oppose a mag- 
netic field by developing a magnetic moment which does not vary as 
the field changes. Complete statistical compensation is, however, 
impossible to justify. Those who claim it, exemplified by Van Vleck 
(1957), seem primarily concerned with field-dependence of energy 
and not magnetic moment. They seem to make their error, a rather 
grave error, in using a formulation of the form: 

^ dH 

to show that the energy quantity E does not vary with a change of 
the magnetic field // when the magnetic moment of free electrons is 



208 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



statistically evaluated. It is a most curious mistake because this 
formula itself contains the implicit assumption that there is no 
diamagnetism present. To be correct the value of M should include 
also the magnetic moment directly attributable to the applied field 
H. History may one day show that this particular error has been a 
major set-back to the progress of theoretical physics. It has pre- 
vented the earlier development of the analysis on pages 30 and 31, 
analysis which could have helped considerably in the understanding 
of the gyromagnetic difficulties later to be discovered. 

To conclude this discussion, a few final words could be said about 
the relevance of the Trouton-Noble experiment to the new law of 
electrodynamics presented in Chapter 2. The experiment did not 
involve the translational movement of the capacitor relative to the 
earth. The motion of the earth around the sun was taken as the 
motion which should induce any manifestation of electrodynamic 
action. It follows, therefore, that, if the electromagnetic reference 
frame can be said to be moving with the earth, there is no experi- 
mental electrodynamic effect to be expected anyway. As none was 
found, nothing has been proved. The empirical derivation of the law 
of electrodynamics is open to criticism on this account. There 
remains the theoretical derivation and the evidence of its successful 
application to phenomena, such as ferromagnetism and the explana- 
tion of gravitation. These should be sufficient to establish the law. 
As to the empirical derivation, can it really be expected that a charged 
capacitor should tend to turn in its own inertia/ reference frame if 
moved linearly through space relative to an observer? This is an 
impossibility. It is a contradiction in terms since there could be many 
observers with different relative linear motions, all involving different 
amounts of turning action (in different directions) but in the same 
inertial reference frame. Then, the electrodynamic reference frame 
alone remains as the reference for such actions. It either moves 
linearly with the capacitor, or it does not. If there is no measurable 
linear motion, and there were to be a turning action of the charged 
capacitor varying according to different uniform velocities of such 
motion, then Einstein's Principle of Relativity is disproved. It seems, 
therefore, fairly safe to accept that the experimental data are consis- 
tent with the empirical derivation of the new law of electrodynamics 
presented in Chapter 2. 



APPENDIX I 



Electrostatic Energy and Magnetic Moment of Spinning Charge 

Consider a sphere of radius a containing an electric charge e. The 
charge distribution within this sphere is determined by the condition 
of uniform pressure. The electric charge has an intrinsic mutual 
repulsion and it is constrained against the action of such internal 
forces to occupy the limited volume of the sphere. Pressure has to be 
uniform inside this charge. The charge distribution must be radial 
due to symmetry. Within any spherical shell concentric with the 
centre of the sphere the charge distribution is uniform over the solid 
angle subtended. Thus, if e. r denotes the charge contained within 
radius x and de x is the charge in the shell of radial thickness dx, we 
may calculate the outward repulsive force due to their interaction as 
e, (/('., A"-' from Coulomb's law. This is the force differential across the 
shell and it must equal the pressure, denoted P, multiplied by an 
increment in surface area across the shell. This is the differential of 
47T.T- or Snxdx. From the equality: 

ZnPx^dx = e,-dc. r ( 1 ) 

Since P is constant, it follows from this that: 

4nPx 2 d(x 2 ) = e x de. r (2) 

whence : 

e ,. = x 2 V4nP (3) 

This gives: 

P = e l \4na x (4) 

From (3), the electric field intensity e. r jx 2 within the charge may be 
shown to be constant and equal to \Z4nP. The internal electrostatic 
energy of the charge is then found by multiplying its volume 47ia 3 /3 
by this field intensity squared and dividing by 87r. The energy £" is 
then : 



£' = 27ra 3 P/3 



(5) 



210 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



From (4) and (5) this is simply e 2 l6a. This is to be added to the well- 
known value of the field energy outside the charge radius of e- \2a to 
obtain the total electrostatic energy E of the charge given as: 

£ = 2e 2 /3a (6) 

It is to be noted that the charge must adopt spherical form because 
it would otherwise occupy the same volume and have a higher 
electrostatic energy. It is the contention of the theory presented in 
this work that space is strictly quantized. The volume available for 
the charge e is limited. According to this volume, the energy of the 
particle is determined on the assumption that it is a minimum. Thus, 
taking the spherical form as reference, imagine an element of charge 
to be pushed out to distort the sphere at some point. Then elsewhere 
an element of charge must receed inwards to keep the occupied vol- 
ume constant. Electrostatic energy is decreased less for the outward 
displaced element than it is increased for the inward displaced one. 
As a result, minimum energy means a spherical charge. This facilitates 
spin about an axis through the centre of the charge sphere, since 
rotation about this axis can occur without disturbing the medium 
outside the sphere containing the charge. 

By differentiating (3) with respect to x and dividing by the volume 
of a spherical shell 4nx 2 dx, it can be shown that the charge density 
within the sphere of charge varies inversely with distance from the 
charge centre. The charge de x of the shell is 2x\/4nP dx, so, noting 
that the velocity moment of a spherical shell is I times its radius 
squared per unit angular velocity, the magnetic moment of the 
charge e becomes: 

Z (\x*2xV4nPdx (7) 

J 

or: 

~ V4tlP co (8) 

DC 

o denotes angular velocity. To explain the parameter 2c, remember 
that the magnetic moment of unit electromagnetic charge is 4n times 
its velocity moment times its frequency of rotation, l/27r per unit 
angular velocity. 

From (4) and (8), the magnetic moment of the charge e is: 



APPENDIX II 



Magnetic Field Angular Momentum Analysis 

Referring to Fig. 1, consider two charges <?i and q 2 in close association 
at O moving at right angles at velocities vi and v 2 respectively. The 
frame of reference is that in which magnetic field reaction is induced. 
That is, the velocities are measured in the E frame, in the sense in 
which this term is used in Chapter 4. Thus, the magnetic field induced 
at a point P distant OP from O may be expressed as the vector sum 
of two components Hi due to qi and H 2 due to q 2 , 

Let qi be taken as moving along the axis Ox. 

Let q 2 be taken as moving along the axis Oy. 

Take axes Ox, Oy and Oz as orthogonal. 

Let the angles 6, (p, e, rj be as shown. 

The magnetic field at P due to q\ is: 

Hi y = +(<7ii>i/c) sine sin tjj(OP) 2 in the y direction 
#iz= -(qivi/c) sine cos t]f(OPf in the z direction 

The magnetic field at P due to q 2 is: 

H 2z = -(qov 2 /c) sin sin (pj{OP) 2 in the z direction 
H 2x = + (q 2 v 2 /c) sin cos <pl(OP) 2 in the x direction 

Now, imagine that the field due to qi exists but that the field due to 
q 2 has only just been established by q 2 having been suddenly acceler- 
ated from rest to assume the velocity v 2 . This means that the magnetic 
field energy density at P changes from (H ly 2 +H u 2 )l8n to 
[Hi y 2 + H 2x 2 + (Hu + H 2z ) 2 ]l8n as the wave passes. At the point Q it 
may be shown that the same effect produces a change of magnetic 
field energy density from (H ly 2 + Hu 2 )l%n to [H ly 2 +Ho 2 + (H» g - 
H lz ) 2 ]l$n. 

The point now to note is that there is a component of energy 
density which has to be added in equal measure at P and Q by the 
passage of the wave. This is (H 2z 2 + H 2x 2 )j%n. Also, there is a com- 
ponent to be added at P and an exactly equal component to be 
subtracted at Q. It is: 



212 



PHYSICS WITHOUT EINSTEIN 



l~{H u H Zi ) (10) 

As was discussed in Chapter 2, mutual magnetic energy is equal 
and of opposite magnitude to the mutual dynamic electric field 
energy. Indeed, the two sum to zero. Electric held energy has mass 
properties. This follows from the discussion of the velocity-depend- 
ence of mass in Chapter 1. We need not think in terms of the motion 



y 




Fig. 1 



of magnetic energy. Consequently, in considering the motion of 
energy and its mass properties, expression (10) represents the energy 
density of the electric field which has to move from P to Q as the 
wave passes through these points. This is a measure of the mass 
redistribution in the field. The main energy terms, that is the non- 
interaction terms, are related to the self energies of the moving 
charges. The faster they move, the greater their dynamic electric 
field energies. Hence, the greater their masses, as explained in 
Chapter 1. Interaction itself does not augment mass in the system 
shown in Fig. 1. Interaction means repositioning of mass. The 
passage of the wave can result in angular momentum being imparted 
to the field energy. 

To calculate the angular momentum of this field reaction we note 
that mass is moving around the wave region about the axis Oz. 



APPENDIX II 213 

Movement from P to Q is through an arc subtending the angle 2c at 
radius OP but projected by multiplication by cos ;/. This movement 
is completed in the time taken for the wave to cross the region 
contributing to the energy interchange. Let w be the angular velocity 
of the energy transfer. Then the projected velocity moment is 
w(OP) 2 cos }], and, since w is 2t/dt, where dt is the time taken by the 
transfer, this velocity moment is: 

2c(OPf cos tj;dt (11) 

The radial thickness of the region under study is cdt and an elemental 
volume at P ox Q can be formed by multiplying cdt by 2n(OP) sin c 
and (OP)de. Thus, the elemental energy being transferred between 
these volumes at P and Q is found, from (10), as: 

l(OPf-cdt{H u H lz ) sin v. dt: (12) 

We divide this by c 2 to obtain mass and multiply the result by (11) 
to determine the angular momentum as: 

] - (UuH-2z){OP)h: sin c cos // dr. ( 1 3) 

Substituting now the originally stated values of H\, and H lz gives: 
{(liq-'i'ii'ijc'^i: sin 2 /; sin cos <p cow- 7/ dc ( 1 4) 

It may be seen from Fig. 1 that: 

cose = sin cos (p (15) 

From (14) and (15) the elemental iield angular momentum given by 
(14) is obtained in terms of,'.- and ;/. When averaged for all values of 
//, cos- // becomes .1. Thus the total angular momentum may be found 
by evaluating: 

l(({iq2VU%lc 2 )j e sin 2 e cos c dc (1 6) 

This is: 

(j2~^(imviV2lc 3 (17) 

Consideration shows that if n and v* are not at right angles, as shown 
in Fig. 1, the expression has to be multiplied by the sine of the angle 
between them. Thus (17) is a measure of the maximum angular 
reaction between the charges. 



APPENDIX III 



Magnetic Spin Properties of Space-time 

The lattice particle system of space-time is the electromagnetic 
reference frame. The charge continuum moving about this frame at 
the universal angular velocity Q develops magnetic moment. Here, 
we assume that this is balanced by the spin of the lattice particles. 
This spin motion must be in the same direction but it will, of course, 
have to be at much higher frequency. 

From Chapter 2 we have seen that the magnetic moment of any 
fundamental system in orbital motion has to be doubled. Thus unit 
charge e of the continuum moving at Q = c\2r in an orbit of radius 2r 
relative to the lattice produces a magnetic moment of twice (ejlc) 
times Q times (2r) 2 or 2er. From Appendix I the lattice particle 
spinning at angular velocity to develops a magnetic moment 
{ej6c)b-co, where /; is the particle radius. This has to be multiplied by 
a factor to correct for anomaly. Equating the magnetic moments : 

y(el6c)b 2 co = 2er (18) 

Next, we note that the spin angular momentum of the lattice 
particle plus its orbital angular momentum (E and G frame compo- 
nents) sum to zero. The problem here is that the distribution of the 
angular momentum due to the mass in the field is uncertain. How- 
ever, we assume that we can apply the same criterion to the mass 
components defined by and within the sphere of the lattice particle. 
The field is excluded. Now, the rest mass energy of the lattice particle 
is 2e 2 j3b, of which e 2 l6b is within the sphere of radius b and e 2 ',2b 
outside. The effective mass of the particle is halved because of the 
"buoyancy" due to the density of the energy medium surrounding 
the particle. Thus, ignoring the field outside the radius b, the effective 
orbital mass energy of the non-field constituent, to which our zero 
angular momentum condition is applied, is -e 2 /3b due to the buoy- 
ancy effect and e 2 j6b due to the energy within the sphere. This tells 
us that the mass effect within the sphere and able to spin at co is 
exactly equal and opposite in polarity to that to be considered in 



