


The following Elssay was originally undertaken mainly as a 
contribution towards the systematic theoretical development of 
the standpoint which considers electricity, as well as matter, to 
be constituted on an atomic basis. 

This is, as regards its general idea, no recent hypothesis. 
Within ten years of the publication of the fundamental dis- 
coveries of Volta, in the year 1800, which first revealed the 
existence of permanent electric currents, Sir Humphry Davy 
had been led to maintain the proposition that "chemical and 
electrical attractions were produced by the same causes, acting 
in the one case on particles and in the other on masses*," as 
the outcome of the researches on electro-chemistry which are 
recorded in his earlier Bakerian Lectures : and a little later the 
foundation for a complete system of chemistry was sought by 
Berzeliua in a distinction between electro-positive and electro- 
negative atoms. Although it would be of course wrong to read 
back our precise modem knowledge into the general views 
which a survey of the facts impressed on Davy's mind, — just as 
it would be erroneous to consider his more widely known views 
on the nature of heat as an anticipation of modem exact 
thermal theory — yet his striking pronouncements show how 



VI PREFACE 

rapidly the times became ripe for the quantitative electro- 
chemical investigations of his successor Faraday. Since 
Faraday's work on electrolysis the notion of the atomic 
constitution of electrification, in its electro-chemical aspect, 
has never been entirely absent: it has been insisted on by 
Maxwell and more particularly by von Helmholtz: it was 
adapted, in the most natural manner, to the ideas of the 
Weberian electrodynamics, which treated of moving electric 
particles: but it is only recently that any efforts have been 
made towards the development of the Maxwellian aether-theory 
on that basis. 

The form under which the atomic electric theory is intro- 
duced in this Essay, originally presented itself — as it happened 
— ^in a quite different connexion, in the course of an inquiry 
into the competence of the aether devised by Mac Cullagh to 
serve for electrical purposes as well as optical ones. It was 
found, reasoning entirely from abstract principles, that the only 
possible way of representing electrification, in an elastic aether, 
was as a system of discrete or isolated electric charges, consti- 
tuting singular points involving intrinsic strain in the stnicture 
of the medium. If the propagation of disturbances in the 
aether, with their ascertained optical properties, is to be 
explained dynamically at all, that is by the interaction of 
inertia and motion, the clastic reaction of this medium to 
displacement is almost restricted, as Mac Cullagh showed, to be 
effectively (even if not fundamentally*) a purely rotational 
one; an essential confirmation of this rotational character of 
its elasticity here presents itself in the fact that in a medium 

* It is not Buperflnous to repeat here that the object of a gyrostatic model of 
the rotational aether is not to represent its actual strncture, but to help us to 
realize that the scheme of mathematical relations which defines its activity is a 
legitimate conception. Matter may be and likely is a structure in the aether, 
but certainly aether is not a structure made of matter. This introduction of a 
snprasensual aethereal medium, which is not the same as matter, may of 
course be described as leaving reality behind ns : and so in fact may every 
result of thought be described which is more than a record or comparison of 
sensations. 



PREFACE VU 

thus constituted the structure of an atomic electric charge 
can be directly specified, so far at any rate as is required for 
a knowledge of its interaction with other electric charges at 
sensible distance, whereas the absence of any conception of 
what constitutes electrification had previously been commonly 
regarded as the fundamental obstacle to the electrical develop- 
ment of aether-theory. The order of ideas thus indicated, 
when carried through up to its logical extent, involves the 
explanation of the atomic character of matter itself: matter 
must be constituted of isolated portions each of which is of 
necessity a permanent nucleus or singularity in and belonging 
to the aether, of some such type as is represented for example 
by a minute vortex ring in perfect fluid or a centre of permanent 
strain in a rotationally elastic medium. It is thus natural to 
infer that the ultimate atom of electricity is one aspect of the 
entity which constitutes the ultimate atom of matter, a con- 
clusion which (foreshadowed as above in set terms by Davy) is 
almost demonstrated by Faraday's electro-chemical law ex- 
pressing an exact numerical connexion between them. The 
question must of course remain open as to whether other forms 
of activity besides this electrical one can be recognized in the 
constitution of the atom of matter: as yet nothing seems to 
have been found in the ascertained types of general physical 
and chemical phenomena which demands a further amplification, 
so that any advance in that direction would at present be 
premature if not gratuitous. For it is to be borne in mind 
that the proper aim of an atomic theory is not to attempt the 
impossible task of reducing once for all the whole complex of 
physical activity to rule, but is rather to improve and connect 
accepted methods of explanation of the various main regular 
types of interaction that have been brought to light in this 
field of knowledge. It is incumbent on us to recognize an 
aethereal substratum to matter, in so far as this proves con- 
ducive to simplicity and logical consistency in our scheme of 
physical relations, and helpful towards the discovery of hitherto 



YUl PREFACE 

unnoticed ones ; but it would be a breach of scientific method 
to complicate its properties by any hypothesis, as distinct from 
logical development, beyond what is required for this purpose. 
It may therefore be held that, in so far as theories of the 
ultimate connexion of different physical agencies are allowed to 
be legitimate at all, they should devclope along the lines of a 
purely electric aether until critics of such a simple scheme are 
able to point to a definite group of phenomena that require the 
assumption of a new set of properties and that moreover can be 
reduced to logical order thereby : a charge of incompleteness 
without indication of a better way, is not effective criticism in 
questions of this kind, because, owing to the imperfection of our 
perceptions and the limited range of our intellectual operations, 
finality can never be attained. 

It appears to be not without value, as regards clearness and 
definiteness of view, that the conception of an elastic aethereal 
medium that had been originally evolved from consideration of 
purely optical phenomena, is capable of direct natural develop- 
ment so as to pass into line with the much wider and more 
recent electrodynamic theory which wtis constructed by Maxwell 
on the basis of purely electrical phenomena, — in fact largely as 
the dynamical representation and development of Faraday's 
idea of a varying electrotonic state in space, determined by the 
changing lines of force. 

In the following discussions some care has been taken to 
trace the connexion with the historical course of physical ideas. 
While there bas been a steady gain in precision, the trend of 
fundamental physical speculation has always been much the 
same, and thus does not in its main features pass out of date : 
but owing to the rapid accumulation of new phenomena and 
the consequent necessity of formal treatises digesting the state 
of actual knowledge, there is less and less opportunity to 
become critically acquainted with the points of view of the 
original discoverers in physical science, and the general lines of 
thought in which the definite recorded advances are often only 



PREFACE IX 

inddenta The accumulation of experimental data, pointing 
more or less exactly to physical relations of which no sufficiently 
precise theoretical account has yet been forthcoming, is doubt- 
less largely responsible for the prevalent doctrine that theoretical 
development is of value only as an auxiliary to experiment, and 
cannot be trusted to effect anything constructive from its own 
resources except of the kind that can be tested by immediate 
experimental meana The mind will however not readily give 
up the attempt to apprehend the exact formal character of the 
latent connexions between different physical agencies : and the 
history of discovery may be held perhaps to supply the strongest 
reason for estimating effort towards clearness of thought as of 
not less importance in its own sphere than exploration of 
phenomena. Thus for example, the present view of the atomic 
character of electricity, which is at length coming within the 
scope of direct experiment, has been in evidence with gradually 
increasing precision ever since theoretical formulations were 
attempted on this subject: in fact if the considerations ex- 
plained below (§ 46) are valid, it is the only view that could 
logically be entertained without involving either a reconstruc- 
tion of the accepted basis of physical representation or else an 
admission of its partial or merely illustrative character. 

Some of the following chapters may be regarded as a 
re-statement in improved form of investigations already de- 
veloped in a series of memoirs, Phil, Trans, A 1894f-6-7. They 
cover only a part of the survey that was there attempted, being 
concerned mainly with the systematic construction of general 
electric theory on the basis of intrinsic atomic charges. Judging 
from some criticisms which that method has attracted, it would 
appear that misconception has existed owing to difficulty in 
attaining the point of view, such as may possibly arise from the 
circumstance that the fundamental concept of the electron did 
not there present itself at the beginning of the discussion, but 
was introduced subsequently in an appendix. In estimating 
the value of an undertaking of this kind, it should of course be 



X PREFACE 

judged as a connected argument. Single departments of electric 
theory can be, and usually are, more concisely formulated when 
the nature of their connexion with other departments is not a 
question of immediate interest. Here the foundation is intended 
to be definite and universal, thus precluding the adoption of an 
independent standpoint on each brauch of the subject, to be 
developed as far as it will go, with the help if need be of 
empirical modification irrespective of the requirements of other 
branches: and the main question to be determined is not 
whether the presentation is entirely free from flaw, but whether 
and in what respects it is an advance sufficient to merit further 
attention with a view to its improvement. The time has fully 
arrived when, if theoretical physics is not to remain content 
with being merely a systematic record of phenomena, some 
definite idea of the connexion between aether and matter is 
essential to progress; the discussions which follow are largely 
concerned with the development of the consequences of one 
such conception. It seems reasonable to hold that the utility 
of such a discussion will not be entirely removed should this 
conception turn out to be practically incomplete, or even 
incoherent : for it is concerned with a body of ideas relating to 
the ultimate activity of molecules which is on a different plane 
from the indefinite notion of mutual forces to which dynamical 
molecular science has mostly been restricted. 

It is recognized of course that every attempt at improve- 
ment in scientific exposition must have a limited range, and 
that the chief critical interest will soon be transferred from 
what can be explained by any new formulation to what it has 
not shown itself competent to include. Yet it has turned out, 
to take a famous instance, to be no insuperable objection to 
Dalton's chemical development of the atomic theory, that he 
could form no idea as to how his atoms held each other in 
combination: although in fact Wollaston, and to some extent 
Davy, hesitated about accepting the atoms while holding to the 
laws of combination in definite and multiple proportions that 



PREFACE XI 

were suggested by them, because the theory did not explain 
how an atom is constituted. An instructive illustration of the 
practical divergence of view that can arise in this manner is 
afforded by the difference of opinion (cf. Appendix D infra) 
between Newton and Huygens regarding the scope of the law 
of gravitation. 

The general conception of a kinetic molecular structure for 
matter invites a reconstruction of the theoretical basis of ordin- 
ary mechanics itself. The customary development of abstract 
dynamics rests on the foundation of forces acting between 
particles so as to satisfy Newton's three laws of motion. The 
only meaning that can here be assigned to such a particle is an 
unchanging element of mass whose volume is large enough to 
contain a vast assemblage of molecules. Even in the hands of 
Kirchhoff, who is considered to have in his treatment notably 
broadened the subject, the dynamics of finite bodies is derived 
through the principle of Least Action from the conception that 
they are constituted of particles acting on each other in this 
way ; thus in fact adhering to Lagrange's original procedure 
developed in the year 1760. It seems not too much to say, in 
the light of molecular science, that such a constitution for a 
material body is purely imaginary, and even meaningless when 
applied to such subjects as stress and strain in elastic matter. 
The real foundation of general abstract mechanics is either the 
principle of Action in its general form, assumed as a descriptive 
analytical formulation of the course of phenomena, or else the 
principle of d'Alembert which is analytically equivalent to it. 
The latter is doubtless the simpler basis when we are dealing 
only with elements of mass in the ordinary sense; for it is 
merely the statement that the irregular or uncoordinated part 
of the internal motions and strains in a stable or permanently 
existing element of mass has nothing to do with the changes of 
configuration of that element considered as a whole; and the 
preparation for its application consists in the process of picking 
out and specifying the coordinated parts so far as is needed for 



Xll PREFACE 

the problem in hand. In electrodynamic problems however the 
individual electrons in the element of volume come into con- 
sideration, at any rate as regards their main division into 
positive and negative : and then the Action principle, as being 
the more universal, must almost of necessity be employed. If 
further we assume that the material molecule is wholly of 
aethereal constitution, this general dynamical principle of Action 
must itself be involved (c£ Appendix B) as a direct consequence 
of whatever scheme of properties is assigned to the free aether, 
irrespective of special hypothesis : so that, reasoning back from 
its truth, we may gain some general knowledge as to the nature 
of the interactions exerted by the ultimate material atoms 
across the aether. Its significance would then consist, not in 
any directly ultimate character such as it was originally sup- 
posed to possess, but in its being a derived analytical formulation 
sufficiently comprehensive to cover by itself the domain of 
mechanical science, as well as (in a minor degree) in it^ 
aptitude for analytical transformation to suit whatever aspect 
of the phenomena is under discussion, after the manner illus- 
trated for example by the analysis of Chapter vi infra. In 
the course of such an abstract development of the dynamics of 
mechanical systems from the Action principle, the idea of force 
would be introduced through the coefficients in the completed 
variation of the Action, to which it is necessary for purposes of 
physical discussions and comparisons to give a name, that name 
which is in fact suggested from our sensation of muscular effort. 
It is possible that these considerations are insisted on in various 
connexions to an extent that will be tedious* : but they are at 

* At one time it was customary to appeal to absolute dynamical principles 
relating to forces, as the fixed unchauging datum of physical science. The 
interest in fundamental discussions regarding the mode of formulation of 
dynamics has however revived in recent years, mainly through the writings of 
James Thomson, and of Hertz and Boltzmann, and of the school of physicists 
which advocates restriction to a purely descriptive science of energetics. The 
conception of the subject that is propounded here is different from the points of 
view of these writers ; while it aims at defining the domain (including all that 
of steady or very slowly varying states) within which the simpler principles of 



PREFACE XUl 

any rate not more prominent than the cognate fundamental 
discussions on convergency and functionality have become in 
pure mathematical analysis. A field in which these two types 
of approximation towards ideal exact procedure have something 
in common is sketched in the analysis of Appendix A: it is 
now recognized that, in a strictly rigorous presentation of the 
theory of gravitational and otb^r agencies, it is necessary to 
inquire (at considerable length) how far a potential is a function 
that can legitimately be differentiated at a point inside the 
attracting mass : it is here explained, among other things, that 
in a physical problem the potential about which these mathe- 
matical discussions arise is not the potential of the actual 
molecular distribution of matter but that of an ideal smoothed- 
out or continuous distribution, in &ct a mechanical* repre- 
sentation which is, ouly in certain definite respects, equivalent 
to it. Refinements of this kind are no doubt foreign to an 
empirical formulation of mathematical physics, where the aim 
is merely a concise expression of the facts of observation ; but 
it seems not unlikely that in the final theory of the transition 
from molecular to mechanical dynamics they will be of funda- 
mental import. 

The main general principle in this domain, which is con- 
sidered in some aspects more at length in the memoirs above 
referred to, is that the mechanical and the molecular properties 
of a material system, which is not undergoing constitutive 
change, are independent of each other and not mutually in- 
volved : so that the mechanical interactions of a system can 
be developed independently of a knowledge of its molecular 
constitution. This principle may even be sufficiently deep- 
seated to have a bearing on the solution of the philosophical 
question of ultimate mechanical determinism. 

energetics can supply an adequate oloe to the course of physical and chemical 
change. 

* Throughout this Essay the term mechanical is used in antithesis to mole- 
etUar : mechanics is the dynamics of matter in bulk, in contrast with molecular 
dynamics. 

L. c 



XIV PREFACE 

No apology is offered for what may possibly be considered 
as the non-mathematical character of a considerable portion of 
the book. The physical hypothesis has been kept intentionally 
in the foreground, and algebraic results have been where 
possible translated into their descriptive equivalents. This 
synthetic course, while more flexible, doubtless makes the ex- 
position more difficult to follow, and apparently less exact, than 
would be a mathematical development from a system of initial 
hypotheses, in which attention would be demanded for the 
analytical processes alone: but on the other hand it exposes 
the whole situation, and conduces to the direct detection and 
examination of discrepancies that might possibly otherwise 
remain latent: it is thus, notwithstanding the somewhat im- 
perfect focussing of the subject, more suitable for a theoretical 
procedure which is in the constructive stage. 

The Essay in its present form was completed at the end of 
the year 1898, except as regards the Appendices D, E, and F, 
and the articles and footnotes distinguished by a double asterisk 
or other mark. In the revision of the sheets before publication 
the writer has however had the good fortune to obtain the 
collaboration of his friend Prof. A. E. H. Love, of Oxford, 
whose acute and vigilant criticism has led to many improve- 
ments in the exposition as well as the correction of various 
mistakes, thereby adding very substantially to the value of the 
work. For similar most valuable services relating to the latter 
half of the book, and for the greater part of the list o{ corrigenda 
— as regards some of which special apology must be made — the 
writer is indebted to his friend Prof. W. M^F. Orr, of the 
Royal College of Science, Dublin. Notwithstanding much 
increased confidence in the general validity of the argument, 
arising from the expert assistance and criticism thus most 
kindly afforded, many serious defects doubtless remain. Various 
questions not ripe for final definite treatment, and matters on 
which opinions can differ, have been passed under consideration: 
for instance, the discussion on the molecular basis of mechanics 



PREFACE XV 

will have largely served its purpose if it draws attention to the 
point of view. In questions of this kind the most fruitful source 
of progress is perhaps the process of mutual approximation of 
different standpoints; any single attempt at effective adaptation 
of fundamental conceptions must involve detail that is only 
provisional, and leave points of difficulty unsolved or imperfectly 
analyzed, while in many cases it will originate more problems 
than it settles. This latter feature of general theoretical physics 
cannot in fact be better illustrated than by the original found- 
ation of all such theories as given by Maxwell, which in its 
broad outlines was the culmination of the greatest advance in 
modem times : yet it presented itself with so many gaps in its 
formal development, and raised so many new questions for 
discussion, that finality with regard to the mode of formulation 
of the subject is possibly yet far off. 

Acknowledgment is due to the officials of the University 
Press for the exact and obliging manner in which they have 
executed the printing and corrections. 

St Joh^i's College, Cambridge 
Mar, 6, 1900 



c2 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Chapter I Introduction 1 

SECTION I 

Chapter II Historical survey . . . . . 6 

Astronomical aberration of light : Bradley's guiding ideas. Optical 
refraction aninflnenced by the Earth's motion : Fresnel's explanation. 
Aberration as measured by a water-telesoope. Theoretical yiews of 
Cauchy. Views of Sir George Stokes as to constitution of the aether : 
suggested partial analogy of material substances like pitch ; irrotational 
yiscons motion unstable, also involves dissipation of energy : irrotational 
character of finite motions of the aether explained by its high rigidity 
or rotational elasticity. Maxwell's formulation of Fresnel's theory. The 
general absence of any optical influence of the Earth's motion suggests 
that the aether may move along with the Earth : the difficulties of this 
mode of explanation. Maxwell's discussion of electrodynamic theory 
relative to moving bodies. Introduction of atomic electric charges into 
the aether theory. Aether stagnant. Alleged difficulties of the electric 
theory. Maxwell's original scheme effective for systems at rest : nature 
of its adaptation to moving systems. A constitutive aether affords the 
only explanation of an atomic constitution of matter : the various 
atomic theories: electric aspect of an atom. MacCullagh's optical 
aether is the electric aether. Molecules may be systems of electrons : 
the duality of positive and negative dynamically necessary. Maxwell's 
elimination of ' electricity ' from the theory is available for ordinary 
electrodynamics, but cannot be extended to problems involving 
radiation. 

Chapter III General kinematic theory of optical rays 

IN moving media 30 

Specification of a ray: ray- velocity : wave-velocity: wave-front: 
principle of Least Time: application to a moving medium. Theories 
of aberration : if the aether moves sensibly its motion must be irrot- 



XVUl CONTENTS 

PAOS 

ational : influence of its elastioity in this direction : evidence of water- 
telescope. Influence of convection of the material medium on velocity 
of propagation ; Fresnel's law necessary whether there is aethereal flow 
or not. Bay- velocity in moving medium. Influence of convection on 
positions of optical foci: on period of the light: on phenomena of 
diffraction and interference, application to diffraction-grating. Inclusion 
of the second order of small quantities : theory of Michelson's inter- 
ference experiment; law of reflexion by rotating mirror. G^eral 
analysis of interference relative to moving media: the retardation 
may be calculated on the undisturbed path: applied to Michelson's 
arrangement. 

Chapter IV The problem op optical convection : indi- 
cations TOWARDS A DYNAMICAL THEORY ... 54 

Examples of convection of wave-trains by simple media: sound 
waves in air, waves on stretched cord. MaxwelPs equations for the 
compound medium, aether and matter: various possible constitutive 
hypotheses considered. Fresnel's law obtained ; the electric theory of 
moving media which it requires; same expressed without the aid of 
potentials. Sketch of results to be derived from a precise molecular 
theory : Miohelson*s interference experiment gives a clue as regards the 
constitution of a molecule. Magnetic effect of convection of an electric 
charge with the Earth : BOntgen's null result explained by countervailing 
charges: the electric effect of the convection of a magnet must be 
similarly null. 



SECTION II 

Chapter V On method in general physical theory . 68 

On the scientific utility of hypothesis : illustrated from the history 
of the corpuscular theory of light, and of the Weberian theoiy of 
electrodynamics. Helmholtz's criticism of the latter not destructive ; 
it is now included in modified form in the aether theory: the same 
applies to MacCuIlagh*s optical theories, which were at one time 
rejected. On vector terminology. Hypothesis of aethereal constitution 
of matter; necessary in order to avoid an irreconcilable duality of 
matter and aether ; historical. Phenomena are expressible in terms of 
matter alone, unless velocities or alternations comparable with those 
of radiation are concerned. This electric theory of aether and matter 
is precisely formulated; thus even if itself incomplete, it will throw 
light on the possibilities of correlation in that remote region : ordinary 
molecular theories suppose the molecules so far apart that their inter- 
actions can be expressed by * forces.' 



CONTENTS XIX 

PAGE 

Chapter VI Dynamical theory of electrical actions . 82 

Least Action, fundamental in general dynamics. Djrnamical 
equations for free aether, derived from its energy function : the two 
fundamental vectors, oircuitally related : velocity of elastic propagation. 
Introduction of electrons, as point-charges. Modification of relation of 
aethereal strain to displacement in a medium containing electrons : 
displacement of an electron equivalent to a local aether strain : two 
independent variables, electric flux and aether strain : combined they 
form Maxwell's circuital total current Generalization of Stokes' 
theorem of circuit and barrier integration, for a medium containing 
singularities. In ordinary electrodynamics, aether strain inconsiderable 
compared with electric flux: expression of the kinetic energy of the 
aether in terms of electric flux, viz. in terms of true flux of electrons 
and * apparent ' flux the equivalent of change of aether-strain, involves 
the introduction of the vector potential of the electric flux : the potential 
energy involves the aether strain alone. Application of Action principle 
to the energy as thus specified : introduction of the additional condition 
that each electron is a pole of the aether strain : variation performed as 
regards a moving electron : interpretation of result as giving the electric 
force acting on the electrons and the aethereal force straining the 
aether: modification required in magnetized media to obtain the 
* mechanical * part of the electric force which excludes the purely local 
part : the mechanical force on an electric current. Electric currents of 
conduction, due to motions of ions, constituted half by positive and 
half by negative ions. Currents producing material electric polarization. 
Current arising from convection of charged bodies. Current arising 
from convection of a polarized dielectric, expressible primarily as a 
Quo^i-magnetization. Any magnetization identical mechanically with 
a distribution of current. Total mechanical force on the material 
medium, as constituted by the force on the true current, that on the 
magnetism, that on the electric polarization and the true electric 
charge : the part of it arising from the convection of the medium. The 
vector potential of magnetism must be defined as that of the equivalent 
distribution of electric flow: this equivalence extends to magnetic 
induction, not to magnetic force. 

Chapter VII Review op the electrodynamic equations 

OF A MATERIAL MEDIUM 109 

Exact dynamical relations. Exact relations inherent in the con- 
stitution of the medium. Consequences: the static electric force due 
to the actual distribution adds to the kinetically induced force. 
Approximate constitutive relations of the material medium : dielectric 
and magnetic coefficients: analysis of aeolotropic conduction, any 
rotational character must be due to extraneous vector influence. 
Elimination of mathematical potentials : the circuital relations. Max. 
well's purely abstract scheme; determinate for media at rest and 



CONTENTS 

PAOS 

identioal with the present soheme : illustration from theory of doable 
refraction, compared with Helmholtz's wider theory. The aether 
sufficiently defined by its dynamical equations. The transition from 
molecular to mechanical theory : the latter inyolves only the principal 
values of the integrals expressing the potentials. 

Chapter VIII Optical and other developments relating 

TO ENERGY AND STRESS 127 

Mechanical electrodynamic forces expressed in terms of a stress- 
system: limited validity of Maxwell's expressions, their physical 
meaning : his dielectric stress invalid except in free aether. Application 
to repulsion of conductiug masses by magnetic alternators: copper 
filings lie along lines of force. Contrast between relations of obstacles 
to electric waves and to sound waves. Mechanical pressure of radiation ; 
on a black body is given by Maxwell's law. Absorption of radiation : 
character of surface of a perfectly black body ; of a perfect reflector. 
Belation of the complete radiation to the temperature: Boltzmann's 
proof of Stefan's law. Dynamical and material symmetry: general 
deductions regarding perversion, reversibility, chirality: influence of 
convection through the aether on structure. Adiabatic compression of 
radiation : its mechanical value : legitimacy of an ideal screen impervious 
to radiation but pervious to aether. 



SECTION III 

Chapter IX Influence of steady motion on an electro- 
static MATERIAL SYSTEM 149 

Existence of an electric potential in every steady state. Equations 
for case of uniform translation : characteristic equation of the potential, 
solved: electric distribution and force unaffected, but magnetic field 
altered: correlation with a stationary system. Null results of con- 
vection of magnets. Convection of a dielectric system. Uniform 
rotation of an electrostatic system : electric potential not constant in 
conductor: solution for a rotating dielectric; for a spherical con- 
ductor. 

Chapter X General problem of moving matter treated 

IN RELATION TO THE INDIVIDUAL MOLECULES 161 

Analytical speciflcation of an electron as a moving pole in the 
electric field necessitating a singularity in the magnetic field. The 
problem, formulated so as to take cognizance of the electrons indi- 
vidually, is determinate in terms of the aether alone if matter is 



CONTENTS XXI 



PAOV 



oonstitnted of electrons: arguments in favour of its being mainly so 
constituted. The equations relative to the convected material system; 
transformed back to the standard form : resulting correlation with same 
system stationary, but with a time-origin varying from point to point; 
includes the previous special investigations: in static distributions the 
charges and electric forces are the same in both systems to the first 
order, but not the aethereal displacements and magnetic forces. 

Chapter XI Moving material system: approximation 

CARRIED TO THE SECOND ORDER 173 

Electrodynamic equations, taking account of individual electrons : 
referred to moving system: restored to standard form by change of 
scale in space and time : resulting correlation. Second-order shrinkage 
in an aethereally constituted system arising from convection. Optical 
propagation in moving matter : Earth's motion optically inoperative. 
Null effect on structure of a molecule. Null effect on conductivity of 
the medium. Discussion of null effect to second order in Michelson's 
interference experiments. Are the linear equations of the aether exact? 
Inference as to structure from the definiteness of atomic masses : 
gravitation not involved with the present subject. 



SECTION IV 
Chapter XII On optical rotations magnetic and 

STRUCTURAL 194 

Magneto-optic energy term: deduction of relation between polar- 
ization and electric force: the magnetic influence purely rotational. 
Equations of propagation : coefficient of rotation. A hypothesis as to 
relation of rotation to density : not experimentally verified. Physical 
explanation of the rotation. Theory of magneto-optic reflexion and 
the Kerr effect. Structural rotation : the equations : its kinetic origin. 
Chiral relations of ions. Rotation produced by artificial twisted 
structure. See Appendix F. 

Chapter XIII Influence of the earth's motion on 

ROTATIONAL OPTICAL PHENOMENA 211 

Equations for moving rotational medium : influence of convection 
on velocity of propagation : the convective effect simply superposed. 
Verification of Mascart's null result as regards structural rotation: 
consistent with the electron theory. Null result as regards magnetic 
rotation. 



XXU CONTENTS 



SECTION V 



PAOS 



Chapter XIY On the mechanism of molecular radiation 221 

The aethereal disturbance propagated from a moving eleotron. The 
field of a vibrating doublet ; of an electron describing an orbit. The 
type of radiation emitted from a moving eleotron: its intensity: a 
uniformly moving electron does not radiate. Isolated pulee caused by 
sudden disturbance : its energy conserved as it moves onward : mode of 
establishment of a steady magnetic field as the trail of such a pulse. 
Conditions for absence of radiation from a molecule : concentration of 
its energy 

Chapter XV On the nature op ordinary radiation, and 

ITS SYNTHESIS INTO REGULAR WAVE-TRAINS . . 235 

Bdntgen radiation, not of vibratory origin : its intensity per mole- 
cule : absorption proportional to density. The Fourier analysis, how 
far objective. Analysis of radiation by a series of simple damped 
receivers : response to a discontinuous pulse, to a damped wave-train : 
case of Hertzian radiation. Character of radiation from gases : periods, 
effective phase, interference. Periodicity created or intensified by the 
analyzer; case of a grating; case of a prism. Rdntgen radiation would 
analyze into high periods. 

Appendix A On the principles of the theory of mag- 
netic and electric polarity : and on the mechanical 
significance of divergent integrals .... 252 

Definition of polarity : its relation to the Maxwellian electric dis- 
placement : polarization of dielectric matter. Distribution of polarity 
replaced by a distribution of density. Formal laws of induced polar- 
ization. Transition from the aggregate of molecular polar elements to 
the polarized mechanical medium. The potential of mechanical theory 
defined: the actual magnetic vector potential must be modified to a 
mechanical form. The integrals occurring iu mechanical theory are 
defined by their principal values. The formula for electric force always 
consists of an electrokinetic part added to the electrostatic force. 

Appendix B On the scope of mechanical explanation : 

AND ON THE IDF^ OF FORCE 268 

General mechanics based on principle of virtual work and principle 
of d'Alembert. Generalized law of mechanical reaction. Scope and 
physical reality of statics: idea of force fundamental and prior to 
mechanical motions. The method of molecular dynamics. Mechanics 
a growing science as regards its principles. General kinetics formulated 




CONTENTS XXIU 

PAOB 

with regard to relative motions alone, in special cases: in other cases 
the stagnant aether is the ultimate datum of reference. EirohhofiF*s 
exposition of the Lagrangian formulation on the basis of the Action 
principle applied to systems of 'particles.' The Lagrangian scheme 
implies that the system is conservative as regards its energy, and 
involves that it is conservative (e.g. reversible, dynamically permanent) 
in other respects. Hertz's objection that rolling motions are not 
included. Physical concepts are abstract ideas cultivated under the 
guidance of observation. If matter is aethereally constituted, all 
dynamics ultimately rests on that of the aether : mechanical Action 
principle in this way deduced. The approximate inclusion of actual 
conservative material systems under the ideal Action principle involves 
observation and experiment. Thermodynamics a branch of statics: 
its aim is the formulation of the available energy, on which alone 
mechanical effect depends. Physical explanation of law of uniformity 
of temperature: temperature not a dynamical concept. Mechanical 
analogies. Mechanics of permanent systems is independent of mole- 
cular dynamics: illustrated by theory of osmotic pressure. Energy 
not an ultimate concept. Vital activity not mechanical as regards its 
stimulus. 

Appendix On electrolysis : and the molecular 

CHARACTER OP ELECTRIC CONDUCTION .... 289 

Laws of Faraday and Eohlrausch : they require that electrolysis is 
accompanied by convection of the electrolyte. Lidependent diffusion 
of the ions : their equations of transfer : relation of their diffusion con- 
stants to their electric mobilities. Diffusivity connected with electric 
data : electromotive forces arising from concentration. Ions not free 
in metallic conduction. Ultimate steady gradient of concentration 
established by electrolysis. Special case of no current. Hall effect in 
electrolytes. Influence of motion through the aether. Equations for 
mixed electrolytes: electromotive forces: simple cases. Convective 
material flow due to bodily charge, compared with electric osmosis. 
Thermoelectric influence : the moving ions carry their heat along with 
them : the thermoelectric gradient along an unequally heated conductor 
not a true voltaic effect. 

Appendix D On the historical development of atomic 

AND RADIANT THEORY 310 

Fermat on Least Time or Action in optics. The aether-theory of 
Huygens: on transmission by waves: on the nature of the elasticity 
of solids, contrasted with that of gases : ideas as to elasticity of the 
aether : kinetic theory of gases, and of matter in general: matter freely 
permeable to aether: his limited acceptance of the law of gravitation. 
Gravitation uninfluenced by structure. The aether-theory of Newton: 



XXIV CONTENTS 

PAOS 

an aether essential to his views : compelled by absence of explanation 
of shadows to introduce the extraneous aid of Inminiferous corpuscles : 
would welcome any constitutive aether that would not disturb the 
motions of the planets : atoms necessary to physics. Young's plea that 
the electric aether may also be the medium of optical propagation. 
Davy's view that electric attraction is of the essence of the atom, and 
is the cause of chemical aflSnity. Ghiuss on the necessity of a medium 
for the transmission of electric force between atoms. Kelvin's view 
that atoms are structures. Graham's view that an atom is a vortex in 
the aether. Fresnel's views on the optical influence of motion of 
material bodies : the Earth's motion does not disturb the aether : his 
law of optical convection deduced from his hypothesis that the aether 
is denser in material media : consequence that ordinary optical pheno- 
mena are uninfluenced by the Earth's motion. 

Appendix E On kinematic and mechanical modes of 

REPRESENTATION OF THE ACTIVITY OF THE AETHER . 323 

Mechanical models and illustrations. Rotational elasticity : Kelvin's 
gyrostatic illustration, its limitations. Model of an electron in a 
rotational aether : its creation by a supernatural process : analogous 
constructions in elastic matter. Mechanical analysis of attractions 
between electrons; involves dissection of the aether by strain-tubes 
connecting complementary electrons : illustration from the generalized 
form of Stokes' analytical theorem. The ultimate foundation in 
physical theory is the Action principle. The electron effectively a 
point-charge: the details of its structure unknown. All physical 
representations are at bottom comparative or illustrative : the scheme 
of a rotational aether merely consolidates the various hypotheses into 
a single one. Static attraction transmitted, not propagated. A con- 
stitutive aether contrasted with an accidental one. 

The electron theory essential to the formulation of ordinary electro- 
dynamics as well as for radiation. Neumann-Helmholtz electrodynamic 
potential theory invalid ; experimental tests by FitzGerald and Lodge. 
The expression for the electrokinetic potential of two electrons com- 
pared with Weber's formula: they lead to the same results in the 
electrodynamics of ordinary currents. 

Appendix F Magnetic influences on radiation as a 

CLUE TO MOLECULAR CONSTITUTION .... 341 

The Zeeman effect: determined for a molecule in which the mobile 
electrons are all negative : same results apply when there are mobile 
positive ions relatively very massive. Nature of magnetic polarization 
of a molecule, it does not involve orientation : the exceptional phenomena 
of the magnetic metals arise from cohesive aggregation of molecules. 
The polarizations of the Zeeman lines indicate the characters of the 




CONTENTS XXV 

PAGE 

vibratioDB of the molecular system : the methods of dynamics of par- 
ticles adequate to the problem: the system referred to rotational 
coordinates; the condition for circular principal vibrations. Any 
purely constitutive potential energy for the molecule leads to the 
Zeeman phenomena, with the requisite generality. Inference as to 
effective isotropy of the molecule. The Faraday effect and Becquerel*B 
law of dispersion deduced from the Zeeman effect when the freely 
mobile electrons are all negative ; or when the dispersion is controlled 
by one absorption band, or by several bands for which the Zeeman 
constant is the same. Optical rotations necessarily of dispersional 
type ; and therefore not simply related to material structure. Direct 
kinematic analysis of optical rotations for crystalline media, by refer- 
ence to rotating frame: law of rotation in different directions: the 
permanent types of vibration when rotation is superposed on double 
refraction: problem of refraction into a chiral medium not deter- 
minate. 

Index . 357 



xxvu 



fj 



*> 
»» 
»» 



** 
>» 
>» 

♦» »» 

>> 

If 



CORRIGENDA 



Page 11 line 30, for n/2ir read 2irn 

12 „ 8, delete no. There are viecoas tractions which generate heat in 

the fluid; though they do not afifect it8 motion, they exhaast 

the energy of the moving solids 
32 „ 25, after cases insert of limited variation. Cf. p. 276 
41 „ 17, for v^lV^co6^e read v^jV^Bin^e 

43 „ 3, for V read v' 

44 at foot, for OA' read 0'^ ; ff<;{^t^ 99 in following lines : amend first 
equation on next page, and change sign of right hand in 
second and third equations 

58 at foot, for Kfijc^ read cjKfi, and for {Kfi)^lo read cl(Kfi)^ 
90 in equation (i) delete the fluxion dots : cf. footnote, p. 330 
104 line 6 from foot, read y{v-g)-p{w- h) 
114 lines 9 and 10, P, Q, R should be cyclically interchanged 

line 12, multiply by ^ 
121 „ 11, for K read K^ 

129 lines 20 — 29, the statement should be reversed : copper filings in a 
magnetic field alternating as regards intensity but not 
direction will set themselves along the field 

134 line 4 from foot, for c^/w* read n*/c* 

135 ,, 4, for 4irM read 4ir/i (/i/ps)* ; line 7, for 2IKfjL read 2; line 10, 
for only the purely aethereal part read the whole of it; 
and line 14, after not insert all. In an undamped wave- 
train the energy is all propagated, up to this approximation : 
the difference between group velocity and wave velocity 
involves the theory of dispersion 

136 for last two lines read only when A' or o* is infinite or else both of 
them vanish 

146 last line, delete - 

153 lines 8 and 12 from foot, for e read e^ 

154 line 2, tore-^Q read e~*Q : line 2 from foot, for e-^ read c"* : and in 

last line multiply by e^ 
„ 155 „ 9 from foot, for 4ir read 4iro* 
„ 158 „ 12 from foot, for K+2 read K-2 
„ 167 „ 15, for the second h read c 
„ 174 ,, 2, and 2 from foot, for v read v 
„ 175 lines 1 and 3, for t read t' 



»* 



»» 

t* 
f» 

If 



ff 



XXVIU CORRIGENDA 

Page 179 lined, for Scos*^' read cos^^' 
183 footnote, for B read C 

190 line 7, for fpjk read 0/c'; and line 8, fbr and read though not 
„ 198 „ 2 from foot, for c^ read c* 
„ 199 lines 10 and 11, for a, read a,c" 
„ „ line 15, for +tn, read -ui, 

„ 200 on lines 3, 11 and 18, the multipliers before dfdt should be nrftt' and 

nyftn' respectively, where (r, m', n') is the direction vector of 
the magnetic field 
„ 204 the sign of (aj, a„ a,) has been changed in § 132 

„ 206 line 9, for C read C, equal to C ( ^^ ) ; ^nd line 12, ftnr C read 

8xO^C', and for )^ read )~^. Cf. also Appendix F, § 5 
„ 808 footnote, for 1884 read 1894 
„ 350 for -Zilir. -S^sr^ead +2:i4],., +ZA^ 




AETHEB AND HATTEB. 

ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA. 

p. 2 add to footuote X 

A treatment of electrons as singularities in the aether has also been 
developed independently by E. Wieohert 'Die Theorie der Elektrody- 
namik und die lidntgen'sche Eutdeokung,' Schriften d. phys.-okonom. 
Ges. z. Eoni^sberg, 1896, and more especially ' Grondlagen der Elektro- 
dynamik * Leipzig (Tenbner), 1899. 

p. 60 for § 37 line 9 to end read 

dH_dq_ _ba 
dy dz~ dt' 

where 3: = 57+ *^ ^ * <^^ (^* Qt ^^) ^^ ^^ electric force acting on the con- 

veoted charges, being eqnal to {P', (^ -vc, R' + \^)\ in which (P', Q\ R') 
represents 4irc^ (/, g, h) and is the force straining the quiescent aether. 

K— 1 
-^80 (/'» 9\ ^') = 4 - 2 (^» ^' ''^)» ^ ^® convection cannot alter the value 

of A' to the first order. These equations are equivalent to the preceding. 

p. 86 line 21 add to footnote 

More strictly, if the electron were moving with velocity v such that (vjcf 
cannot be neglected, e must be defined as the value of \(lf-\-ing+nh)dS 
taken over any surface surrounding it alone. 

p. 91 line 29 add footnote 

The current then contains magnetic terms : see § 73. 

p. 93 add to footnote 

The result of not making $ null, as in the text, would be merely that the 
electric potential ^ (§ 58) would be diminished by the amount - d^ldt ; 
and the (very minute) distributions of electric charge arising from electro- 
kinetic causes would thus remain undetermined by the theory. 

p. 94 add to footnote 

L is constant only when the squai'es of quantities like ijc can be neglected. 
Thus Maxwell's law of pressure of radiation cannot be extended to 
theoretical discussions involving radiators or reflectors moving with 
velocity comparable with that of light. 

p. 102 for lines 1 — 7 from foot read 

During this transfer the moment of the doublet gradually changes, thus the 
circuit is not a parallelogram : moreover we must make a correction by 
superposing on the complete circuit a creation of the doublet in its final 
position at the end of the transfer and an annulment in its initial position 
at the beginning of the transfer, in order to obtain the net effect of its 
transfer and change, free from completion of the ends of the circuit. 
Combining these creations and annulments for adjacent elementary 
circuits all traversed in the same element of time, we see that they con- 
stitute the polarization current already specified in § 62. 

[There will be surface terms outstanding at sudden transitions, which are 
best evaluated independently by considering the limit of a gradual 
transition. 

This analysis of the electric motions in the individual molecules is necessary 
for the correct determination of the mechanical forces acting on the system 
through its electrons (§ 65). But in treating of the electrodynamic pro- 
pagation we must ultimately replace all magnetism by equivalent aggregate 
Unear electric flux (p. 263) obtaining ^jdt {/', g\ h')y where 8ldt stands for 
dldt-^pdldx + qdldy + rdjdz, as the total current of polarization, which 
thus represents the time-rate of separation per unit volume of the positive 
and negative electrons in the molecules.] 

p. 105 line 4 from foot for dE'jdt read cr^dE'ldt. 

p. 112 after § 70 add a footnote 

The potentials, combined in a different manner, may in fact be expressed as 
directly propagated from the sources of the aethereal disturbance, which 
are the stationary and moving electrons: see footnote to p. 227, added 
infra. 



ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA. 

p. 116 line 7 add footnote 

The true current is nnder ail oiroumstances defined bj the flax of electrons 
acroBs fixed interfaces. At the same time it constitntes a volume dis- 
tribution {Ui^ fj, zTj) dr, as ttupra under p. 102. 

p. 146 line 11 for diminished read increased and for deducted read added. 

p. 147 line 4 for the second A read - A. 

p. 154 in lines 8, 9 read 

; but their level surfaces will linearly correspond to those of 
p. 154 line 14 dele radial but. 
p. 155 line 14 for force read potential, 
p. 157 line 16 for force read distribution, 
p. 176 line 10 for charges read volume-densities, 
p. 201 add at end of § 129 

See p. 354. 

p. 222 lines 1, 5, 7 from foot, for c« read c--. 

p. 227 line 5 from foot for f read \. 

p. 227 add to footnote 

Following Levi-Civita (Ntioro Cimento, 1897) the general result may be com- 
pactly and instructively expressed as follows. Let (ti^, r^, tr.) denote the 
true electric current including tlic equivalent of magnetic whirls, if any, 
and let p be the density of true electrification. Let u^ (t) denote the value 
of ttj at time f , so that Uj (t - rjv) denotes its value at time t - rjc. Define 
t\ , Git III *"^ *^i ^y *^^® relations 

Then the state of the medium is expressible in terms of these new potentials 
by the same equations as give it in terms of the usual vector and electric 
potentials. These modified potentials here appear as transmitted without 
loss in sjinmetrical spLerical sheets from the sources of the disturbance, 
which are the true electric fluxes and electrifications. 

Consider in fact an electron e suddenly displaced from A to B. When at 
rest at A it possessed an intrinsic field of electric force, derived from a 
potential c^e/PA : the shift of it sends out an electromagnetic pulse in a 
spherical sheet : after the passage of this pulse over P the intrinsic electric 
field at P remains that derived from the new potential c^elPB. Then a 
further displacement of e may follow, producing a pulse which will again 
alter the intrinsic electric field at P as it passes over that point. By 
superposing the kinetic electric reaction of the pulse on the intrinsic 
field of the electron, and summing for all the electrons, the general ex- 
pression for the electric (or rather aethereal) force at P is immediately 
obtained; while the magnetic force is the curl of (Fj, O^ If^. 

At foot of p. 226 the terms involving r~^ constitute the statical field of a 
doublet el; in the problem there considered they should be replaced by 
that of the single electron, namely by an electric force er~^ along r. 

p. 297 § for first paragraph read 

It has appeared (§ 1) that the result of the unequal drifts of the positive and 
negative ions, under the action of the electric force, is necessarily an 
electric current conveyed to an equal extent by positive and negative 
ions, together with a drift of the electrolyte in mass. In steady electric 
flow round a circuit made up of various electrolytes there would be a 
uniform current of this type in each of them, together with a drifting 
accumulation of the electrolyte continually being neutralized by steady 
backward diffusion. If a portion of the circuit is metallic, such an accu- 
mulation would also be produced in it unless (i) the positive and negative 
ions or electrons have equal mobilities, or (ii) tneir mobilities are both so 
great as to render the accumulation insensible. 

p. 882 add footnote to line 5 

The nucleus being of unknown constitution, its mobility has to be assumed ; 
that of its strain form is already secured. 

Jan. 1901. 



EELATIONS OF AETHEK TO MATTEK 



NT- 



CHAPTER I 



INTRODUCTION 



The scheme of this essay may be summarized as follows. 

1. In the first section a historical account is given of the 
progress of experimental knowledge of the influence of the 
motion of matter through the aether on phenomena directly 
connected with that medium. For a long period this group of 
phenomena was purely optical ; the principal member of the 
group was the astronomical aberration of light, and the main 
interest of the others was centred in their use as tests of 
theories constructed to account for or explain aberration. The 
recent development of the connexion between the theories of 
electricity and optics has added to this domain the class of 
electro-optic and magneto-optic phenomena, and also various 
phenomena purely electric. The progress of theory is here 
passed under review alongside of the progress of experimental 
knowledge, and some attempt is made to compare the strengths 
and relative bearings of the positions that have been from time 
to time taken up by successive investigators. In this review 
brevity and interconnexion have been chiefly aimed at, for the 
subject has been historically a rather tangled one owing to the 
number of writers who have treated it and the variety and 
isolation of their standpoints: it will be seen that the estimates 
here given of the relative merits of the various partial theories 
difler somewhat in character from those generally current. For 

L. 1 



2 RELATIONS OF AETHER TO MATTER 

references to the earlier historical data Eetteler's treatise* has 
proved most useful : the principal writings among these, and 
all the later ones, have also been examined directly. 

To this review is appended a general account of wave and 
ray propagation in moving media, which though originally 
written independently, necessarily follows very much the same 
course as the one given in Lorentz^s memoir of ISST^". 

2. The second section developes the general theory of the 
relations between matter and aether, which is to form the basis 
of the treatment of moving material media. In it the electric 
and optical activity of the matter are assigned to the presence 
of electric charges associated with the material atoms: the 
complete scheme of electrodynamic and optical equations is 
then derived as a whole, on this basis, from the single founda- 
tion of the Principle of Least Action. The modifications which 
arise in the scheme owing to motion of the matter are on 
this hypothesis directly and definitely ascertainable, on the 
supposition that the motion of the matter does not affect the 
quiescent aether except through the motion of the atomic 
electric charges carried along with it. It appears that the law 
of the phenomenon of astronomical aberration is fully verified, 
as are also all the other first order effects — mostly of a null 
character — of the motion of material systems, which experiment 
has established. This portion of the subject has been already 
profoundly treated by LorentzJ, by an analysis very different 
from the present one, but with ideas and results that are in the 
main in agreement with those here arrived at. In the treat- 
ment here given, the essential distinction between molecular 
theory and mechanical theory, and the principles involved in 
effecting the transition from the former to the latter, are 
carefully traced. 



* * ABtronomisohe Undolations-Theorie, oder die Lehre Ton der Aberration 
des Licbtes,' von Dr £. Eetteler. Bonn, 1873. 

t H. A. Lorentz, * de Tinfluence da monvement de la Terre snr les pheno- 
xn^nes lumineuses.' Archives Nierlandaitet xxi, pp. 108 — 176. 

X * La Th^orie ^lectromagnetique de Maxwell, et son application aox corps 
xnonvants,* Archives Nierlandaitet xxv, 1892: 'Yersuch einer Theorie der 
eleotrischen and optischen Erscheinangen in bewegten Edrpem,' Leiden, 1895. 



INTEODUCTION 3 

3. The third section enters on more speculative ground. 
It developes the exact consequences, as regards the influence of 
convection through the aether, which flow from the hypothesis 
that the atom of matter is constituted of an orbital system 
of equal primary electric point-charges (or electrons) and of 
nothing else : or, what comes in certain respects to the same 
thing in a mode of statement that may possibly be preferred, it 
assumes that the mass of each sub-atom is proportional to the 
absolute number of electrons, positive and negative, that it 
carries, and that the effective interatomic forces are entirely 
or mainly electric. From this basis a complete formal correla- 
tion is established between the molecular conflgurations of a 
material system at rest and the same system in uniform 
translatory motion, which holds good as far as the square of 
the ratio of the velocity of the system to the velocity of radia- 
tion. This correspondence carries with it as a consequence the 
null result, up to the second order, of the very reflned experi- 
ments of Michelson and Morley on the influence of the Earth's 
motion on optical interference fringes. The correlation pre- 
supposes that the material atoms are independent systems that 
maintain their relative positions: thus in the simplest case, 
with which alone we are actually concerned, the material bodies 
are supposed to be solid, and the influence of the distantly 
wandering ions, if there are such, that convey electric currents, 
is left out of consideration as relatively negligible on account of 
the smallness of their number. In an appendix the mechanism 
of electrolytic conduction is scrutinized, primarily with a view 
to drawing conclusions by analogy as to the extent and 
character of the migrations of the ions in solid conductors: 
this discussion has however grown altogether out of proportion 
to its connexion with the present subject, and forms to some 
extent a connected theoretical account of electrolysis and the 
voltaic phenomena associated with it, such as the concentration 
of the electrol)rte investigated by Hittorf, the electromotive 
forces of concentration investigated by von Helmholtz and 
Nemst, the electric osmosis of Quincke, and the nature of 
contact differences of potential. 

4. It is generally held, chiefly on the ground of Lorentz's 

1—2 



4 RELATIONS OF AETHER TO MATTER 

analysis, that the absence of any dependence between the 
optical rotatory power of quartz and the direction in which the 
light travels with regard to the Earth's motion, is in discrepancy 
with theoretical schemes like the present one which consider 
the Elarth to move through the aether without carrying that 
medium along with it. In the fourth section this question is 
treated, with results however that prove to be in accord with 
the £eu;ts. As there seems to exist a feeling, — ^put in evidence 
by Lorentz's conclusion above mentioned, which asserts a con- 
vective influence on rotatory power although he had shown 
that there was none such on ordinary optical phenomena — ^that 
these rotatory phenomena are intrinsicedly of a class by them- 
selves, a view which may derive strength from their relatively 
slight or residual character, a discussion of the general nature 
of the structural and the magnetic rotatory optical properties is 
given. An attempt to connect rotator}' power with density 
fails, for reasons that are tentatively suggested. It is pointed 
out that the absence of any convective influence on the rotation 
affords some independent evidence, in addition to Michelson's 
result above stated, in favour of the effective validity of the 
view as to molecular constitution that is considered in the 
third section. 

5. The fifth section treats of the subject of the radiation of 
material systems, the difficulties of which are not peculiar to 
any special theory of the connexion between aether and matter. 
The present theory, which attributes radiation to the oscillatory 
motions of electrons in the molecule, must give some account 
of why it is that molecules radiate only when they are violently 
disturbed ; and in particular, which concerns more closely our 
special subject, why it is that motion of bodies through the 
aether does not affect the amount or quality of their radiation, 
except after the merely kinematic manner of the Doppler effect. 
To carry out this purpose, an expression is found for the train 
of radiation and of general aethereal disturbance emanating 
from a single electron moving in any manner. 

As connected with the molecular theory, and in fact 
demanded by it, a discussion is also given of the principles on 
which optical resolving apparatus is able to decompose the 



INTRODUCTION 5 

wholly tumultuous train of disturbance which constitutes 
ordinary white light into an orderly series of trains of simple 
harmonic waves. It is held (with Lord Rayleigh) that the 
train of impulses or vibrations which constitutes the Rontgen 
radiation would be similarly resolved into simple wave-trains of 
very high frequencies if we had fine enough apparatus to bring 
to bear upon it ; though the molecular structure of ordinary 
matter is probably too coarse to be sensibly eflfective for this 
purpose. Reasons are given for the view, opposed to what is 
now sometimes perhaps too generally stated, that counting the 
number of the succession of interference bands, that can be 
produced with the light from the whole of a sharp bright line 
in the spectrum of a gas, enables us to form an estimate of the 
degree of regularity of the vibrations of the individual mole- 
cules which emit the i-adiation ; a result which is of importance 
for both optical and molecular theory. 



SECTION I 



CHAPTER II 



HISTORICAL SURVEY 



6. The phenomenon of the astronomical aberration of light 
was discovered by Bradley as the outcome of an effort, con- 
ducted with unusual care, to detect traces of annual parallax 
in certain stars which passed near his zenith, and so were 
amenable to accurate measurement. His observations exhibited 
displacements in the position of each star, which had the 
expected period of a year ; but instead of being towards the 
Sun they were towards a perpendicular direction, that of the 
Earth's motion in its orbit, while they followed the same law of 
the sine of the inclination as parallax would do. After many 
attempts to coordinate his observations, the clue to the aber- 
rational method of representing them was suggested to Bradley, 
it is said, by casual observation of a flag floating at the mast- 
bead of a ship ; when the ship changed its course, the flag flew 
in a different direction. The analogy is rather more direct 
when it is the drift of the clouds that is the object of remark ; 
the apparent direction from which they come is different from 
the real direction when the observer is himself in motion 
relative to the air that carries them. So, the observer of the 
star being in motion along with the Earth, the apparent 
direction in which the light from the star appears to him to 
come may be expected to be different from its real direction ; 
thus leading to the usual elementary representation of the 



CHAP. Il] HISTORICAL SURVEY 7 

aberration as a phenomenon of relative motion. This explana- 
tion is absolutely valid if the light is something which travels 
in definite rays with finite speed, itself undisturbed by the 
motion of the Earth : on a corpuscular theory it thus requires 
that the luminous corpuscles are not sensibly affected by the 
Earth's attraction : on the undulatory theory it involves either 
that the lumiuiferous aether is not disturbed at all by the 
Earth's motion through it, or else that some special adjustment 
of its motion holds good which gives the same result. The 
explanation of the phenomenon of the aberration of light thus 
immediately opens up the whole question of the disturbance of 
the aether by the motion through it of material bodies like the 
Earth, and also of the manner in which the reflexion and 
refraction of light in our observing instruments is affected by 
their motion along with the Earth. It is merely one particular 
result, — more prominent because a positive result — in the field 
of the mutual influence of aether and moving matter. 

7. It occurred to Arago, reasoning on the lines of the cor- 
puscular explanation, that inasmuch as the velocity of light is 
different in glass from what it is in vacuum, the aberration of 
its path arising from the Earth s motion would also be different 
in the glass, and therefore the optical deviation caused by a 
glass prism would vary according as the light traversed it in 
the direction of the Earth s motion or in the opposite direction. 
With the achromatic prism which he employed for testing this 
conclusion, he calculated that this difference might be as much 
as a minute of arc. The outcome of the experiments showed 
no difference at all. Arago worked with star light for which 
the Doppler effect due to relative motion would make a real 
difference, excessively minute however and beyond his obser- 
vational means : with light from a terrestrial source which (as 
Fresnel remarked) would do equally well for his test, the differ- 
ence would be absolutely null. The significance of this result, 
as against the then current explanation of aberration, on 
corpuscular ideas, was fully realized by Arago: and he com- 
municated the facts to Fresnel with a view to eliciting whether 
there was anything more satisfactory to be adduced on the basis 
of the wave theory, which he was then engaged in developing 



8 THE AfiERBATION OF LIGHT [SECT. I 

with the support of Arago's powerful advocacy. The pheno- 
menon to be accounted for was that the motion of the 
Earth does not affect the laws of reflexion and refraction of 
light. In FresneFs reply*, which is one of the fundamental 
documents on the present subject, he pointed out that a simple 
answer was possible, namely to assume that the surrounding 
aether is carried along completely by the Earth so that all 
relative phenomena would be the same as if the Earth were at 
rest : but he went on to say that this view could not be enter- 
tained on account of the facts of astronomical aberration, of 
which he could form no intelligible conception except on the 
hypothesis that the aether remained absolutely stagnant as the 
Earth moved through it. On this latter hypothesis the velocity 
of light outside a transparent body must have the normal value : 
and it was an easy problem to find whether it was possible for 
any law of modification of the velocity of light inside the body, 
arising from its motion, to make the laws of refraction and 
reflexion relative to the moving body the same as for matter at 
rest, as Arago's experiment required. It appeared that there is 
such a law, the conditions being all satisfied if the absolute 
velocity of light inside a transparent medium of index ft is 
increased by the fraction 1 — /a""^ of the velocity of the medium 
resolved in its direction. This supposition, adopted on the 
above grounds by Fresnel, keeps the paths of the rays relative 
to the moving bodies unaltered, and at the same time satisfies 
the facts of aberration. The attempt made by Fresnel to provide 
for it a dynamical foundation suffers from the same kind of 
obscurity as did his later dynamical theory of crystalline re- 
fraction : and though the subsequent views of Boussinesq and 
Sellmeier, on the part played by the matter in the mechanism 
of refraction and dispersion, allow a valid meaning to be read 
into Fresnel's explanations, yet they perhaps form no very 
essential part of his achievement in this field. Afterward Sir 
George Stokes showed in detail that Fresnel's hypothesis not 
only left the relative paths of rays unaltered, but the phenomena 
of interference as well, some of which had been urged against it 
by Babinet. 

* See Appendix D. 



CHAP. Il] HISTORICAL SURVEY 9 

The result obtained by Arago suggested a wide field of 
experimental inquiry as to whether other optical phenomena as 
well as refraction were independent of the direction of the 
Earth's motion through space. In most cases the experimental 
test is very precise and delicate ; for the apparatus exhibiting 
the optical effect has only to be installed in the most sensitive 
manner possible, and note taken as to whether the gradual 
change of absolute direction of the light passing through it, 
arising from the Earth's movement of rotation, causes any 
diurnal inequality in the results. The negative results of 
theory have gradually been extended, by special investigations, 
to other optical phenomena, such as dispei*sion and cr}'stalline 
interference, as these were successively found by experiment to 
be uninfluenced by the Earth's motion in space. It will be 
seen that the modem or electric view of the aether supplies a 
succinct dynamical foundation for the whole matter. 

8. Long before Arago's time it had occurred to Boscovich, 
reasoning from Bradley's original point of view, that inasmuch 
as the velocity of light in water is different from what it is in 
air, the aberration produced by the Earth's motion in the 
apparent path of a ray travelling through water should be 
different from the normal astronomical amount : he suggested 
the use of a telescope with its tube filled with water to find out 
by star observations whether this is the case, in the expectation 
that the line of coUimation would be different, in order that the 
relative rays in the water should focus on the cross-wires, from 
what it would be if the interior of the tube contained only air. 
In recent times Sir George Airy has actually had such an 
instrument temporarily installed at the Greenwich Observatory : 
he has found that observations with it, continued over a con- 
siderable time, gave the ordinary value of the constant of 
aberration, the different aberration of the ray in water being 
thus compensated by a modification of the ordinary law of 
refraction on the passage of the light into that moving medium. 
This experiment had already been discussed by Fresnel in his 
letter to Arago, with the remark that there is no occasion to 
complicate the result by aberration, as a terrestrial object might 
equally well be focussed on the cross-wires of the instrument 



10 THE ABERRATION OF LIGHT [SECT. I 

placed transverse to the direction of the Ekirth's motion ; and 
that the observations might even be carried out by a microscope, 
reversible by hand, sighted on a bright point attached to its 
frame. It was pointed out by Fresnel that Wilson had shown 
that on the corpuscular theory no effect was to be expected : 
and he added a demonstration that the same was the case on 
his own view of the undulatory theory, thus predicting on a 
consensiLS of all points of view a negative result. 

9. The theory was next taken up, from the undulatory 
standpoint, by Cauchy, who preferred the first of Fresnel's 
alternatives, that the Earth in its orbital motion pushes the 
aether in front of it so that the portions near the surface travel 
along with the E^rth, as he was unwilling to admit that the 
heavenly bodies could move through the aether without dis- 
turbing it at all. He pointed out that astronomical aberration 
was then to be explained, not probably by any eflfect of changed 
aethereal elasticity or inertia, but merely by a kinematic slewing 
round of the advancing wave-fronts (or rather absence thereof) 
owing to the translatory motion of the medium in which the 
waves are propagated. The disturbance of the aether itself 
owing to the motion of the Earth he was prepared to regard as 
the source of the electric and cognate phenomena associated 
with that body. This mere preference of Cauchy's did nothing 
towards removing Fresnel's difficulty as to how such a motion 
of the aether is to be imagined as exactly adjusted so as to 
involve the correct amount of aberration in accordance with 
Bradley's law : but the view subsequently became a real theory 
in the hands of Sir George Stokes. That physicist had just 
had cause, in his hydrodynamic researches, to analyze the 
differential change of form, arising from the state of motion in 
a fluid medium around any given point, into pure strain made 
up of three superposed elongations, combined with pure rota- 
tion: and it became clear that if the latter component is 
absent in the aether, so that the motion of the aether is differ- 
entially irrotational, the advancing wave-fronts will not be 
slewed round at all, and therefore the waves will travel through 
space in straight lines as if the aether were at rest. When 
these rectilinear waves get into the region of aether imme- 



CHAP. Il] HISTORICAL SURVEY 1 1 

diately around the observer, which is carried on with him, they 
will be affected relative to him with the full aberrational change 
of direction arising from his motion, just as a moving corpuscle 
would be. Now the irrotational quality of aethereal motion 
thus pointed to, is, by Lagrange's fundamental hydrodynamical 
theorem, the characteristic of the motion of frictionless fluid 
which has been originally at rest : thus the material for a 
physical theory lies at hand. The aether is, as regards slow 
motions in bulk, simply assumed to have the properties of 
frictionless continuous fluid substance, while for the excessively 
rapid small vibrations of light it has solid elastic quality. The 
question remained how far these two sets of qualities can 
coexist in the same medium: an afiirmative answer was de- 
fended, or rather illustrated, by an objective appeal to the 
actual properties of a substance such as pitch, which flows like 
water if sufficient time is allowed, while at the same time it 
can be moulded into an efficient tuning-fork for small vibrations 
as frequent as those of sound. There appears to be good 
ground for demurring against the mutual consistency of the 
properties imputed to a simple, permanent, and flawless medium 
like the aether being settled by an appeal to the approximate 
behaviour of a highly complex and viscous body like pitch : the 
principle that is involved can however be expressed in a purely 
abstract manner. If any term in the analytical dynamical 
equations of the aether is made up of two parts, so as to be of 
type such as au + hd^ujd^ where u represents displacement, 
then when 6 is very small compared with a the first part au 
will practically represent the term for slow motions, while on 
the other hand for simple vibratory motion of excessively high 
frequency n, cPu/dt^ being then equal to (w/27r)*t*, the second 
term is the all-important one. The objection to this kind of 
explanation, which substitutes a very close approximation for 
the exact term, is that we have actually to provide in the 
aether for a transparency which is adequate to convey the 
light of the most distant stars, which points rather to exact 
abstract mathematical relations than to complex and approxi- 
mate physical laws of elasticity. 

10. At the same time Sir George Stokes expressed his 



12 THE ABERRATION OF LIGHT [SECT. I 

belief that it would not do to actually take the aether to be an 
ordinary fluid, on the ground that this ideal motion of irrota- 
tional quality would then be unstable. In a subsequent note 
{Phil. Mag. 1848) he advanced as proof of this instability the 
fact that the mathematical solution for the steady motion of a 
sphere through a viscous fluid, which he had just obtained, is 
the same however slight may be the degree of viscidity of the 
fluid. Now an irrotational motion calls out no viscous reaction 
throughout the mass, and therefore satisfies the conditions 
of viscous as well as of perfect flow : but there is one circum- 
stance which destroys its claim to be a solution in the former 
case, namely the presence of slip at the surfaces of the solids. 
If the surfaces of the solids were ideally frictionless this would 
not matter : but if when the irrotational flow has there been 
fully established, the actual frictional character of the surface 
were restored, laminar rotational motion would spread out from 
each surface in the same manner as heat would spread out by 
diffusive conduction from a hot body, until a new state of steady 
motion would supervene. The solution of Stokes shows (as is 
also clear from general principles) that however small the 
viscosity, this new steady state is wholly different from the 
ideal irrotational steady state belonging to mathematical 
absence of viscosity and friction : and it might appear to 
follow that this state is, not precisely an unstable one, but 
rather one which could not exist at all in the fluid. The 
term unstable is however appropriate because, if the solids 
are impulsively started into their steady state of motion, the 
initial state of motion of the fluid will (assuming that there 
is no such thing as impulsive friction*) be the irrotational 
one, which will gradually be transformed by diffusion of vortex 
motion from the surfaces at a rate which is the slower the 
less the viscosity of the fluid. This conclusion follows as 
a special case of Lord Kelvin's general dynamical principle 
that when a material system is impulsively set into motion 
by imposing given velocities at the requisite number of 

* The direct proof from the hjdrodynamioal equations is not however 
limited in this way, if the law of impulsive viscosity may be assumed to be 
linear. 



CHAP. Il] HISTORICAL SURVEY 13 

points or surfaces, (namely iu this case given component of 
velocity normal to the boundaries) the state of motion instan- 
taneously assumed by it is that one for which the kinetic 
energy is least, which is easily shown to be the irrotational one 
in the case of a liquid. 

As Sir George Stokes was not disposed to admit that the 
aether could pass freely through the interstices of material 
bodies in the manner required by Fresnel's views, and as any 
other theory of its motion which could be consistent with the 
fact of astronomical aberration required irrotational flow, an 
explanation of the limitation to that flow had, he considered, 
to be found. He pointed out that the existence of tangential 
stress depending not alone (like viscosity) on relative velocities, 
but also (like elastic stresses) on relative displacements, would 
make the flow irrotational ; for any deviation from irrotational 
quality would now be propagated away not by diffusion but by 
waves of transverse displacement, and the coefficient of the 
elastic part of the force, and consequently the velocity of this 
propagation, may be assumed so great that the slightest 
beginning of rotational motion is immediately shed off and 
dispersed. This chain of argument, that motion of bodies 
disturbs the aether, that aberration requires the disturbance 
to be differentially irrotational, that this can only be explained 
by the dispersion of incipient rotational disturbance by trans- 
verse waves, and further that radiation itself involves transverse 
undulation, he regards as mutually consistent and self-support- 
ing, and therefore as forming distinct evidence in favour of this 
view of the constitution of the aether* The coexistence of 
fluidity on a large scale with perfect elasticity on a small scale 
he illustrates by the ordinary phenomena of pitch or glue, 
passing on to a limit through jellies of gradually diminishing 
consistency until perfect fluidity is reached : the chief difficulty 
here is (as already mentioned) that absolute mathematical 



* It would thus appear that the slip at the surface of the moving solids, 
which is offered as a decisive objection to Stokes* view by Lorentz, is not really 
fatal to such a view of aberration, taken by itself, except in so far as it leads to 
continual radiation from the surface of the moving body and therefore to 
renstance to its motion. 



14 THE ABERRATION OF UGHT [SECT. I 

transparency of the aether is replaced by approximate trans- 
parency, such as would involve ultimate decay of all structures 
existing in it. 

11. The problem of the relative motion of the Elarth and 
the aether was treated by Clerk Maxwell in 1867, in a letter 
to Sir W. Huggins which has been incorporated in the funda- 
mental memoir of the latter on the spectroscopic determination 
of the velocity of movement of stars in the line of sight*. It 
is there pointed out that there are two independent subjects 
for examination. The Doppler alteration of the period of the 
light from a star is quite definite, and independent of the 
special details of the form of undulatory theory that may be 
adopted. But there is^a second question as to whether the 
index of refraction depends on the orientation of the ray with 
reference to the direction of the Earth's motion, in which the 
observer and all his apparatus participate: this involves the 
physical nature of the undulations : here, as Fresnel had already 
remarked, the sources of light may just as well be terrestrial 
as astronomical. According to Arago's original experimental 
result, which had been closely tested by a more delicate 
arrangement by Maxwell himself working with homogeneous 
light, some years before this time, there is no influence on 
the index of refraction arising from the Eaith's motion. As 
refraction depends solely on retardation in time owing to the 
smaller velocity of propagation in the refracting medium, the 
relative retardation must therefore be unaltered by the Earth's 
motion. If V be the velocity of a ray in air, and t; the 
velocity of the aether in air relative to the observer, and if V 
be the velocity of the same ray in a dense medium and t/ the 
velocity of the aether in that medium relative to the observerf , 
then across a thickness a of this medium the light is retarded 
with respect to air by a time 

a a 



♦ Phil. Tram. 1868, p. 682. 

t This is Maxwell's phrase, no doubt interpreting Fresnel : on a wider and 
more modem view r' is the amount by which V* is altered owing to the motion 
of the aether relative to the medium. 



CHAP. II] HISTORICAL SURVEY 15 

which is equal to 

^t^^ \ F F'* / v v^ V*^ *")] * 
that is to 

As this is, by the experimental evidence, to be independent 
of V and v' to the first order, we must have v'/v= F''/F'; or, 
expressed in words, the effects of the Earth's motion on the 
velocities of the ray relative to the observer in the two media 
are proportional to the squares of the ray-velocities for the 
ray under consideration. In the moving refracting medium 
the absolute velocity of the ray is therSfbre increased by v — v', 
that is by v(l — V'*IV% where v is the velocity of the medium 
in the direction of the ray. When the medium is isotropic, 
F/F' is equal to the index of refraction /a, thus the alteration 
of the velocity is t;(l — /a"^), as Fresnel originally found. 

According to the ideas underlying Fresnel's general optical 
theory, refraction depends on change of density of the aether. 
Thus the density of the aether in the refracting substance 
would be proportional to /a' : and if the aether is imagined as 
flowing across the refracting substance in its relative motion, 
its velocity in that substance must by the equation of conti- 
nuity be fi"* of its velocity in air outside. Thus on the 
hypothesis that the change of velocity is solely due to a 
convection by the moving aether, we are led from Fresnel's 
general notions to the same law as Arago's experiments 
demands*. 

In the same place Maxwell remarks on the great instru- 
mental difficulty, and also the absence of confirmation, of the 

experiments of Fizeau and Angstrom indicating displacement 
of the plane of polarization by passage through a pile of 
glass plates and by diffraction respectively, depending on the 
orientation of the apparatus with regard to the direction of 
the Earth's motion. 

* This remark is given by Maxwell. I do not find it in Fresnel's letter to 
Arago, bnt it ooonrs in part in the paper by Sir G. Stokes, Phil. Mag, 1S46. 



16 THE ABERRATION OF LIGHT [SECT. I 

12. It results from very various experimental investigations 
some of which are mentioned above that, with a very doubtful 
but unique exception in the case of Fizeau's experiments on 
piles of glass plates, the most varied optical phenomena, 
whether of ray paths or of refraction, dispersion, interference, 
diffraction, rotation of plane of polarization, have no relation 
to the direction of the Earth's motion through space, though 
for many of them the test has been made with great precision. 
The most obvious conclusion from this consensus of evidence 
taken by itself would be the view that the Earth's motion 
carries the aether completely along with it, and that all the 
relative optical and other phenomena are therefore just the 
same as they would be with both the Earth and the aether 
at rest. Such a view is also very temptingly suggested by 
the absolutely negative result, up to the second order, of the 
Earth's motion on the Michelson interference experiment. 
If then we could assume that the Earth's motion produces 
flow, differentially irrotational according to Sir George Stokes' 
criterion, in the surrounding aether, but such that in all 
regions near the Earth's surface, up to the greatest distance 
at which we can explore, the aether is practically carried along 
bodily with the Earth, the requirements both of astronomical 
aberration and of the mass of negative optical results would 
be fully satisfied. But here we are met by various dilBSculties. 
If we assume that the aether around the Earth near its surface 
is carried on by the Earth as that body traverses its orbit, 
and also assume that at a great distance the aether is at rest, 
these states of motion cannot be connected without discontin- 
uity by any possible irrotational motion of the intervening 
aether. The irrotational motion set up by the motion of the 
Earth and the surrounding shell of aether, supposed attached 
to it, is the same as would be set up by a moving solid in ideal 
fiictionless liquid : the continuity of normal flow can be pre- 
served, but there must be tangential discontinuity (slip) either 
at the boundary of the solid or somewhere else : this is the case 
whether incompressibility of the aether is assumed or not, the 
two sets of conditions continuity of normal flow and continuity 
of tangential flow being more than can be simultaneously 



CHAP. II] HISTORICAL SURVEY 17 

satisfied. This way of surmounting the discrepancies is there- 
fore, on the very threshold of our present wider survey, illusory. 
Were it not so, it would only be necessary to proceed a step 
further in order to encounter fresh difficulties. If the aether 
were carried on bodily by the Earth, we must assume that the 
aether very near a mass moving along the Earth's surfiace is 
at any rate partially carried along by that mass. This point 
has been tested directly with great precision by Lodgef, who 
tried to detect whether the aether between two whirling steel 
discs partook to any extent in their motion ; and the result 
has been decisively negative. The only possibility of escape 
from this result, that the aether is not carried on by the 
Earth's motion, would be in an assumption that the large 
mass of the Earth controls wholly the motion of the aether in 
its neighbourhood somehow as it does gravitation, so that the 
smaller mass of the rotating discs is inoperative in comparison. 
In any case the former difficulty remains decisive : we might 
indeed be tempted to replace the absolutely irrotational motion 
of the surrounding aether, involving surfaces of slip, by very 
slightly rotational motion such as would evade all tangential 
slip: but the law of astronomical aberration would thereby be 
upset, since the smaller the rotation thus imposed the greater 
the distance to which it must extend, while the resulting 
aberration is proportional to these quantities jointly*. A 
hypothesis that would allow the aether to be moved in any 
degree by material bodies passing across it thus has small 
chance of correspondence with the body of ascertained optical 
&cts. 

We are therefore thrown back on FresneFs view that the 
aether is not itself set in motion by the movement of material 
systems across it, or, in terms of the simile of Young, that it 
passes through the interstices of material bodies like the wind 
through a grove of trees. 

t * Aberration Problems ' Phil. Tram. 1893 a. 

* It has been Boggested by Des Condres, as a way out of the difficulty, that 
the aether is possibly subject to gravity: but that would merely produce 
a balancing hydrostatic pressure without altering the irrotational character 
of the motion. 



18 THE ABERRATION OF LIGHT [SECT. I 

13. The next important theoretical contribution to our 
subject is implicitly contained in §§ 600, 601 of Maxwell s 
"Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism" (1872). It is there 
verified, by direct transformation, that the type of the equations 
of electromotive disturbance is the same whether they are 
referred to axes of coordinates at rest in the aether or to axes 
which are in motion after the manner of a solid body. The 
principle is here involved, as FitzGeraldf was the first to point 
out, and as was no doubt in Maxwell's own mind considering 
his recent occupation with the subject, that in treating of the 
electromotive disturbance which constitutes light we are per- 
mitted to make use of axes of coordinates which move along 
with the Earth without having to alter in any way the form 
of the analytical equations. This statement covers as a special 
case Bradley's law of astronomical aberration. It also directly 
includes in its entirety the principle of Arago and Fresnel that 
the laws of geometrical optics are not affected by the Earth's 
motion : it ought therefore to involve as a consequence Fresnel's 
expression for the change of velocity of radiation produced by 
motion of the material medium which it traversea The latter 
question was examined directly from Maxwell's analytical 
equations by J. J. Thomson* with a result different from 
Fresnel's, namely, that the acceleration of velocity is always 
half that of the moving material medium, being the same for 
all kinds of matter. This discrepancy is one of several which 
indicate that for extremely rapid disturbances like optical 
waves, the analytical scheme of Maxwell does not suflSciently 
take into account the influence of the material medium on the 
propagation. A contradiction of some kind is also suggested 
by the circumstance that Maxwell's theorem does too much by 
making the optical properties independent of uniform velocity 
of rotation of the material medium, as well as of uniform 
velocity of translation ; we shall see (§ 23) that the possibility 
of exact independence in both respects is negatived by the 
general nature of rays. The necessary amendment of the 
scheme of Maxwell has been independently arrived at by 
more than one writer, but somewhat earliest in point of time 

t Tratu, Royal Dublin Society, 1882. 

• Proc. Camb. Phil, Soc, v., 1885, p. 260. 



CHAP. II] HISTORICAL SUBVEY 19 

by H. A. Lorentz ; and it involves the general electrodynamic 
considerations, including the discrete distribation of electricity 
among the molecules of matter, on which the present essay is 
based. Shortly after Lorentz the subject was taken up from 
a similar point of view by von Helmholtz, primarily in relation 
to the theory of optical dispersion : but his equations, derived 
from a difficult abstract procedure in connexion with attempted 
generalizations of the principle of Least Action, were soon 
found to be at fault in the matter of moving media just as 
much as was the original scheme of Maxwell. Possibly there- 
by incited, von Helmholtz considers directly the question of 
motion of the aether in his last published memoir: he finds, 
as Hertz had done some years before, that the mechanical 
force as given by the equations of Maxwell cannot by itself 
keep the aether in equilibrium if we suppose this force to act 
on it as well as on matter: and on the assumption that the 
aether is fluid as regards movements arising from extended 
disturbance, and of very small density, he obtains differential 
equations for the determination of the steady state of aethereal 
motion that must on that hypothesis exist in an electrodynamic 
field. The existence of any finite motion of this sort, unless 
it is very minute, has been negatived by the elaborate experi- 
ments of Lodge, and also by more recent observations on the 
same plan by Henry and Henderson which were inspired from 
von Helmholtz's theory. 

14. Quite recently a general summary of the state of the 
question of the mutual relations of aether and moving matter 
has been published by W. Wien*, as a guide to a discussion of 
the subject at the annual meeting of the German Scientific 
Association. He there works out some special cases of von 
Helmhol))z's theory just mentioned, arriving at the result that 
if the density of the aether is absolutely null there can exist a 
steady translational motion of electric charge through the 
aether which will not involve any disturbance of that medium, 
while if the density is very small the disturbance thus involved 
will be very slight : but in motions not steady, for example the 
uniform separation of the components of a stationary electric 

* Wied, AtmaUn Ixv., July 1898. 

2—2 



20 THE ABERRATION OF LIGHT [SECT. I 

doublet, infinite velocities of disturbance of the aether will 
enter at the very beginning of the motion, so that the steady 
state cannot be originated. 

On the other hand, the abstract theory to be here given 
may be translated into a concrete scheme which identifies 
electrodynamic enei^ with the translatoiy kinetic energy of 
the aether considered as possessing inertia : to make the aether 
remain practically quiescent under all conditions it is then 
necessary and sufficient to take its inertia to be sufficiently 
great: in fact if this were not secured, the electrodynamic 
equations instead of being linear would involve the very great 
complication of non-linear terms with which we are familiar in 
theoretical hydrodynamics. 

In summing up at the end of the above-mentioned essay, 
Wien formulates three outstanding objections to the hypothesis 
of a quiescent aether ; 

(i) the observed absence of any magnetic effect of the 
motion of electrically charged bodies carried along by the 
Earth, 

(ii) the absence of any influence of the Earth's motion on 
the optical rotatory property of quartz, 

(iii) Fizeau's experiment, in which he found some evid- 
ence for changes, arising from the Earth's motion, in the 
displacement of the plane of polarization of light produced by 
passage through a pile of glass plates. 

As regards these objections, the first appears to be a point 
in favour of the theory instead of against it (§ 4?0 infra) : the 
second is based on a theoretical investigation of Lorentz, which 
appears to be at fault (Ch. XIII.) so that the result is again in 
favour : while the conclusion in the third case was regarded as 
doubtful by Fizeau himself on account of the extreme difficulty 
experienced in excluding disturbing causes (a doubt which has 
been shared by most authorities who have since examined the 
matter, including Maxwell and Rayleigh), and the experiment 
has not been repeated. 



CHAP. Il] HISTORICAL SURVEY 21 

Electrodynamic view of the Aether, 

15. The astronomical aberration of light is one of the small 
group of phenomena in which the reactions between matter 
and aether depend sensibly on the state of motion of the 
matter. Disturbances originated in the aether are equalized 
and smoothed out with such great speed, that the aether-field 
around a body, which is moving with any attainable velocity, 
is practically at each instant in the same equilibrium condition 
as if the body were at rest: it is therefore only in the case 
of very rapidly alternating phenomena such as radiation that 
there is any practical occasion to pass beyond a mere theory of 
convection of aethereal effect along with the molecules of the 
matter. It is owing to this circumstance that the electro- 
dynamic theories of Ampfere and Weber represented so well the 
whole range of phenomena then open to experiment, even to 
the extent of giving in KirchhofF's hands the correct velocity 
(that of radiation) for the transmission of electric waves of very 
high frequency guided along a wire : and that, as regards the 
deeper questions of propagation of electric effect in time, 
theory has been, chiefly in Maxwell's hands, uniformly so 
far in advance of the means of verification. 

The logical validity of the older electrodynamics was con- 
fined to systems of uniform currents streaming round closed 
paths : and all investigations purporting to deduce from experi- 
mental data expressions for the electromotive forces induced 
in open circuits, or for mechanical forces acting on separate 
portions of circuits carrying currents, were necessarily illusory 
from the fact that such portions were practically unknown 
as separate independent entities. The new departure instit- 
uted by Maxwell came, when expressed mathematically, to a 
statement that dynamically all electric discharges are effect- 
ively of the nature and possess the properties of systems of 
closed currents, being completed when necessary by so-called 
displacement-currents in free space and in dielectric media ; in 
fact that the consideration of the electrodynamics of unclosed 
circuits never arises. That theory, as left by its author, works 
out by adapting the established Amperean theory of closed 



22 ELECTBODTNAMICS OF MOVING MATTER [SECT. I 

currents to the new ideas; and there still remains the same 
ambiguity in respect to mechanical forces on portions of flexible 
or extensible current-circuits*. There is however no ultimate 
ambiguity as regards electromotive phenomena in bodies at 
rest, the equations of the theory sufficing to eliminate the 
arbitrary element that initially must be introduced, and thus to 
give a definite determination of the electric force at each point 
of space. New difficulties, of practical importance only in the 
theory of radiation, occur when the material medium which 
carries the current is in motion : and the theory for that case 
was left in the form of a first approximation, which assumed that 
the aethereal disturbance was simply convected by the moving 
matter, that being amply sufficient for ordinary electrodjmamic 
applications. The dynamical methods were however sketched 
by Maxwell which would have to be employed to work out 
a more definite scheme of the relation of aether to the matter 
at rest in it or moving through it : and quantities of dynamical 
origin or suggestion, such as the vector potential of electric 
currents, which have sometimes been considered so great a 
complication by subsequent writers as to justify their summary 
abolition, turn out in fact to be of the essence of a more 
thorough analysis. 

16. The dynamical scheme which thus in Maxwell's hands 
furnished a formulation of the electrodynamics of material 
systems at rest in the aether, completely effective except as 
regard the material mechanical forces acting on the matter 
carrying the currents, was one of continuous differential analysis: 
the matter was taken as simply modifjdng, where it existed, 
the effective constants in the formula for the spacial distribu- 
tion of electric energy : when the aether did not move with 
any finite speed or the matter move across it, there was no 
pressing occasion to separate the energy into a part belonging 
to and propagated by the aether and a part attached to the 
molecules of matter. The theory, at the stage at which it was 
left by Maxwell, being a theory of complete electric circuits, 

* Gt Phil Trans. 1S95 ▲, pp. 697—701, for a demonstration that the 
ponderomotlve forces cannot be directly deduced from a single energy-fanction 
withont the aid of molecular analysis. 



CHAP. Il] HISTORICAL SURVEY 23 

the total current was a continuous streaming flow ; there proved 
to be no necessity, in the case of systems at rest, for keeping 
distinct the current of conduction, the current arising from 
changing electric polarization in a dielectric substance, and the 
displacement current belonging to free aether apart from 
matter altogether: the only hjrpothesis he required was that 
there is an aethereal current of such amount as to complete 
into a single circuital stream all the types of true electric flux 
which are associated with matter. These distinctions however 
become essential as soon as the theory is to take cognizance of 
the motion of the matter, especially in the domain of radiation 
where a mere equilibrium theory, contemplating the convection 
unaltered of its electric field along with the matter, is not 
a valid approximation. Then convection, relative to the aether, 
of electric charge and of dielectric polarization, contributes to 
the total current, as well as the change of aethereal elastic 
displacement and of material polarization. The problem thus 
presents itself in the form of two media, the aether and the 
matter, each with its own motion, but both occupying the same 
space ; and some idea has to be formed of the interconnexions 
by which they influence each other. If we treat them both by 
the methods of continuous analysis, the only way open is to 
assume the most general linear relations between the two sets 
of variables representing the properties and states of the two 
media, and subsequently try to reduce the generality by aid of 
experimental indications. This is a well-tried course of pro- 
cedure in abstract physics, and has been very efiective under 
simpler and more easily grasped conditions : but even if suc- 
cessful it could hardly help us to mentally realize the connexion 
between aether and matter, while on the other hand the 
philosophical objections to filling the same space with several 
different media have been widely felt and emphasized. 

17. Possibly the only sound procedure is the one which 
recommends itself on purely philosophical grounds. From 
remote ages the great question with which, since Newton's 
time, we have been familiar under the somewhat misleading 
antithesis of contact versus distance actions, has engaged specul- 
ation, — how it is that portions of matter can interact on each 



24 ELECTBODTNAMICS OF MOVING MATTER [SECT. I 

other which seem to have no means of connexion between 
them. Can a body act where it is not? If we answer directly 
in the negative, the spacial limitations of substance are to a 
large extent removed, and the complication is increased. The 
simplest solution is involved in a view that has come down 
from the early period of Greek physical speculation, and forms 
one of the most striking items in the stock of first principles of 
knowledge which had been struck out by the genius of that 
age. In that mode of thought the ultimate reality is trans- 
ferred from sensible matter to a uniform medium which is a 
plenum filling all space : all events occur and are propagated in 
this plenum, the ultimate elements of matter consisting of 
permanently existing vortices or other singularities of motion 
and strain located in the primordial medium, which are capable 
of motion through it with continuity of existence so that they 
can never arise or disappear. This view of physical phenomena, 
which was no doubt suggested by rough observation of the 
comparative permanence and the mutual actions of actual 
whirls in water and air, was quite probably, even at that time, 
not the mere idle philosophizing which has sometimes been 
supposed. It at any rate involves the fundamental consequence 
that the structure of matter is discrete or atomic — that con- 
trary to d priori impression matter is not divisible without 
limit : and it perhaps enables us to form some idea of the line 
of development of those views on the constitution of matter 
which, as Democritus and Lucretius described them, were con- 
siderably ahead of anything advanced in modem times until the 
age of Descartes and Newton. The same doctrine was prob- 
ably the ideal towards which Descartes was striving when he 
identified space and matter, and elaborated his picture of the 
Solar System as a compound vortex. In Newton's cautious 
hands, the relation of material atoms to aether is not dealt 
with : his establishment of an exact law of gi^avitation indeed 
originated the school of action at a distance, which held bluntly 
that matter can be considered as acting where it is not, and 
whose influence lasted throughout the sevententh century 
through Boscovich and the French astronomers and mathema- 
ticians, until the time of Faraday. This doctnne of the finality 



CHAP, ll] HISTORICAL SURVEY 25 

of action at a distance was however strongly repudiated by 
Newton himself, and hardly ever became influential in the 
EInglish school of abstract physics represented by investigators 
of the type of Cavendish and Young. More recently, the 
following out into modem developments of the mere idea of 
continuous transmission of physical actions gained for Faraday 
a rich harvest of fundamental experimental discoveries: while 
the general results obtained by von Helmholtz in the abstract 
theory of fluid motion have enabled Lord Kelvin to reconstruct 
on a precise scientific basis the notions of Leucippus and 
Descartes on the relation of matter to aether**. 

Meanwhile, irrespective of such general cosmical views, the 
development of electrical theory itself has been steadily tending 
to an atomic standpoint. It has been noted by Maxwell, and 
was afterwards very fully enforced by von Helmholtz, that the 
interpretation of Faraday's quantitative laws of electrolysis 
could only be that electricity is distributed in an atomic 
manner, that each atom of matter has its definite electric 
equivalent, the same for all kinds of atoms : and even the 
expressive phrase " an atom of electricity *' was imported into 
the theory by Maxwell. The only difficulty in this mode of 
formulation related to the mechanism of transference of these 
atomic charges or electrons from one molecule of matter to 
another. The order of ideas to be presently followed out will 
however require us to hold that the atomic charge is of the 
essenceft of each of the ultimate subatoms, or as we may call 
them protions of which an aggregation, in stable orbital motion 
round each other, go to make up the ordinary molecule of 
matter : so that the transference of electric charge will involve 
transference or interchange of these constituent protions them- 
selves between the molecules, that is it will always involve 
chemical change, as Faiuday held on experimental grounds 
must be the case. 



** Of. Appendix D. It may well be that too favourable a view is taken in the 
text of the earlier physical atomic theories, which np to the period of Lord 
Kelvin's vortex atoms coold only have been hypothetical speculations. 

ft Ct Sir Humphry Davy, in Appendix D. 



26 ELECTRODYNAMICS OF MOVING MATTER [SECT. I 

18. The fluid vortex atom of Lord Kelvin faithfally repres- 
ents in various ways the permanence and mobility of these 
subatoms of matter : but it entirely fails to include an electric 
charge as part of their constitution. According to any aether- 
theory static electric attraction must be conveyed by elastic 
action across the aether, and an electric field must be a field of 
strain : hence each subatom with its permanent electric charge 
must be surrounded by a field of permanent or intrinsic 
aethereal strain, which implies elastic quality in the aether 
instead of complete fluidity : the protion must therefore be in 
whole or in part a nucleus of intrinsic strain in the aether, 
a place at which the continuity of the medium has been broken 
and cemented together again (to use a crude but effective 
image) without accurately fitting the parts, so that there is a 
residual strain all round the place. 

The assumption of elasticity of some kind in the aether is 
of course absolutely essential to its optical functions : and the 
elucidation from the optical phenomena, as a purely abstract 
problem in analytical dynamics, of the mathematical type of 
this elasticity, was acomplished in 1839 by MacCullagh* in an 
investigation which may fairly claim to rank amongst the 
classical achievements of mathematical physics. The type of 
elasticity which he arrived at was one wholly rotational, so that 
the aether would be perfectly fluid for all motions of irrotational 
type, but would resist elastically, by a reacting torque, any 
differential rotations of the elements of volume, somewhat after 
the manner that a spinning fly-wheel resists any angular 
deflexion of its axis. Here then we have the specification of an 
ideal medium that would behave as a fluid to solid bodies 
moving through it, because its irrotational motion would be 
precisely the same as that of a fluid in the corresponding 
circumstances: it would not resist the motion of such solids 
any more than the aether resists the motion of the heavenly 
bodies or of material masses generally : moreover vortex rings 
could permanently exist in it and persist according to the well- 
known laws of abstract hydrodynamics. But these tempting 

* 'An Essay towards a Dynamioal Theory of CrystaUine Reflexion and 
Refraction/ Trans. R. I. A,, vol xzi: CoUecUd Wwrk$, p. 146. 



CHAP. U] HISTORICAL SURVET 27 

indications must be put aside in favour of a track lying in 
a rather different direction, the ultimate element of material 
constitution being taken to be an electric charge or nucleus 
of permanent aethereal strain instead of a vortex ring. 

A view of the constitution of matter, which proves to be 
sufficient over an extensive range of phjrsical theory and must 
not be made any more complex until it proves insufficient in 
some definite feature, asserts that the molecule is composed 
simply of a sjrstem, probably large in number, of positive and 
negative protions in a state of steady orbital motion round 
each other. Nothing has yet been done directly to examine 
how wide a field of possibility of different types of molecules 
and molecular combinations is thus opened up : but it is easy 
to recognize that the range is more extensive than would be 
offered by a Boscovichian system of attracting points, or of 
attracting polar molecules as in A. M. Mayers illustrative 
experiments with magnetic elements, or by fluid vortex rings. 
Thus for example a system of electrons ranged along a circle, 
and moving round it with the speed appropriate for steadiness, 
constitutes a vortex ring in the surrounding aether: it will 
therefore enjoy to some extent the well-known wide limits of 
stability of such a ring*: and the stability will probably be 
maintained even when there are only a few electrons circulating 
at equal intervals round the ring. Again, a positive and a 
negative electron can describe circular orbits round each other, 
stable except as regards radiation, thus forming a simple type 
of molecule devoid of magnetic moment : or again, we might 
have a ring formed of electrons alternately positive and negative. 
And moreover we may imagine complex structures composed 
of these primary systems as units, for example successive con- 
centric rings of positive or negative electrons sustaining each 
other in position. 

The duality arising from the assumption of two kinds of 
electrons, only differing chirally so that one is the reflexion of 

* It is here implied that the electrons are constrained by the attraction of 
an eleetron of opposite sign at the centre of the ring : as otherwise their mutual 
repnlsions and the centrifugal forces would produce their dispersion. On the 
question of loss of energy by radiation from such a system, ef. Ch. uv. infra. 



28 ELECTRODTNAXICS OF MOVINQ MATTER [SECT. I 

the other in a plane mirror, will present nothing strange to 
those physicists who regard with equanimity even the hypo- 
thesis of the possible existence of both positive and negative 
matter. 

On this view of the constitution of atoms the transit of 
a material body through the aether does not involve any 
disturbance in bulk or pushing aside of that medium, unless 
the body carries an electric charge or is electrically or mag- 
netically polarized. 

19. In Maxwell's final presentation of electric theory, in 
his "Treatise," he deals ivith displacement but not with any- 
thing called electricity**: so that a diagram of molecular 
polarization is foreign to it. When electric current (recognized 
electrodjoiamically) flows from ^ to jB along a wire, the circuit 
is completed by displacement from jB to ^ through the di- 
electric: and the notion of charges at A and B is (but only 
to this limited extent) irrelevant. At the same time there is 
little doubt that this scheme was the outcome of consideration 
of the theory of Kelvin and Mossotti, who were the first 
(in 1845) to extend Poisson's theory of magnetic polarization 
to dielectrics, of which the electric activity had then just been 
rediscovered by Faraday: and it seems possible that this 
notion of electrically polar molecules was dropped by Maxwell 
because his model of the electrodynamic field did not suggest 
to him any means of representing the structure of a per- 
manently existing electric pole. 

This agnostic attitude as to the nature of electric dis- 
placement and electric charge does not however limit the 
application of his theory on the electromotive side, so fBu* as 
regards bodies at rest ; for on any view the most that can be 
made of conduction in bodies at rest amounts to the direct 
application of Ohm's law, while the electrodynamics of stationary 
circuital currents had been already made out by Ampere, 

** This statement does not however apply to the memoir *A Dynamical 
Theory of the Electro-magnetio Field,' Phil. Tram, 1864, in whioh the theory 
of discrete electric charges is distinctly indicated; cf. §i 78, 79. For the 
demonstration that electrons can have a permanent existence in the rotational 
aether, cf. Appendix £ at the end of this volome. 



CHAP. U] HISTORICAL SURVEY 29 

Faraday, and Neumann. But to the case of bodies in motion 
such a scheme can give no clue, except the first approximation 
based on the assumption of an equilibrium state of the sur- 
rounding field at each instant of the motion. And it can give 
no sMx^ount of mechanical or ponderomotive forces, nor therefoi'e 
of electrostatic phenomena in general, except by the empirical 
formation in simple cases of a fragment of a mechanical-energy 
function by taking advantage of the indications of independent 
observation and experiment. 



CHAPTER III 

GENERAL KINEMATIC THEORY OF OPTICAL RATS IN 

MOVING MEDIA 

Specification of a Ray 

20. The relation between the direction of the ray and that 
in which the radiant waves are travelling is the fundamental 
conception of optical science. When the material medium 
transmitting the radiation is at rest in the aether, the ray, or 
path of the radiant energy, is the same relative to the matter 
as relative to the aether; and its direction is determined by 
the wave-surface construction of Huygens, in a manner of 
which the precise rationale is due chiefly to Fresnel. If the 
point becomes a centre of radiant activity owing to a train 
of regular waves advancing on it, the radiation sent on from 
it travels out into the surrounding space, so that the locus at 
which a given phase of it has arrived at any instant is a 
surface S surrounding 0, called the wave-surface. Suppose 

now that a train of waves is pass- 

fim, ;;;;^ ing across the point and let the 

plane F be tangential to a wave- 
front: draw a parallel plane tan- 
gential to the wave-surface on the 
onward side, the point of contact 
being Q : then the radiant energy 
of the portion of this wave-train 
which passes across is propagated in the direction OQ. For, 
if we draw the wave-surface with Q as centre which passes 
through 0, the plane F will be tangential to it at 0: hence 




^ 



CHAP. Ill] EXISTENCE OF OPTICAL RAYS 31 

the actual radiation sent on from all points of the element 
of the wave-front F situated at 0, which is tangential to that 
wave-surfiekce, will reach Q in the same phase, as follows from 
the definition of the wave-surface and the reversibility of the 
radiation: hence the effects due to all parts of this element 
of wave-front situated at will reinforce each other at Q, 
while those of any other element of the same order of magnitude 
will obliterate each other owing to differences of phase : thus 
it is only the portion of the wave-front around that sends 
radiation to Q, and the other parts of it may be shut off by 
screens without altering the effect at Q. It is here tacitly 
assumed that the medium is homogeneous, so that wave-surfaces 
of all magnitudes round are similar, and the my OQ is 
therefore a straight line. When there is heterogeneity we 
must take a wave-surface of very small dimensions, correspond- 
ing to a very short time of transit, so that OQ is an element 
of arc of the ray; the next element of ai-c starting from Q 
will now be in an infinitesimally different direction ; and thus 
the ray will be a curved line. The path of a ray between two 
points P and P' is of course actually explored by placing a 
source at P and gradually limiting the beam by screens so as 
not to affect the illumination at P' : so long as the screens do 
not cross the curve PP' constructed as above this will not be 
affected. 

It remains to express these kinematical ideas in analytical 
form. With a view to this object, we must distinguish, when 
the medium is of crystalline quality, between the wave-velocity 
and the ray-velocity corresponding to any given direction. 
Thus in the diagram the plane wave-front F is propagated 
in the direction normal to itself with the wave-velocity ap- 
propriate to that direction: but the radiant energy of that 
wave travels in the direction OQ with the ray-velocity, which 
is greater than the former in the ratio of OQ to OT, where OT 
is perpendicular to the tangent plane at Q. When the form 
of the wave-surface round is known, the wave-velocities 
and ray-velocities corresponding to all directions are thereby 
determined. 

Now the wave-surface 8 marks the outer boundary of the 



32 



PRINCIPLE OF LEAST TIME 



[sect. I 



region which a radiant disturbance, initiated at 0, can affect 
in a given time. Each ray of the disturbance by following its 
natural path, with the ray-velocity proper to its direction at 
each instant, can travel to that bounding sur&ce in the time ; 
but if it is constrained to follow some other path, it cannot 
get so far in the time. Thus any point on the ray-path OQ 
is the farthest point on that path that a ray starting from 
and guided by any constraint, could possibly reach in the time ; 
and the disturbance actually reaches that point by travelling 
along the ray itself. That is, the path of a ray from P to 
P' is that path along which the energy of the disturbance, 
travelling at each instant with the ray- velocity appropriate to 
its direction, can pass from P to P" in the least time. This is 
the generalization, afforded by the theory of undulations, of 
Fermat's empirical principle*, which asserted that a ray of 
light travels from one point to another along such path as 
would make its time of transit least. 

This principle remains precisely a principle of least time 
for paths from P up to all points P' such that the successive 
wave-fronts between P and P' belonging to a radiant disturb- 
ance maintained at P do not develope any singularity along 
the course of the ray. But when P' lies beyond a place of 
infinite curvature (cuspidal edge) on the wave-front the 
principle becomes merely one of stationar}' time: in certain 
cases it may be even a principle of maximum time. A suf- 
ficient illustration is afforded by the simple case of rays 
diverging from P, which after any series of refractions finally 
emerge into an isotropic medium as straight rays at right 
angles to a wave-front S. Let the ray from P to P' cross this 

wave-front at Q: then by 
definition the time for the 
ray from P to Q is the same 
as the time for the ray from 
P to any consecutive point 
Of on this wave-fix)nt: in 
comparing the times for the 
ray PQP' and a consecutive ray PQfP' we have thus only to 

* Gf. Appendix D. 




CHAP. Ill] RATS IN MOVING MEDIA 33 

compare the times for the straight segments QP' and Q'P\ 
that is we have only to compare the lengths of these segments. 
Now clearly from the point P' on a normal QP' to a surface 
S of double curvatures, P'Q is the line of least length that 
can be drawn to meet the surface in the neighbourhood of Q, 
so long as the centres of both the principal curvatures at Q 
are beyond P'; it is the line of greatest length when P' is 
beyond both these centres ; and it is only of stationary length, 
neither maximum nor minimum, when P' is between these 
centres. 

21. Let us consider the form that these principles will 
assume when the matter across which the radiation is travelling 
is itself in motion. The radiation is now not reversible, and 
the demonstration of the law of ray-direction must be expressed 
diflTerently from the above. This however is easily done. 

The time from to Q is the same as from to Q\ hence 
is the same as from 0' to Q, where 
00' is equal and parallel to QQ', 
each of them being infinitesimal 
compared with OQ, Hence the 
disturbances from all points 0', 
near on the plane wave-front, 
reach Q at the same time and 
therefore in common phase, and 
therefore accumulate, while at a 

point in any direction other than OQ they would annul each 
other. Thus the path of a ray is still determined by the 
principle of stationary time: but the path from P to P' is 
not the same as the path from P' to P because the velocity 
of propagation relative to absolute space is altered on reversing 
the direction of the ray. 

In circumstances of moving matter there are moreover two 
kinds of rays to be distinguished, one of them being the paths 
of the radiant energy with respect to the particles of the 
moving matter, the other the absolute paths of the radiant 
energy in the stagnant aether, or as we may say in space. As 
radiation is revealed to us wholly by its action on matter, 
including therein the parts of the eye itself, it is the former 

L. 3 




34 ABERRATION OF A RAY [SECT. 1 

type of rays that is of objective importance. In determining 
the course of the ray among the elements of moving matter, 
when it is thus referred to these elements, the principle of 
stationary time is to be employed using therein a ray velocity 
which is at each point the velocity of the ray relative to the 
matter there situated. For that principle ensures that, as the 
element of matter at Q moves, all the radiant energy arriving 
at it nearly in the direction of the ray reaches it at each 
instant in the same phase and thus accumulates: on account 
of the sameness of time, the path of the relative ray from P 
to Q is not affected by altering the motions of these terminal 
points alone. 

22. Consider then radiation travelling in a medium of 
varying density so that the velocity at the point (x, y, z) is V: 
and let us examine the t3rpe of the varying velocity (jt>, q, r) 
that may be imparted to the medium, supposed isotropic, 
without disturbing the forms of the paths in space along which 
the radiant energy travels. We assume, for the present, that 
the velocity of the ray in space is affected by a fraction k of 
the velocity of convection of the medium in its direction, the 
value of k depending on the index of refraction at the place, 
and being unity for the free aether. When the medium is 
stationary, the paths of the rays are to be determined by the 
equation of variations S/(cfc/F) = 0; for the vanishing of this 
variation ensures that consecutive rays starting in the same 
phase from one limiting point of the integral shall reach 
the other limiting point in identical phases, and therefore 
reinforce each other. When the medium is in motion, the 
equation of the ray-path in space becomes 



Iv^ 



* =0, 



k {Ip + mq -h 7ir) 



where (/, m, n) is the direction-vector of the element of arc ds, 
and (/), 7, r) is the velocity of the material medium. Thus to 
the first order of approximation 



CHAP. Ill] IRROTATIONAL THEORY OF SIR G. STOKES 35 

that is 

BJ V'^ds - BJk F-» (pdx + qdy + rdz) = 0, 

where V is proportional to fjr^, the reciprocal of the refractive 
index. 

The ray-paths in space cannot remain unaltered unless 
the second of these terms depends only on the limits of the 
integral, that is unless kfj,^ (pdx + qdy + rdz) is an exact diflfer- 
entiaL While if this condition be satisfied, the change in the 
time of passage of the ray between the two terminal points, 
arising from the motion of the medium, depends only on the 
limits of the integral and so is the same for all rays: thus 
all phenomena of interference between pairs of rays will be 
unaltered. 

We can directly apply this result to a theory of aberration 
which supposes that the Earth in its orbital motion pushes the 
free aether in front of it and so sets up a velocity (jo, q, r) in 
it. Our hypothesis will by the principle of relative motion 
be exact for free aether, k then being unity; thus, taking fj, 
for air to be practically unity, we see that the paths of rays 
in space will be the same as if the aether were at rest, will 
therefore be straight, provided pdx -{■ qdy •\' rdz is an exact 
differential, that is provided the aethereal motion set up 
around the Earth is of the differentially irrotational type, in 
agreement with Sir George Stokes' result. 

Thus if the aether around the Earth were set into irrota- 
tional motion by the Earth's progress through it, the rays of 
light from the stars would still travel through space in 
straight lines: their velocity in space would however be the 
standard velocity of radiation combined with the velocity of 
convection of the aether, and so would be affected near the 
Earth to the order of the ratio of the velocity of the Earth s 
motion to the velocity of radiation. If now an observer esti- 
mated the direction of these rays by looking along two sights 
situated in free space, or what is practically the same, in open 
air, his motion and that of the sights would, on the ordinary 
principles of relative motion, involve an aberrational change in 
their direction when adjusted to catch the ray, which would 
be the same as the existing astronomical aberration, except 

3—2 



36 AETHER FLUID FOR LARGE MOTIONS [SECT. I 

that its coefficient, being the ratio of the velocity of the Earth 
to the efiFective velocity of the ray in space, would, on account 
of its convection by the moving aether, vary for different parts 
of the Earth and different times of day by about one part in 
10*, an amount which would not be detected by astronomical 
observation. 

The present object is to make out the best case possible for 
this type of theory of aberrational effect, which assumes the 
aether to be set in motion : so we must try to assign a cause 
for the irrotational quality of motion thus demanded. In free 
space we have merely to postulate that the aether possesses the 
properties of the ideal perfect fluid : then by Lagrange's funda- 
mental theorem in fluid motion no convective motion that can 
be propagated into that medium can be other than irrotational 
The question then arises how far this explanation vdll extend to 
the case in which the aether is entrained by the matter that is 
moving through it. Attention has already been drawn (§ 10) 
to Sir George Stokes' considerations which would make the 
luminiferous property itself prevent the initiation of any 
rotational motion in the aether. It is in fact not difficult to 
prove that the energy of strain of a rigid incompressible medium 
of the tjT)e of ordinary matter may be expressed as a volume 
integral involving only the differential rotation, together with 
surface integrals extended over boundaries : and it follows that 
any local beginnings of rotational motion in an aether of elastic- 
solid t3rpe would be immediately carried off and distributed by 
transverse waves, so thai if the rigidity is great enough no 
trace of rotational motion of the medium in bulk can ever 
accumulate. In opaque media, however, such waves would not 
be effectively propagated. The coexistence in the same 
medium of liquidity for large-scale motions and rigidity for 
light-waves would on this view be the thing to be explained. 

We have been proceeding on the supposition that the 
Earth's atmosphere moves through the aether without disturb- 
ing the motion of the latter, or rather that any disturbance 
thereby produced does not destroy the differentially irrotational 
character of its motion. Supppse the observer fixes the direc- 
tion of the star by an observing telescope instead of by simple 



CHAP. Ill] DIRECT INFLUENCE OF MATTER 37 

sights, the astronomical law of aberration will still hold provided 
the motion of the aether in the region inside the telescope 
retains the same irrotational character as in free space, and not 
otherwise. But when the tube of the telescope by which the 
direction of the ray is determined is filled with water instead 
of air, then if the continuously irrotational character of the 
aethereal motion were maintained in the water as well as in air, 
on the lines of Sir George Stokes' dynamical explanation, the 
course of the ray referred to space, when inside the tube, would 
not be altered by the motion, and therefore the coeflScient of 
aberration relative to the observer would be reduced in the ratio 
of the velocity of radiation in water to that in air. 

23. This conclusion is contrary to fact. The preservation 
of irrotational continuity of motion, thus djmamically suggested, 
must therefore be abandoned : and we are compelled to treat of 
two interacting media, aether and matter, instead of a simple 
modified aether. From this new standpoint, in addition to the 
convection of radiation along with the moving aether, there will 
have to be a first-order influence on its velocity of propagation 
in the aether, arising from the relative motion of the matter 
through it and proportional to its relative velocity. This effect 
could vanish only if the aether moved along with the matter : 
whereas if it did so its motion could not be continuous, and also 
irrotational outside the matter, as in any case it is required to be. 

We therefore proceed, for the case of terrestrial rays passing 
in part through dense media, to develope this wider hypothesis 
of interacting media. The effective velocity of the rays is now 
made up of the standard velocity V which would obtain for 
conditions of rest, diminished by the velocity (P, Q, -B) of the 
space attached to and moving along with the material observing 
system, increased by the absolute velocity (p, 5, r) of the aether 
itself, and increased by h times the velocity (^', 5^. r') with 
which the matter transmitting the radiation is moving through 
the aether, all measured at the point under consideration and 
referred to axes fixed relative to the undisturbed distant aether : 
here A; is a constant depending on the nature of the matter, 
which for an isotropic medium must be scalar. 



38 NECESSITY OF FRESNEL'S LAW [SECT. I 

Thus the velocity, relative to the observing system, of a ray 
travelling in the direction (l, m, n) is 

V^(lP + mQ + nR) + ((p + w? + nr) + k (Ip' + niq' + nr'). 

Let us first consider the usual case in which all the matter 
is at rest relative to the observing material system, so that 

(p'+p, q' + q> r' + r) = (P,Q,i2); 

the velocity of the ray is now 

V^{l-k){lp+mq'-hnr). 

Just as before, the condition that the ray-paths relative to 
the observing system are unaltered to the first order by the 
common motion of all the matter is that 

/Lt« (1 - k) {p'dx + qdy + rdz) 

shall be the exact differential of a continuous function of 
position. As {p\ q\ r') has no necessary connexion with the 
value of /A, this requires that /*'(! —A;) shall be a constant A, 
so that A; = 1 — Afir^ : as moreover k must tend to a null 
value for very rare material media for which /a is practically 
unity, we must have A equal to unity so that A: = 1 — /*"*. 
The condition further requires only that p'dx -{' q'dy + r'dz 
shall be an exact differential; so that there is still room for 
motion of the matter relative to the aether, provided it is 
differentially irrotational. For example, if we suppose that the 
aether is stationary, and that the velocity of optical transmission 
in it is at each point specifically altered after Fresnel's manner, 
by the fraction 1 — /a"' of the velocity of the matter there 
moving through it, then the ray-paths are unaltered as to form 
and as to relative phases when the material system to which 
they are referred and the space attached to it are set into any 
state of continuous inx)tational motion, — the rectilinear motion 
of the Earth along its orbit furnishing a case in point. This 
argument shows that the law of Fresnel is on any view required 
in order to account for Arago's principle. 

Let us then proceed, on the basis of FresneFs value of k 
thus demonstrated, to the general case in which the material 
system that transmits the light is in motion with velocity 



CHAP. Ill] AETHEREAL FLOW UNNECESSARY 39 

(i>i» 9i> n) relative to the observing system. The velocity of 
the ray relative to the observing system is now 

V + (Zpi + mqi + nvi) — /*"« {Ip' + mq' + nr). 

Thus the condition that the relative ray-paths are unaltered is 
that 

/A* {pxdx + qidy + Vidz) — (p'da? + q'dy + /d-zr) 

should be an exact differential : that is, in addition to the con- 
dition already obtained that the absolute motion of the aether 
itself should be differentially irrotational, we must also have 

fi^Pidx + iJi?qidy -h iJi?i\dz 

the exact differential of a continuous function. In a region of 
constant index this condition requires that the motion of the 
matter transmitting the light must relative to the space of the 
observing system be continuous and irrotational ; but at the 
transition between different substances the tangential com- 
ponents of this motion must be discontinuous so that on the 
two sides of the interface they are inversely as the squares of 
the indices of refraction on those sides. These relations are 
extremely unlikely to be satisfied in actual circumstances. 

It appears then that there is no optical method of detecting 
a differentially irrotational flow of the aether superposed on the 
necessarily existing Fresnel influence of relative motion of the 
matter on the velocity of propagation in the aether, unless that 
flow be of cyclic character in the region considered. The 
Earth's motion might thus, so far as we have yet gone, cause 
or control such a flow of the surrounding aether, provided 
however we are willing to admit that bodies of ordinary size 
at the surface of the Earth are powerless to sensibly deflect it. 
Such a flow is not required by any optical facts, though Fresnel's 
effect is so demanded : it is therefore gratuitous to introduce it, 
especially as it does not in any way simplify our conception of 
the distuAance imparted to the aether by bodies moving through 
it ; and it will in fact appear that its presence to any sensible 
extent would introduce excessive complication into a theoretical 
scheme otherwise simple. 



40 RELATED OPTICAL PHENOMENA [SECT. I 

24. The argumeDt above given proves not merely that the 
principle of Fresnel forms a sufficient basis for the usually 
received facts of astronomical aberration, but in eflfect shows 
that it is necessitated by them. Thus its experimental verifi- 
cation, by Fizeau and by Michelson, was of value rather as a 
confirmation of the general validity of this line of physical 
reasoning, than as a special proof of Fresnel's principle itself: 
if Bradley's law of aberration is granted, in connexion with the 
observed absence of influence of the Elarth's motion on teirestrial 
ray-paths, that principle follows deductively. 

Irrespective then of any experimental evidence relating to 
the effect of the Earth's motion on interference, diffraction, 
double i*efiraction, polarization by reflexion, rotatory polarization, 
or other physical phenomena depending on the dynamical 
nature of the radiation, considerations of a merely geometrical 
or kinematical character have restricted the influence of motion 
of the material medium on the propagation of radiation to the 
definite relation of Fresnel. It is necessary to find a dynamical 
basis for that relation, and to show that this basis is in keeping 
with the relations to the Earth's motion of the other types of 
phenomena here enumerated, remembering that it is demon- 
strated only up to the first order of the ratio of the velocity of 
the material system to that of radiation. Of these other phe- 
nomena it may here be noted that interference experiments 
involve only the relative phases of the rays, and so are included 
in the above discussion : while the remaining effects above 
enumerated involve more intimately the dynamics of the waves. 

25. In this consideration of ray-paths relative to the 
moving matter, it has been necessary to include only the first 
order of small quantities, so that it was unnecessary to dis- 
tinguish for isotropic media between ray-velocity and wave- 
velocity. In some discussions which follow, in which the 
second-order terms are included, it is of course ray-velocity 
with which we are concerned : and the difference between the 
two velocities must therefore be determined. When the ob- 
serving system is moving across aether with uniform translatory 
velocity v, the velocity of propagation relative to the matter of 




CHAP. Ill] RAY-VELOCITY RELATIVE TO THE EARTH 41 

a wave-front travelling in free aether in a direction inclined to 
that of t; at an angle ^ is F— vcos^: hence the relative 
wave-surface, being the envelope of simultaneous wave-fronts, 
is exactly a sphere, say of radius unity, referred to an origin 
situated at a distance v/V from its centre C measured in the 
direction of v. Corresponding to a point P on this sphere, the 
relative ray-velocity is V multiplied by 
the vector OP ; while the relative wave- 
velocity is as usual V multiplied by the 
vector perpendicular from to the 
tangent plane at P. Now, being the 
angle between the directions of the ray 
OP and v, we have 

0P»+ (70« + 20P. (70 cos^ = 1 ; 

hence OP = (1 - CO* sin* 0)^ - 00 cos ^ ; thus the magnitude of 

the ray- velocity is ( F" — v' sin" 0)^ — vcoa0, or up to the second 
order F— t; cos 6/ — ^v'/ F' . cos* 0. Also, the disturbance relative 
to the moving matter, that is the ray, is propagated in a 
direction inclined to the wave-normal at an angle equal, to 
the first order, to v/V, sin measured away from the direction 
of V, These results are on the hypothesis that the propagation 
relative to the aether itself is isotropic, so that F is independent 
of direction : otherwise there will also be terms involving inter- 
action between the velocity of convection and the aeolotropic 
quality. 

26. As the axial rotation of the Earth does not come under 
the restriction above made to an irrotational motion, it follows 
that our results will not strictly apply as regards the diurnal 
aberration. In this case there would be an accumulated 
change of direction in the relative ray-path, in dense matter, 
for example down a water-telescope, of the order of magnitude 
of the ratio of the greatest transverse change of the velocity of 
the matter along the ray to the velocity of radiation : but under 
no practical circumstances could this be of any importance. 

The discussion above given applies to the paths of single 
rays : it exhibits the conditions under which the time of 



42 INFLUENCE OF ABERRATION ON FOCI [SECT. I 

passage of the ray from a fixed point A to another fixed point B 
on it is unaffected to the first order by motion, say of uniform 
translation, of the matter through which it travels. The con- 
dition that A and B should be conjugate foci on the ray is 
that, for a slight variation of the path of the ray, the time of 
passage shall be unaffected to the second order of this varia- 
tion: thus we should be prepared to find that uniform trans- 
latory motion of the matter would have a first-order influence 
on the position along the ray of the focus conjugate to a given 
one. But there is no means of recognizing an effect of this 
kind. 

It is easy to extend the results here obtained to the case 
in which deviation is produced by a diffraction grating instead 
of by reflexion or refraction. The direction of the diffracted 
ray is determined by the principle that the difference between 
times of passage from A to B hy way of successive physical 
elements of the grating shall be a period of the light or a 
multiple of that period : to the first order this difference of 
times or phases will not be affected by a uniform motion of 
translation. Thus the principle of Arago and Fresnel extends 
also to the use of grating spectroscopes. The discussion of the 
question for more complicated cases of diffraction will be best 
conducted by aid of the d)Tiamical theor}'. 

Influence of Convection on Radiant Periods: Doppler Effect 

27. The disturbance excited in the aether by the uniform 
motion through it of the radiating body and the Earth cannot 
affect the change of relative period due to approach of the 
observer and radiant source : for such disturbance will be 
steady, and therefore the number of vibrations which leave 
the source in a given time must be the same as the number 
experienced by the observer, except in so far as his distance 
from the source has changed in the interval. If we take the 
aether to be quiescent, the emitted wave-length X is shortened 
to (1 — v/c) X, where v is the velocity of the source resolved 
in the direction towards the observer and c is the velocity 
of radiation in vacuum ; while the observer, moving towards 



CHAP. Ill] DOPPLER EFFECT 43 

the source with velocity whose component is v\ picks up 
these waves with a period t , which is related to the true 
period, T or (1 — v/c) X/c, by the equation 

T (c + v) = TC. 



Hence t = , rr - ] 

1 + v/c c' 



so that the combined motions affect the period in a ratio, which 
to the first order of small quantities, to which our knowledge is 
in most respects confined, is equal to 1 — (v + t;')/c, thus de- 
pending only on the relative motion. 

The only first-order difference that could arise, according to 
whether or not the moving body pushed the aether in firont 
of it, would be a difference of wave-length. No such effect 
would be produced by the source moving the aether in this 
way, if the receiver is far enough off to be out of the mnge 
of the disturbance : but if the velocity v of approach of the 
receiver involves a velocity W of the aether around it, the 
wave-length of the radiation relative to the receiver will be 
altered in the ratio 1 — kv/c. At first sight it appears as if 
this change of wave-length might be revealed on analysis of 
the light, for example by the use of a grating which is the type 
of analysis in which the theoretical conditions are simplest : if 
that were the case the analysis of light from a teirestrial 
source, such as a sodium or thallium flame, would show a 
change of wave-length depending wholly on the relative motion 
of the matter and the aether around it. But it will be shown 
generally that uniform relative motion of matter and aether 
can produce no first-order change whatever either in refractive 
or diflfractive effects : so that no such influence can arise. It 
seems however worth while to give in brief a special analysis 
for a grating, in order to illustrate more fully the origin of 
this absence of effect. 

28. The problem under consideration is one in which the 
observer and all his apparatus are in uniform motion of trans- 
lation along with the Earth : we have therefore to consider 
ray-paths and vibration-periods relative to the Earth's motion 



44 



THEORY OF MOVING DIFFRACTION-GRATING [SECT. I 



through space with velocity v\ Suppose that the aether takes 
part in this motion to the extent k\/ : then the relative velocity 
of radiation in air which is travelling in a direction making 
an angle with the direction OX of the Earth's motion is 
F - (v' — fc?^) cos 0, say F— t; cos where t; = (1 — A:) v\ 

We have to determine the law of diffraction from a grating 

under these circumstancea Let i 
denote the angle of incidence of the 
ray OA, say from a sodium or 
thallium source at 0, and i the 
angle of diffraction of the diffracted 
ray A0\ which travels at an angle 
iT—ff with the direction O'X of the 
Earth's motion. If we compare the 
i-ay OAO' with the ray OBO which 
comes from the next reflecting space 
of the grating, the difference of 
their times of transit must be a whole number n of complete 
periods of the radiation, say nT\ this will be true for any 
point (f on the diffracted ray, up to the first order of the ratio 
of AB to 0-4, while for the focus of a curved grating it will be 
true up to the second order. Thus we have 




OA 



AO' 



F + vcostf F-vcos^ 



OB 



BO' 



V+vco8{0 + B0)^ V-vcoQ(ff'hB0') 



+ nT 



where ^ + ^ = t + t' ; or, transposing, 

OA OB 

F+vcosd V+vcos(0 + B0) 

aA 



O'B 



F - 1; cos ^ ^ F - 1; cos (^ + hff) 

so that to the first order of approximation, for which 
S^ = ^5cost/0^, lff^-ABiiQ8i\0A\ 
0JB = 04+-4JBsint.S^, 



-f-WT, 



CHAP. Ill] TEST OF ARAGO'S PRINCIPLE 45 

we have 

- V. AB sini - A. V QUI e. 80 -AB sin I. r cos 0B0 

V^-\'2Vvco90 

- V.AB sin I -^ OB. vsm0',B0'-ABsmi\Vcos0'80' 



and therefore 



+ nT, 



sin t f 1 — ^ cos^ + j^coti sin 

— sin i' f 1 +-yr cos ^' — TT ^^* *' sin ^ ) = -j^ wt, 

which gives, to the first order in v/V, 

, V nX 

sin 4 — sm t = -Tn WT = -TT> • 

AB AB 

Thus the law of diffraction does not involve the relative 
velocity t/, which is the required result : it is only changes of 
period that can affect the law. 

For a curved grating the relative motion would affect the 
focussing, which depends on adjustment of the reduced paths 
up to the second order : this effect will be of the first order in 
v/c, but of course wholly beyond the range of detection. 

29. It is worthy of remark that, whether the radiation is 
analysed by a grating or by prisms, the consistency of the 
results of astronomical measurements of velocities in the line 
of sight involves incidentally a delicate test of the hypothesis 
of Arago and Fresnel that uniform motion of the Earth through 
the aether does not affect the laws of geometrical optics. An 
uncertainty in the measures of velocity of about one mile per 
second, which seems at present to be the superior limit in 
a process that is rapidly improving, would permit discrepancies 
amounting to only about one second of arc in the optical laws ; 
to recognise this amount in ordinary terrestrial measurement, 
very exact appliances would be required. 

There is one point, however, essential to the theory of 
measurements of celestial velocities by this means, that has 
to be settled. How do we make sure that the motion of the 
source through the aether does not affect the intrinsic periods 



46 INFLUENCE OF EAKTU'S MOTION ON [SECT. I 

of its radiant vibrations ? The answer is that the eflFect, such 
as it is, must be the same when the translatory motion of the 
molecules which act as source is reversed, because there is 
no other velocity or directed quantity connected with the 
moving molecules such as could enter into combination with 
their translatory motion : thus the eflFect on the free periods 
must depend on the square of the ratio of the translatory 
velocity to the velocity of radiation, and therefore be far below 
the order of actual measurements. 

Detailed Theory of the Michelson-Morlei/ Interference 

Experiment 

30. The theory of the Michelson and Morley interference 
experiment* which is fundamental in this subject, will form an 
illustration of the principles explained above. A ray of light 




from a source S, proceeding in the direction SG of the Earth's 
motion, is divided by a glass lamina at G inclined to it at an 
angle Jtt; the reflected part traces the path GBHI in space, 
being returned by a mirror at B which is parallel to the 
direction of the Earth's motion, and reaching the lamina again 
when the point G of it has moved on to ^; the transmitted 
part traces the path SGAHI in space, being returned by a 
mirror at A at right angles to the direction of the Earth's 

♦ Phil Mag, Dec. 18S7. 



CHAP. Ill] OPTICAL INTERFERENCE 47 

motion. It is still to be proved that the paths in space as 
thus specified ai'e correct ; it has to be shown that the ray SO 
will be reflected along GB, and that the ray which is returned 
along AH will be reflected along HI. That being assumed for 
the present, these two rays, adjusted so as to be both travelling 
exactly along HI, will be the rays that produce interference 
fringes in an observing telescope directed along IH, when the 
mirrors A and B are almost exactly equidistant from G ; and 
the circumstances of the interference will be determined by 
computing the difference of times from G where the rays are 
separated to H where they are united again. By ray-paths in 
space we mean for the present ray-paths relative to the aether, 
which may or may not (so far i\s we are here concerned) itself 
be in uniform translatory motion : also GH is the distance the 
point G of the dividing lamina has moved, relative to the 
aether, while the reflected portion of the light has traversed 
the path GBH. If V is the velocity of radiation through 
aether and v the velocity of the material system relative to the 
aether, we have the angle GBH equal to 2v/ V, say 26 ; and the 
angles of incidence and reflexion at B are equal. If the distance 
of the mirror B from G is l^, we have GB=^BH^l^{\ +i^), 
and the velocity along each of these lines is V\ hence the time 
over the path GBH is 2^7. (1 +i^). To find the time over 
the path GAH, it is easiest to work with velocity of the 
radiation relative to the material system, otherwise the pc»sition 
of A at the instant of reflexion would have to be found : now if 
Ij is the distance of the mirror A from G, the relative velocity 
from G to A is V—v and from A back to H is V+ v, hence the 
time is 

J—^fA^, that is, ^(1 + n 

The coefficients multiplying li and l^ in the two cases difier by 
6^/V, where is equal to v/ F: thus if the adjustment to equality 
of time is made for the system in any position, that adjustment 
will be disturbed when the whole system is turned through a 
right angle. The effect of slow steady rotation of the system 
would thus be a procession of interference bands across the 
field of the observing telescope, which would reverse four times 



48 REFLEXION BY A MOVINQ MIRROR [SECT. I 

(§ 34) in a complete revolutioD, the number of bands that have 
crossed between two reversals corresponding to a time-difference 
of d^l/V or It^jV*, where I represents l^ or Z,. But according to 
the experiments, which have recently been repeated with a 
refinement that leaves no room for doubt, this effect depending 
on the square of v/F is entirely absent. 

31. It yet remains however to complete the above demon- 
stration by showing that the ray AH \a reflected along HI: if 
that were not so we should have to seek the ray AH' that 
would be reflected in the direction of HI, and the difference of 
times up to the focus of the telescope would be affected to the 
second order in v/F if the inclination of AH' to AH were of the 
first order. We have thus to determine the law of reflexion, at 
an advancing mirror, of a ray-system referred to the aether : 
consider two parallel rays of which one meets the mirror in H ; 
the other would meet it in K if the mirror had not moved 

forward in the meantime, but really meets 
it in K' where KK' : KL = v : F, v being 
the velocity of advance of the mirror 
towaixis the light: therefore the reflexion 
is the same as if the mirror were HK' fixed 
in aether, thus being turned through an 
angle KHK' or c, where, i being the true angle of incidence, 

tan (* — €)_ V—v 
tan 6 "" F ' 
so that, 6 being small, 

1 ^ • o 

€ = J -^ sm 24. 

In the present case t is Jtt ; and rotation of the mirror through 
6 would rotate the reflected ray through 20 ; therefore the ray 
AH is reflected along HI. In the same way the ray SG is 
reflected along OB. Moreover it follows from the principle of 
continuity that practically the same value for the retardation 
would be obtained by taking any adjacent pair of interfering 
rays instead of the pair in the diagram. The bands usually 
observed will naturally correspond to reflexion at the first face 
of the lamina in each case. 





CHAP. Ill] RAY-VELOCITY IN A MOVING MEDIUM 49 

32. Wave-Velocity and Bay-Velocity in an isotropic Moving 
Medium, — In a material medium of index 
of refraction /*, in uniform translation 
along the direction of the axis of angular 
measurement with velocity v, the relative . , . 

velocity of a train of light- waves travel- \ c o 

ling in' a direction making an angle 0' 
with the direction t; is /a~^F— An; cos 0\ 
where on Fresnel's hypothesis k is equal 
to /A^. As this velocity must be equal to the perpendicular 
from the origin on the tangent to the wave-surfSstce constructed 
relative to the moving medium, it follows that this surface is 
exactly a sphere of radius /jT^ V with its centre (7 at a distance 
kv behind the origin 0. The ray- velocity relative to the moving 
system, in any direction OP, is represented by the radius vector 
OP of the wave-surfiice : thus if this ray OP makes an angle 
with the direction of v, we have 

OP' + 2kvOP cos0 + kh^:= fi-^V\ 
giving 

OP = - in; cos tf -h 0*-^ F« - khi" sin» 0)^ 

= h) cos —h ^rr 81^^ ^» 

correct up to the second order. 

The path of a ray relative to the moving material system 
would be determined by making the variation of its time of 
transit between any initial and any final point on the path 
vanish, using this value of the ray- velocity. 

But it is important to remark that the correctness of this 
second-order term in the relative ray-velocity depends on the 
assumption that the relative velocity of wave-propagation is as 
above stated, and thus involves no term depending on (v/Vy. 
Such a tenn would be independent of reversal of the direction 
of V, and therefore could only arise from a constitutive change 
in the material medium itself, produced by its translation 
through the aether. 

The expression above obtained is correct to the second order 
for relative ray-velocity in free aether, as in § 25 ; though, as 

L. 4 



50 INTEBFERENCE IN TERMS OF RAY-PATHS [SECT. I 

has just been seen, there is no reason why it should be correct 
to that order for a moving material medium, so that any de- 
velopments derived from it are for ponderable media mainly 
illustrative. An alteration of the second-order terms in the 
expression would not however assist towards the explanation of 
the null result of the Michelson-Morley interference experiment, 
for the paths of the divided ray are there wholly in air, which 
is for the present argument practically the same as free aether : 
thus we are still confined, for the explanation of that result, to 
the equally reasonable hypothesis of a second-order change in 
the linear dimensions of the solid material system of the ex- 
periment, arising from its motion through the aether (§ 112). 

33. General Analysis of Interference in Moving Media, — 
The problem of optical interference in moving material media 
may be treated in a quite general manner. It has already been 
seen that, on Fresnel's hypothesis, the relative paths of the rays 
in a uniformly moving material medium of varying density are 
the same as if the system were at rest, up to the first order of 
small quantities inclusive. Further it has been shown that the 
relative velocity of the ray which travels at an angle with 
the direction of the uniform translational velocity t; of the 
system is /a"'^F(1 — Arecostf — JA"€*sin'^), where e is equal to 
fiv/V, while on Fresners hypothesis k is equal to /*""'. Thus if 
Ss' denote an element of any ray-path of continuous curvature, 
relative to the system in motion, and 8s the corresponding 
element of the ray-path if the system were at rest, the time of 
passage of the ray for the moving system is 



/ 



^-^ (1 - ke cos - JiV sin' 0)-'\ 



which is equal up to the second order inclusive to 

J^ (1 -. ^-e cos ^ - iA:»€« sin» 0)-' + [^ (ds' - ds). 

Of this expression the second term is the diflTerence of the 
times of transit of a ray over the path «' and over the natural 
path s, when the medium is at rest. Now Fermat's principle 
of least time shows that if these paths differed in position up 



CHAP. Ui] BELATIVE TO THE MOVING SYSTEM 51 

to the first order, the times of transit would differ only by 
the second order : but actually the paths differ in position only 
up to the second order, hence this term is negligible up to 
that order. We can therefore calculate the time of passage 
of a ray relative to the moviug material system, correctly up 
to the second order, by assigning to it the path 8 that would 
actually belong to it when the material medium is at rest. 

This proposition holds good however abrupt the transition 
of density may be at certain surface-loci: hence it really 
includes as limiting cases those in which the continuity of 
curvature of the ray is disturbed by a finite number of re- 
flexions or refractions. It is however easy to see independently 
that these cases do not introduce any disturbance into the 
result. For consider a refraction as in the 
diagram, P'p being the actual ray relative 
to the moving medium, and pP that which 
it is proposed to substitute for it, namely 
the corresponding ray in the medium at 
rest. We have seen that the length PP' 
is of the second order of small quantities. The special effect 
of the refiraction on this substitution is to add the element 
of arc Pp to the integral for the time of passage, and to take 
away the element of arc P'p' : these are both of the second 
order, thus to that order the change produced is to add to 
the integral yi^.Pp, and to subtract fi^.P'p', where fii and fi^ 
are the refractive indices above and below the interface : but 
these tenns are equal, each representing the time of passage 
from the wave-ftxjnt P'p to the wave-front Pp : hence there 
is no change in time here introduced, up to the second order. 

34. Now when the medium is at rest the paths of the 
interfering rays in the Michelson-Morley arrangement are as in 
the diagram, each of the rays being reflected straight back to the 
mirror which originally divided them. Thus if the velocity v 
of the material system makes au angle with the direction of the 
incident light, the times of transit of the two rays relative to 
the moving system are, up to the second order, 
m/,/F(1 - *€ cos - JiV sin' 0) 

+ H^i/V (1 -f- ke cos - iifcV sin" 0) 

4—2 




52 



APPLICATION TO 



[sect. I 



and 

fil^JV (1 - k€ sin - JJfc»€" cos« 0) 

+ fd^jVil + ^•6 sin ^ - iA:«€- cos' 0) ; 

these are equal to 

?^(l+jt»e»-ii'«€«sin«^) 



and 



?^* (1 + i*€* - iA»6» COS' 0) respectively. 



'^ 



It 



/ 




^=j^ 



n 



The diflTerence of times of transit is thus 

2fi^^ + ^yk'e'cos20, 

since in the second-order terms we may write I for /, or L. 
Thus, as the apparatus revolves, the fringes pass backwards and 
forwards across the field of view of the observing telescope vdth 
a simple harmonic oscillation, moving in the same direction 
during a quadrant of the revolution. The total change of 
phase between the two positions, in which the light is incident 
along and at right angles to the Earth's motion, is 

V >F«- 

The effect of inserting a tube of water in one of the arms, 
so that part of the path is in air and part is in water, may be 



CHAP. Ill] MCHELSON'S EXPERIMENT 53 

easily estimated in this way ; the result will still of course be 
of the second order. Thus if the path li consists of a part li' in 
air and a part li" in water of index fi, while the path I2 is all 
in air, the difference of times of transit would come out as 

1 €* ^ 

constant - 0(4 + ^1' + /^k'') ^ ^^^ ^^* 

where approximately 

Z, - ii' = fdi". 

But it is to be borne in mind, as above explained, that 
this result neglects the second-order effect on the velocity of 
radiation in the material medium due to constitutive change 
in it arising from its motion through the aether, and also 
the effect on the linear dimensions of the material system 
arising from the same cause. When these effects are included, 
the result will probably, on any view, be quite different : accord- 
ing to the general molecular theory to be explained later, it 
will always be null. 



CHAPTER IV 



THE PROBLEM OF OPTICAL CONVECTION: INDICATIONS 
TOWARDS A DYNAMICAL THEORY 



35. Consider in the first place the propagation of wav< 
or indeed the course of any kind of disturbance — in a single 
self-contained medium, with a view to determining the effect 
on it of a velocity of uniform translation imparted to the 
medium. The principle of relative motion supplies the solution. 
Impart to the whole system a velocity equal and opposite to 
that of the medium ; and, because this uniform velocity intro- 
duces no new kinetic reactions, the phenomena of the relative 
motion will pursue the same course as before, but they ^dll 
now be relative to the medium at rest instead of in motion. 
In all such cases, therefore, the disturbances in the medium 
are simply carried on along with the medium itself, with its 
fiill velocity of translation, and in other respects pursue their 
course unaltered. 

For example, the velocity of translation of the air through 
which sound is propagated is added (in algebraic sense) at 
each instant to the velocity of the sound itself. In the same 
way, if, adopting the view discussed by Sir G. Stokes, we 
considered the surrounding free aether as disturbed by the 
Earth's motion, its velocity at each point would have to be 
added on to the intrinsic velocity of radiation through it This 
is true whether the motion of the medium is uniform or not : 
when however it is not uniform a simple wave will no longer 
travel as a simple wave, and to that extent the meaning of the 
term velocity of the wave is indefinite. 



CHAP. IV] EXAMPLES OF SIMPLE SYSTEMS 55 

In expressing the velocity of a particle of the moving 
system relative to coordinate axes travelling with the system 

didt 4" vdjdx 

must replace djdt, where v is the velocity of the sjrstem and 
is taken to be parallel to the axis of x. We may illustrate 
by the simple case of the propagation of waves along a stretched 
cord which is carried through two fixed eyelets, and runs 
through them with a uniform velocity of translation v. Con- 
sidering transverse waves, if 17 denote the transverse displace- 
ment at a distance x along the tight cord, the transverse 
velocity is {djdt + vdjdx) 17, and the transverse acceleration of 
this element of the cord is {dIdt 4- ud/dxY 17. The tension T in 
the cord is uniform because v is uniform ; in fetct any slight 
diflference of tension, however initiated, is smoothed out by 
longitudinal waves which are assumed to travel very much 
taster than the transverse waves under consideration. Thus 

the restoring force is as usual T-j- -r^Bx per length Bx: and 

the equation of propagation is 

" \dt dx) dx dx 



or 



(d dy d^ri 



where c", equal to T/p, is the normal velocity of propagation. 
Assuming a solution in the form of the simple wave-train 

17 = 170 exp t — (a? - Vt), 

this gives the relation (F— t;)» = c', so that F= c+ t; exactly, 
as was to be anticipated. 

For purely longitudinal waves, of displacement f, the equa- 
tion of propagation is 

'^ \dt dx) dx\ dx, 

where E is the longitudinal elasticity, and (E/p) is the un- 
disturbed velocity of propagation. As in the previous case. 



56 COMPOUND SYSTEM, AETHER AND MATTER [SECT. I 

this velocity is increased by the velocity of translation of the 
cord measured positive towards the direction of propagation of 
the waves. 

36. Let us proceed now to the propagation of electric 
waves across a dielectric medium, which is moving with uniform 
velocity v parallel to the axis of a. If we follow Maxwell's 
scheme of equations, and his notation, we have 

. , . ^ (dH dG dF dH dO dF\ 

where (a, 6,c)«(^y- -^, -^-^, ^ - ^ j ; 

1 A / \ (dy dB da drf dff da\ 

also ^^(u,vM-[^-^^. ^-^, 5^-^j 

and (a, 6, c) « /a (a, /3, 7) ; 

yielding V*(F, G, H)^- 4i7rfi(u, v, w)* (u). 

These equations are satisfied by the propagation of a train 

of transverse waves along the axis of x, in which P and a and u 

and F are null, while '^ is a function of y, ^ : thus for such a 

wave-train they give 

^ fd d\^ d^ 

"" \dt dx) dz ' 

As -T- + -T- + -T is null in accordance with (ii), any theory that 

makes 

dP dQ dR 

dx dy ^ 

null will also make V«^ null, that is will make "9 merely the 
static potential of the electric charges in the field. Then we 
shall have 

* Of. § 55, and end of Appendix A. 



CHAP. IV] VARIOUS POSSIBLE HYPOTHESES 57 

and the remainder of the analysis will depend on the relation 
that is adopted between the dielectric current (u, v, w) in the 
moving medium and the electric force (P, Q, R). 

(1) If we were to assume the ordinary relation for a 
medium at rest, namely 

the above condition of nullity of 

dP dQ dR 
dx dy dz 

would be satisfied, and the equations of propagation would be 

On introducing the type of a simple wave-train 

(Q, R) = (Q., iJ.) exp ,^{x- Vt), 

they would give F ( F— u) =s ,.- 

so that F = . + i *^ + i - u", approximately ; 

thus the velocity of the wave-train would be increased, to a 
first approximation, by half the velocity of translation of the 
medium. 

(2) If we assumed that the whole of the s}rstem, aether 
and matter, that is polarized or otherwise affected by the 
electric force, moves together, with the uniform velocity u, and 
that the change of its actual polarization constitutes the di- 
electric current, we should have 

and the equation of propagation would be 



58 VARIOUS POSSIBLE HYPOTHESES [SECT. I 

The waves would then partake of the whole of the velocity of 
translation of the medium. 

This rather than the previous result in (1) is what we 
should expect on the dynamical principle of relative motion, 
when the whole system transmitting the waves is involved in 
the translatory motion. We therefore conclude that on such 
an aspect of Maxwell's theory — one namely which considers 
everything to partake in the motion — ^the present relation 
between the dielectric current and the electric force in the 
moving medium would be the right one. 

But neither of these results is in agreement with the facts, 
which in very rare media such as gases make the influence on 
the velocity of the waves extremely small. So we conclude 
that in a rare medium the main part of the electric flux, which 
is then the part connected with the aether itself, is not con- 
vected at all with the moving material system. We are there- 
fore led to another hypothesis, 

(3) which divides the total dielectric cuirent into an 

1 // 
aethereal part ■ -rr (P, Q, R\ which is not convected pre- 
sumably because the aether does not participate at all in the 
motion of the matter, and another part depending on material 
polarization which is convected to the full extent and therefore 

is of the form ^^ ijt'^^^ (^' ^' ^^' "^^^ ^^^ *^® ^^^ 
current, referred to axes at rest, we would have 

leading to equations of propagation 
The equation for the velocity is now 

so that V= '\' + J (1 — A""*) v, approximately. 



CHAP. IV] FRESNEL'S LAW OBTAINED 59 

The change of velocity of the waves is now just half of that 
given by the formula of Fresnel, which has been fully verified 
by experiment. Thus we are impelled a stage further, and led 
to inquire why the displacement current in the stagnant aether 
should have to do at all with the electric force (P, Q, R), which 
involves in its constitution the velocity v of the matter carrying 
the electric charges on which alone electric force operates. If 
we assume that this aethereal electric current is excited by the 
same cause as produces it when there is no matter present, or 
when the matter is at rest, namely by what we may call the 
aethereal force (P', Qf, R\ connected with the electric force by 
the relation 

(P', Q'. if ) = (P, Q + uc, B - 1/6), 

we shall have to combine an aethereal displacement current 
and a material polarization current 

in order to obtain the total dielectric current, which will thus be 

Now putting "9 null for purely transverse waves, which will 
be found to cause no discrepancy, we have 

(<2'.B')=-^(».^); 

and, keeping now to &, if as more convenient independent 
variables, we derive 

with the similar equation for H, These equations give for the 
velocity of propagation 

F« + (A'-l)(F-i;)» = -, 



60 FINAL SCHEME FORMULATED [SECT. I 

« 

or KV^-2(K-l)vV='--(K-l)v'. 

that is F=(l-.Z-)v+(£-^,^v»y 

" C^* ■*■ ^^ " ^"'^"^ " isf ^^ ^ ^"'^ 1^' approximately. 

agreeing to the first order of small quantities with Fresnel's 
formula. 

The principles to which the above cursory preliminary 
sketch has pointed, form the basis of the definite dynamical 
theory of the electrical and optical relations of moving material 
media, which will be worked out in detail in the following pages. 

37. If we determined to avoid the introduction of the 
auxiliary vector potential (F, G, H\ this argument would have 
to be expressed as follows. Let (/, g, h) denote the aethereal 
part and (/', g*, h') the material part of the total electric dis- 
placement of Maxwell ; the circuital electrodynamic relations, 
for the moving material medium will, when referred to axes at 
rest in the quiescent aether, be of types 

dy dz'^^Kdr dt)' 

dR_dQ^_d[a 
dy dz di * 

where (P', Q\ R) represents 47rc^ (/, g. A), and where d'jdt when 
it operates on (/, g^ h) is the same as djdtf but when it operates 
on (/', g\ h') is the same as hjdt or djdt + vdjdx. 

Further (f+f\ g + g\ h + A') = if (/, g, A), just as when the 
material medium is at rest: for its motion cannot alter the 
value of K to the first order of small quantities. 

This scheme of equations forms a sufficient basis for the 
theory, mthout any direct assumption as to the relation between 
(/', g\ h') and (P', Q', R) : the relation previously given 

(/' 9'^ f^') = ^ (P\ Q' -vc,R + vb) 

is in fact implicitly involved in this scheme. Thus the dis- 
tinction that is necessary in moving media between the electric 



CHAP. IV] WITHOUT POTENTIAL FUNCTIONS 61 

force and the aethereal force is involved in the circuital relations 
as here expressed. 

The first of this system of equations gives, in the general 
problem of dielectric propagation, equations of type 

d 



dt dz dt ' \dt' dt^J 



«« 



whence by substitution from the second we obtain for a homo- 
geneous medium the three equations of type 



^tjy 



that is 



-^''KdP^ de)' 






with the similar equations for (a, yS, 7). These lead to Fresnel's 
expression for the convection-eflFect, as before. 

38. It will be shown later (Ch. x), more generally, in 
connexion with molecular theory, that if any system of electrons 
exist at rest in the aether with ideal rigid connexions between 
them, and its state is compared with that of the same rigidly 
connected system of electrons in motion >vith uniform trans- 
latory velocity v through the aether, then, when the square 
of v/a is neglected, (i) the forces which act on the individual 
electrons are the same in the two cases, (ii) a correspondence 
can be established between aethereal disturbances propagated 
across the system from one group of electrons to another in 
the two cases, so that though electric and magnetic displace- 
ments do not correspond yet relative wave-fronts do, and a 
place where there is no disturbance in the one system corre- 
sponds to a place where there is no disturbance in the other. 
Now all, or almost all, exact electrical and optical measure- 
ments are made by null methods: that is, a moveable piece 
of apparatus is introduced into the system and so becomes 
part of it, and observation is made of its position when a certain 
kind of disturbance is just obliterated. All such experimental 
determinations will therefore be the same, up to the first power 

** This simply means that the rate of change of the integral of magnetic force 
ronnd a small fixed circuit is equal to 4ir times the rate of change of the current 
through its aperture. 



62 SKETCH OF HE8ULTS [SEGT. I 

of u/c, in the fixed and the moving system : there will be no 
possibility, except it may be as regards the second order of u/c, 
of deciding whether the system is at rest or in uniform motion 
through the aether, by means of phenomena which occur wholly 
within the system itself. 

As an illustration, consider the rotation of the plane of 
polarization of light in passing through quartz. On formulating 
a direct analytical theory of the effect, and transforming the 
equations to axes moving with the matter, assuming that the 
value of the rotatory coefficient of the matter is not altered 
by the motion, we should obtain, according to Lorentz s analysis, 
a first-order effect arising fn)m the motion of the Elarth through 
space, which is greater than would escape detection. Yet 
consider the system formed of polarizer, quartz plate, analyzer : 
if it is so arranged as to prevent the incident luminous dis- 
turbance from getting through when the Earth is at rest, it 
should, by the above general result, remain thus arranged, 
correctly up to the first power of u/c, when the motion of the 
Earth intervenes : and thus change of direction of the EIarth*s 
motion should not have any first-order effect on the adjust- 
ment. This is in keeping with Mascart's experimental result, 
of which the validity up to the first order of vjc admits of little 
doubt. According however to Lorentz's anal}rsis there ought 
to be a first-order effect when the optical rotatory coefficient is 
supposed unaltered. If that were so we should, in the light 
of the general principle, have to compensate this effect by 
assuming an alteration in the rotatory coefficient arising from 
the motion. It will be seen (§ 92) that d priori there is no 
formal objection to the existence of a new constituent of the 
rotatory power, arising from this cause, which would be of 
the first order: but this new term would be related to a 
directed quantity, namely the velocity of the motion, and 
therefore it would be of the type of magnetic rotation, and 
thus could not, except accidentally in a particular case, com- 
pensate an effect that is structural, as Lorentz's term is. It 
will appear (Ch. xill.) that the discrepancy is cleared up by 
the existence of error in Lorentz's analysis : and that Mascart's 
result indicates that there is in fact no fii*st-order modification 



CHAP. IV] OF THE MOLECULAR THEORY 63 

at all in rotatory optical quality arising from convection of the 
material medium. 

A very large number of optical phenomena have been 
examined by various experimenters with a view to detecting 
an influence on them of the Earth's velocity of translation. 
The only such influence that has been announced is that 
found by Fizeau on the displacement of the plane of polarization 
of light, produced by transmission through a pile of glass 
plates: according to Fizeau*s own view the experiment was 
uncertain owing to the numerous disturbing causes that had 
to be guarded against ; and this doubt as to the feasibility of 
the observation has been fully shared by Maxwell and most 
other authorities who have considered the matter. 

The only cases in which a first-order effect of the motion 
of the medium is to be anticipated theoretically are those in 
which the optical or other disturbance that is examined comes 
from outside the uniformly moving system which includes the 
observer. The known instances, which are fully covered and 
explained by the first-order theory just mentioned, are the 
Doppler effect of change of optical period arising from the 
relative motion of the source and the observer, and the astro- 
nomical aberration of light. 

39. An interference experiment on the difference of the 
times of propagation round two cyclic paths, originally sug- 
gested by Maxwell, has been carried out by Michelson and 
Morley (§ 30) with the negative result anticipated on all 
theories as far as the first order is concerned. It occurred to 
them that by aid of very high refinement in the experimental 
arrangements the terms of the second order, which can effect 
a discrimination, might be successfully examined: the result 
of the experiments, which have recently been repeated with 
still further refinement and delicacy, has been to make it 
reasonably certain that the terms of the second order also 
vanish, that in fact the time of propagation is independent of 
the Earth's motion not merely to a first approximation but to 
a higher order. The theory as hitherto developed in terms of 
the physical constants of the material media has nothing to say 



64 AN EXPERIMENTAL CLUE [SECT. I 

to this result, because it is not in a position to assign the 
second-order changes that the Earth's motion produces in the 
physical constants of material media and io the instrumental 
arrangements. But the purely negative result is in itself an 
important clue towards an extension of theory to the second 
order, in which we must necessarily deal with the molecular 
stmcture of the medium. 

Hitherto in treating in this molecular manner of the change 
of distribution of a free electric charge owing to the Elarth s 
motion, the electrons of the charge have been supposed to be 
rigidly fixed in the positions they would occupy when the 
conductors are at rest, and the additional forces to which the 
motion would subject them are calculated. It is found that 
these forces vanish up to the first order : so that to that order 
no change in the distribution will result. But in proceeding 
to higher orders we must deal with the problem as one of pure 
aether in which each electron is a singular point It is found, 
on transfoimation to axes of coordinates {x\ y\ z') moving with 
the electrons, that corresponding to each resting configuration 
expressed by functions of x, y, z and i there is a moving one, 
expressed by the same functions of ^x\ y\ z and t', where 
f' = t — vx\c^ and € = 1 + v'/^'* which has the same electrons 
in corresponding positions, and also the wave-fronts of radiation 
traversing it in corresponding positions. The inference is made 
that the change from x' to ^x is a real shrinkage of the material 
system, and that after this has happened the courses of all 
the phenomena above mentioned are identical in the two 
systems up to the second order. This inference rests on the 
hypothesis that an electron is nothing more than a point- 
singularity or pole in the electrodynamic and optical aether, 
and that the atoms of matter are constituted of aggregations 
of such poles. Should it turn out that the atoms have also 
inertia and mutual forces of other kinds than this view involves, 
which however must arise from another entirely different set 
of properties of the aether to which no clue has yet appeared, 
the argument would lose its validity even were this extraneous 
inertia proportional to the intrinsic electric charge. It is 
inferred that Michelson's negative result supports the widely 



CHAP. IV] MAGNETIC INFLUENCE OF MOVING CHARGES 65 

held conclusion that the main part of the actions, chemical 
and other, between molecules and between the constituent 
parts of molecules, is of electrodynamic type : that if gravit- 
ation and possibly some actions of cohesion stand outside 
that type, their importance, considered as regards molecular 
relations, is slight compared with that of the electric actions. 

Can the convection of electrically charged bodies along with the 

Earth affect a magnetometer ? 

40. Under no circumstances can the motion through space, 
with uniform velocity of translation, in which a system of 
charged conductors participates along with the Earth, produce 
any magnetic force in a region shielded by a conducting screen 
from outside electrostatic influence. For consider the influence 
of a single point-charge q of the system, which is moving with 
uniform velocity v parallel to the axis of x : the magnetic force 
due to it at a point whose distance r makes an angle 6 with v 
is, to the first order, gi/r^'sin 6 tending around the direction of 
motion of the charge. Thus, taking the point as origin, it is 
made up of components qi/r^z parallel to the axis of y and 
— qtnr'h/ parallel to the axis of z ; while for any system of such 
charges the effect is obtained by summation. Now at a point 
inside a conductor in a steady state, situated in a magnetic field 
(oo, bo, Co), the total electric force, which is thus equal to 

must vanish. Hence the magnetic force due to translation of 
the charged bodies with uniform velocity vanishes to the first 
order of v/c, compared with that of the field, throughout any 
space shielded off from the charges by a conducting body ; the 
reason being that a countervailing charge is induced on the 
surface of this conducting screen. 

This accounts for the negative result of Rontgen's ex- 
periments, in which he tested whether the convection of a 
charged body along with the Earth affected the orientation of 
a compass needle in its neighbourhood. The charged body here 
induces a countervailing electric charge on the electric screen 
protecting the compass needle, or on the surface of the needle 

L. 5 



66 COUNTERVAILING CHARGE [SECT. I 

itself, such that whatever be the direction of the Elarth's velocity 
through the aether, the actions of these two charges on the 
magnetic elements which make up the body of the needle 
exactly neutralize each other. At first sight it might appear 
that when the countervailing charge is on the surface of the 
needle itself, it could exert no resultant influence, because the 
action of the needle on this charge would be equal and opposite 
to that of the charge on the needle. But it will appear (§ 41) 
that the electric force arising from the convection of the mag- 
netic needle is derived from a potential — vF, and therefore is 
also countervailed by an electric distribution in the needle and 
on its surface (cf. § 67) which prevents it from affecting the 
superficial charge, and is itself not affected because there is no 
electric force. The effect of the motion of a permanent magnet 
on its own constitution must be of the second order of small 
quantities and so will not enter here, because that effect is not 
altered by a reversal of the velocity. 

A more delicate question, though not a practical one, arises 
if we imagine the permanent magnet to be made of dielectric 
material, and not screened off electrostatically from the moving 
charges. In this case, as before, the magnetic force at any point 
due to the convection of the electric charge with uniform 
velocity v parallel to the axis of x is (T^ (0, — vR, uQ)*; where 
(P, Q, R) is the electric force due to the charges, which is not now 
compensated by the shielding of an induced superficial charge. 
Thus there would appear to be in this case a real magnetic 
force throughout the magnet arising from the convection of the 
charges ; so that, if there could be such a dielectric pennanent 
magnet (and if the direct electrostatic action could be experi- 
mentally allowed for), a convection effect of the kind here con- 
sidered might be expected. 

41. In the same way a converse influence of the uniform 
translatory motion of the magnets, through the aether along 
with the Earth, on the electric force might at first sight be 

* More generally a system of electrons or charged bodies whose electric field 
is (P, Q, R) will, when moving with steady uniform velocity (p, 9, r), prodoce 
a magnetic field c-« {qR - rQ, rP -pR, pQ - qP). 



CHAP. IV] ELECTRIC EFFECT OF MOVING MAGNETS 67 

anticipated. Generally the kinetic part of the electric force 
(i.e. of the force which acts on the electrons of material bodies) 
is by § 59 (7^ — ffz — i', ai — yx— 6, fix — ay— H); thus when 
as before (x, y, z) = (u, 0, 0) and the system is in a steady state 
of translation, so that F + vdF/dx is nail, there is a direct change 
in the electric force of amount (vdF/dx, vdFjdy, udFjdz) arising 
from the motion, assuming as is natural that the value of 
{F, G, H) at any point is not sensibly affected thereby. This 
additional term in the electric force is derived from a potential 
and so will not disturb electric currents. It will not even tend 
to alter the electric distributions on conductors in the neighbour- 
hood : for it can be represented as arising from an ideal electric 
distribution within the magnets and on their surfaces (§ 67), so 
that if these magnets are conducting bodies, what would happen 
would be that actual electric distributions would be induced 
throughout their volumes and over their surfaces which would 
neutralize this part of the electric force for their interiors and 
at the same time shield them off from the surrounding space : 
thus here again no effect would arise*. 

* The existence of an effect, of this kind also, is saggested by Wien, Wied, 
Awn., July 1S9S. 



5—2 



SECTION II 
CHAPTER V 

ON METHOD IN GENERAL PHYSICAL THEORY 

On the Scientific Use of Hypotheses 

42. The cultivation of a priori physical theories of purely 
abstract type is not merely an affair of philosophical speculation. 
Their practical necessity for scientific progress, as also the 
amount of uncertainty that is inherent in them, may con- 
veniently be illustrated by a review of some chapters of the 
scientific history of our present subject. 

The master idea of Roemer that the delay in the observed 
eclipses of Jupiter's satellites, when the planet is in the part of 
its orbit furthest removed from the Earth, is due to the inten^al 
of time required by light to transmit the event across the inter- 
vening space to the terrestrial observer, was at the time when 
it was enunciated an effort of pure scientific imagination, for 
which the evidence lay solely in the intellectual simplicity of 
the explanation which it afforded**. This evidence was many 
years afterwards very mat^^rially strengthened by Bradley's 
cardinal discovery of the astronomical aberration of light : for 



•• 



The idea that light may travel with finite velocity aeems to have origin- 
ated, 80 far as regards modem physios, with Cralileo, who had an intention of 
submitting the subject to experiment. According to Descartes' ideas, light was 
a sort of impulsive pressure which spread out instantaneously throughout space, 
in favour of which view he claimed that if the velocity were finite, eclipses would 
be seen at an inter>'al after their real times of occurrence ; this is precisely the 
principle that guided Roemer to his estimate of the velocity of light. 



CHAP. V] CORPUSCULAR OPTICAL THEORY 69 

it was recognized that if light consists of corpuscles moving 
towards the observer, with a definite speed for each medium, 
then the apparent direction from which they come must be 
affected by motion of the observer exactly as Bradley's law 
requires. The corroboration thus obtained for the hypothesis 
of the finite velocity of light was powerful and legitimate, and 
the ideas involved in that hypothesis had much to do with the 
evolution of Bradley's great discovery, notwithstanding that the 
physical scheme involved in his use of it, that namely of the 
corpuscular theory of light, was not merely imperfect but 
positively erroneous. Had there been independent means at 
that time of arriving at a tolerable estimate of the Sun's 
distance, this train of physical deduction would have had some- 
thing very substantial to confirm the net of pure hypotheses on 
which it was supported : for it would then have been possible 
to verify the identity of two values of the velocity of light 
derived from entirely independent sources. In the cognate 
case of the electrodynamic theory of radiation, a numerical 
corroboration of this kind was, for a considerable series of years, 
the only experimental evidence that was forthcoming for a 
scheme which originated with Maxwell as a train of purely 
hypothetical deduction, and was on that ground refused 
acceptance by weighty authorities. Our present object, how- 
ever, is to notice that as matters stood at the beginning of the 
present century, there was in existence a compact and reasoned 
theory of the finite propagation of light, constructed wholly on 
the corpuscular view: that this theory, though actually on 
wrong lines and not merely incomplete, was yet a useful 
hypothesis in its day, in that it gave a constitution to radiation 
that in certain ways was so analogous to its actual constitution 
that it served as a basis for great practical advances in astro- 
nomical and optical science. We have thus an illustration of 
the £BLCt that a hypothetical scheme may serve as a useful 
instrument for the progress of Natural Philosophy, notwith- 
standing that more minute scrutiny may subsequently prove 
it to be not merely imperfect but quite on a wrong track. 
There are in fact two ways in which such a hypothesis may 
work: it may lead readily to deductions which are really 



70 ANALOGICAL ASPECT OF HYPOTHESES [SECT. 11 

logically involved in the facts that suggested the hjrpothesis, 
and which will therefore be verified by observation and lead on 
to deeper knowledge: but on the other hand it may lead to 
results which intrinsically depend on the hypothetical inter- 
pretation as well as the facts themselves, and by these it will 
be amended or rejected. The corpuscular theory represented 
existing knowledge as regards the propagation of light with 
sufficient completeness in its day, to be able to indicate the 
direction of attack for the development of new knowledge and 
new relations : in so far it had all the utility of a valid scientific 
hypothesis : but as the science became enlarged the features in 
which it was unavailing rose into the more prominent place, so 
much that it became degraded to the position of an analog}' 
reaching only over a portion of the field of phenomena some 
time before the crucial experimental determinations of the 
velocity of light in material media decisively robbed it of all 
higher claim, by proving that in one department of the 
phenomena its analogy was in error. 

It is not superfluous to consider sometimes what there is 
to prevent many of the scientific hypotheses of physics, 
chemistry, and other branches of Natural Philosophy, which 
are at present effective and successful, from being similarly 
of a merely provisional and analogical character. The uni- 
formities which it is customary to call laws of nature are often 
just as much laws of mind : they form an expression of the 
implications between mind and matter, by means of which 
material phenomena are mentally grasped. The mere effort 
of the mind after a wider formulation of these implications will 
not be wholly fortuitous and useless for progress even when 
it leads temporarily towards error, for that effort is itself an 
orderly development taking place in the cosmos of interacting 
mind and matter, of which successive stages must have wider 
and deeper ramifications than appear on the surface. The 
formal analogies between the mathematical theories of different 
branches of physics perhaps originate as much in the nature 
of the necessary processes of thought as in the nature of the 
external things : for * the mind sees in all things that which 
it brings with it the faculty of seeing.* 



CHAP. V] HISTORY OF ELECTRODTNAMIC THEORY 71 

43. A glance at the order of historical development of 
electrical theory will serve for further illustration. Here the 
point of view under which an exact theory was developed, 
throughout the greater part of the present century, was that 
of the various portions of a permanent entity called electricity 
exerting mutual forces at a distance across empty space, after 
the analogy of the law of gravitation. This scheme was ab- 
solutely complete for all the usual electrostatic applications. 
In the domain of electrodjmamics and magnetism it explained 
and coordinated, in the hands of Ampfere, Neumann, and Weber, 
a vast range of otherwise extremely complicated phenomena : 
von Helmholtz and Lord Kelvin showed how it might have 
anticipated Faraday's cardinal discovery of the electromag- 
netic induction of electric currents : Kirchhoff found by 
calculation that according to it waves of very high period 
would be propagated along a metallic wire with a velocity 
which according to Weber's fundamental electric determinations 
comes out to be about the same as the velocity of light. The 
scheme also, in Weber's hands, gave a definite and rational 
account of the mechanical attraction between portions of matter 
carrying electric cuiTents, and between portions of magnetized 
matter. As elaborated by Weber it was in fact a complete 
formulation of the 'whole domain of the experimental electric 
science of the time : the circumstance that it was insufficient 
for the case of bodies moving with velocities at all approxim- 
ating to that of light, or for vibrations with frequency so 
high as to approach that of light, was unknown because the 
production of such experimental conditions had not then been 
attempted, while the continuity between electrodynamic and 
optical phenomena had only been vaguely guessed at*. So 
far as existing knowledge went, the only kind of objection to 
which the Weberian electrodynamics was exposed was a critical 
attack on its foundations. This was carried out with strong 
insistence by von Helmholtz : but his arguments perhaps only 
brought into clear relief the circumstance that when velocities 

* Cf. an interesting early appreciatiou by MaxweU of Weber^s theory, in his 
memoir On Faraday's Lines of Force, Camb. Phil. Trang. 1866 ; Collected Papen^ 

I. p. aoe. 



72 SCOPE OF THE WEBERIAN METHOD [SECf. II 

or vibration-frequencies comparable with those of radiation 
were contemplated, the Weberian scheme was incomplete, and 
could not in such extreme cases stand, in the light of general 
dynamical criticism, without fundamental modification. 

There was no experimental knowledge in existence in electro- 
dynamics, previous to Hertz's quite recent classical researches, 
that could not fairly be collated under the Weberian doctrine : 
and the preference expressed by Gauss for the notion of an 
action propagated in time from one moving electric particle 
to another, instead of a law of instantaneous attraction across 
space, must be based rather upon his ** subjective conviction " 
as regards the probable nature and fitness of things, and the 
striving after a view that would lend itself to orderly develop- 
ment into regions beyond the limit of actual experience, than 
upon any inadequacy of the Weberian type of formula to 
include and explain all that was then actually known of electro- 
dynamic actions. " In a very interesting letter from Gauss to 
W. Weber (March 1845) he refers to the electrodynamic specu- 
lations with which he had been occupied long before, and which 
he would have published if he could then have established 
that which he considered the real keystone of electrodynamics, 
namely the deduction of the force acting between electric 
particles in motion from the consideration of an action between 
them, not instantaneous, but propagated in time, in a similar 
manner to that of light. He had not succeeded in making this 
deduction when he gave up his electrodynamic researches, and 
he had a subjective conviction that it would be necessary in 
the first place to form a consistent representation of the 
manner in which the propagation takes place" (Maxwell, 
'Treatise,' §861)*. 

* Of. Appendix D. Two other attempts at theories of propagation, of a 
different kind, are noticed hy Maxwell, • Treatise/ § S62. 

That of Biemann depends on an assumed propagation of an electric potential 
V according to the formula 

a-«rf«F/<fe«=Var+4Tp, 

p being electric density. This is really the equation of propagation of pressure 
in compressible fluid, in which there is a distribution of sources of strengths 
amounting to p (1 - a~^ dVldt) per unit volume, or simply of strength p when the 
fluid is nearly incompressible. Thoagh this theory of ideal fluid motion and 



CHAP. V] MEETING-POINT WITH OPTICAL THEORY 73 

44. The consisteDt representation thus aimed at, of the 
mode in which electrodynamic action is propagated across 
free space, — the absence of which formed a barrier to Gauss' 
progress, — is simply in set terms a dynamical, or, if the term 
is preferred, an analjrtical theory of the activity of the lumin- 
iferous medium. The solution of that problem was developing 
along different lines of its own, at the same time as these 
speculations on laws of electrodynamic action across space were 
being initiated : a complete analytical scheme of the vibratory 
activity of the aether, constructed on the basis of a masterly 
discussion of the optical facts, was actually obtained by 
MacCullagh in 1839, though he fully admitted that it was 
not such a solution as had anything in common with analogies 
of the dynamical propagation of waves across material sub- 
stances. But the times were not then ripe for a new departure 
transcending in this way all known material analogy, perhaps 
owing to the circumstance that the more familiar possibilities 
could hardly have been considered to be exhausted: and it 
seems to have been only in the vivid and unconventional in- 
tellect of Macquom Rankine* that the potentialities of 
MacCullagh's doctrine obtained clear recognition and develop- 
ment. The solution thus given by MacCullagh, of the problem 
of aethereal constitution, was spelled out through examination 
of the optical interaction between free aether and aether modi- 
fied by the presence of matter, isotropic or crystalline : precisely 
the same solution was independently arrived at by Clerk 
Maxwell twenty years later through an examination, of quite 
analogous nature., of the accumulated knowledge of electrical 
interactions across the aether as modified by the presence of 
different kinds of matter. Most students would probably be 
struck by the similarity between the analytical methods and 

yibration, with mobile sources and sinks, would lead to interesting hydro- 
dynamic analysis, it cannot afford a sufficiently wide basis on which to construct 
the much more complex electric theory. 

The other attempt, made by Betti {Nuovo Cimento 1S6S), assumes that an 
electric current is made up of polarized elements like elementary twists in a 
solid elastic medium. The extent to which such an analogy carries in electro 
dynamics has been specified, Phil. Tram, 1897 A, p. 212. 

* MiicellaneouM Scientijic Papers^ pp. 63, 160. 



74 WIDE RANGE INIMICAL TO FINALITY [SECT. II 

mental endowments of these two great analysts : but needless 
to say Maxwell's speculation is of far wider and more universal 
scope than MacCullagh's purely optical theory. His efforts 
to fit the range of physical phenomena into an entirely new 
analytical frame, involving brilliant strokes of explanation 
diversified by abrupt transitions and unbridged lacunae, his 
essays at utilizing the analytical machinery of the older method 
of attractions towards the development of a new descriptive 
scheme that was to wholly supersede it, impart all the interest 
of nascent discovery to his 'Treatise.' It would be very wide 
of the mark to apply to any portion of this great constructive 
effort his own Miltonic characterization of the thermodynamic 
investigations in which Rankine "through the palpable obscure 
finds out his uncouth way"; yet the conception of a struggle 
with confusion — successful but unfinished — not unfitly expresses 
the feeling that gains strength on each successive survey of 
the 'Treatise/ and which mainly arises ftx)m the necessary 
initial imperfections of a reconstruction of ideas in a vast 
domain in which the natural order and logical precision in 
exposition have not had time to be elaborated*. In one of 
Maxwell's appreciations he contrasts the finished electro- 
djmamie exposition of Ampere's 'Essai/ in which all traces 
of the natural growth of the argument are obliterated in the 
interests of a severe logical sequence, with the 'Electrical 
Researches' of his own master Faraday which constitute a 
continuous history of his mental occupation with the subject, 
of his governing ideas, his successes and failures as they arose. 
He was himself to furnish what will perhaps long remain the 
classical example of the history of an effort of scientific thought 
of another kind, in which the aim is not so much to enlarge 
the field of experimental knowledge by the guidance of a few 
novel master ideas, as to seize upon a domain of knowledge 
already dimly and obscurely interlaced, and arrange it as parts 
of a single definite doctrine. 



* Cf. for example the diffioolties discusBed by Hertz, in the introdaotion to 
his Collected Electric Papers, as to what Maxwell reaUy intended to be meant 
by his fondamental conception of electric displacement. 



CHAP. V] VECTOR TERMINOLOGY 75 

45. On Vector Terminology. — The most effective way of 
avoiding the abuses of merely analogical hypothesis, while at 
the same time retaining the advantages of vividness of descrip- 
tion that belong to it, lies in the development of scientific 
language. If we can avail ourselves of an adjective that will 
naturally and precisely connote, and suggest by itself, the 
similarity of relations that is the subject of an analogy, we 
shall have effectually annexed its essence while rejecting the 
superfluous part. The subjects of discussion in mathematical 
physics may be described in the main as vector quantities in 
space ; and the invention, mainly by Hamilton, by Lord Kelvin 
and his brother James Thomson, and by Maxwell, of an approp- 
riate language to express the properties of the different classes 
of vectors, has had much to do with progress in the principles 
of this science as distinct from computations relating to special 
problems. It may further conduce to brevity and perspicuity 
if we keep in view the desirability of rendering the existing 
terminology still more precise in the department of this field 
with which we are here concerned. 

A vector {u, v, w) will be called a stream vector (the solenoidal 
vector of Maxwell) throughout any region in which it satisfies 
the condition of continuity of flow dujdx -h dvjdy -h dwjdz = 0. 
There may be singular points in the region at which this con- 
dition breaks down through {u, v, w) there becoming infinite : 
these are the sources and sinks of the flow. If the vector is not 
a stream, all points in the region will be sources or sinks, so 
that we can still represent it by a flux of incompressible fluid 
which soaks out of the region at each point of it, the amount 
that disappears per unit time in an element of volume St being 
— {dujdx -h dvjdy -h dwjdz) St ; the quantity multiplying St is 
called, after Maxwell, the concentration of the vector into the 
point considered ; when the vector is a stream its concentration 
is null. When (w, v, w) represents flow of heat, its concentration 
at any point represents the accumulation of heat per unit time 
per unit volume at the place, and the type of the vector is 
wholly unrestricted : thus the flow of heat is according to our 
definition a stream only when there is no accumulation of heat, 
that is when the temperature is steady. The region of a 



76 STREAMS AND GRADIENTS [SECT. II 

stream can be divided up into tubes of flow, each of which has 
the properties of an independent pipe or channel devoid of 
leakage. In certain cases — in fact iti all the ordinaiy cases in 
which the originating disturbance is local and does not involve 
the creation of new sources — these channels are ringshaped and 
the flow in them is thus a circulation round the channels : the 
flow may then be called a cyclic stream. 

A vector of the type — (d/dx, d/dy, djdz) x it is proposed to 
call a gradient vector (the simple lamellar of Maxwell), as it is 
the gradient or slope of the scalar quantity x- ^^ this scalar is 
multiple-valued, its lines of slope will be ring-shaped curves 
returning into themselves ; and the vector may then be called a 
cyclic gradient. The total gradient from one point to another 
is estimated as a line integral along a path connecting them : 
its value round a complete circuit back to the point of starting 
is called, after Lord Kelvin, the circulation in that circuit and 
is null, or else equal to a cyclic constant of the scalar function x 
of which the vector is the gradient. A circuit in which there is 
circulation encloses of necessity, is linked with, a core of some 
kind around which the circulation is established ; and this core 
must itself be either of infinite length or ringshaped. 

The term circuital, as introduced by Lord Kelvin, is 
synonymous with stream, thus including cases in which cir- 
culation of the stream is not contemplated; it is therefore 
entirely distinct from cyclic. 

Aethereal Constitution of Matter 

46. The difficulty of imagining a definite uniform limit of 
divisibility of matter will always be a philosophical obstacle to 
an atomic theory, so long as atoms are regarded as discrete 
particles moving in empty space. But as soon as we take the 
next step in physical development, that of ceasing to regard 
space as mere empty geometrical continuity, the atomic con- 
stitution of matter (each ultimate atom consisting of parts 
which are incapable of separate existence, as Lucretius held) is 
mised to a natural and necessary consequence of the new 
standpoint. We may even reverse the argument, and derive 



CHAP. V] A PLENUM NECESSARY TO AN ATOMIC THEORY 77 

from the ascertained atomic constitution of matter a philo- 
sophical necessity for the assumption of a plenum, in which the 
ultimate atoms exist as the nuclei which determine its strains 
and motions**. 

This idea of a plenum with uniform properties throughout 
all extension, but permeated by intrinsic singular points, each 
of which determines and, so to speak, locks up permanently a 
surrounding steady state of strain or other disturbance, forms 
the ultimate basis of all developments relating to the con- 
stitution of aether and matter such as are here attempted. 

To make a beginning in the direct or synthetical manner, it 
is necessary to assign a working scheme of properties to the 
plenum, One way of starting off is to rely on optical theory. 
The plenum must be the medium of transmission of i*adiation, 
with its known finite velocity. It must therefore be specified, 
in dynamical terms, as possessing, when disturbed, energy of 
strain and energy of inertia ; for it is only by the interaction of 
these that propagation in time can be conceived under a 
dynamical scheme, which takes account of nothing except 
substance and motion. The precise formal nature of these 
endowments of the plenum was first unravelled by MacCullagh 
in his masterly analysis of the optical phenomena of crystals. 
But he realized very clearly that nothing of the nature of such 
a type of strain as he was led to postulate, can be thought of as 
associated with ordinary matter; so he retained his specifi- 
cation of the dynamical constitution of the plenum as a purely 
analytical scheme, that is, as a consistent scheme of properties 
of this tt/fra-material medium which he could not illusti-ate from 
the behaviour of elastic matter. Shortly afterwards Rankine, 
never timid in his speculations, expounded MacCuUagh's 
analytical scheme soundly and clearly, in full contrast with the 
elastic properties of matter, as representing a uniform medium 
or plenum endowed with ordinary inertia but with elasticity of 
purely rotational type. This conception has recently been 
revived by Lord Kelvin, who illuminated the whole matter by 

** It is perhaps not saperfluous to point out the argument here involved 
against any tendency we might have to assign to the aether itself an atomic 
stmctnre. 



78 THE PLENUM AN ULTIIIATE BASIS OF PHYSICS [SECT. II 

showing how by aid of g3rro8tatic systems the abstract con- 
ception of a rotationally elastic medium could be illustrated 
and closely copied in a material model*. 

It is curious that, although the idea of an intimate connexion 
between the propagation of electric and of optical effects has 
always been present to speculative physics, yet no attempt was 
made to ascertain whether MacCuUagh's plenum could in 
addition to its vibratory functions take up such a state of 
permanent strain as would represent the electrostatic actions 
between charged conductors, or such state of motion as would 
represent the electrodynamic action between currents. The 
first hint on this side of the matter was FitzGerald's passing 
remark in 1880 f that MacCullagh's optical equations are 
identical with those of the electrodynamic theory of optics 
developed by Maxwell. 

47. The basis of the present scientific procedure thus rests 
on the view, derivable as a consequence of general philosophical 
ideas, that the master-key to a complete unravelling of the 
general dynamical and physical relations of matter lies in the 
fact that it is constituted as a discrete molecular aggregate 
existing in the aether. At the same time all that is known (or 
perhaps need be known) of the aether itself may be formulated 
as a scheme of differential equations defining the properties of 
a continuum in space, which it would be gratuitous to further 
explain by any complication of structure ; though we can with 
great advantage employ our stock of ordinary dynamical concepts 
in describing the succession of different states thereby defined. 

On account of the very high velocity c of transmission and 
equilibration of elastic disturbances in the aether, it follows 
that (on the assumption of a stagnant aether) the motion of 
material systems across it produces no sensible deviation fix)m 
the mere succession of equilibrium states of that medium which 
correspond to the separate configurations of the matter as they 
arise, so long as the velocity of the matter is not comparable to 
that of radiation. It is for this reason that simple convection 

* Gf. Appendix E. 

t ' On the Electronmgnetio Theory of Light,* Phil. Tratu. 1S80. 



CHAP. V] WIDE RANGE OF AN EQUILIBRIUM THEORY 79 

of the electric fields belonging to material bodies furnishes so 
good a first approximation to the laws of the electrodynamics of 
bodies in motion: although in some cases, such as unipolar 
induction due to the spinning of a magnet round an axis of 
symmetry, care must be taken to realize in forming a physical 
picture of the phenomenon that the effective moving elements 
are the sepai*ate independent electrons, not material bodies as a 
whole*. 

In the case of a homogeneous body moving with uniform 
velocity v, there will occur changes in the velocity of radiation 
across it of the order of the first power of u/c. because this 
velocity is, like v, a directed phenomenon. But the changes of 
the scalar properties and dimensions of the body itself are of the 
order of the square of v/c: for example, it is found as a matter 
of observation, that the relative free periods corresponding to 
the spectral lines of gases are not altered to the first order by 
translatory motion of the vibrating molecules along with the 
Earth and the Solar System. 

Mutual aid of electrical and general molecular theory 

48. As thus formulated in terms of the aethereal constitu- 
tion of the individual atoms, the problem of the aethereal 
relations of material media is one of molecular dynamics ; and 
it shares in all the difficult and refined considerations of 
averaging which belong to that branch of physics. But it may 
be held that its discussion contributes more to the principles of 
general molecular dynamics than it receives from them. The 
laws of electrical phenomena have been primarily ascertained 
in their larger features by a process of mixed induction and 
deduction, which proceeded, for more than three-quarters of a 
century, on wholly different lines from those laid down here. 
These laws, thus independently and in part empiiically ascer- 
tained, must be derivable fi:om the molecular standpoint ; and 
their demonstration in that manner confirms and vividly illus- 
trates the principles by which a transition is made from the 
dynamics of systems of discrete molecules to the d)mamics of 
their aggregates treated as continuous matter. Practically the 

♦ Of. Phil, Trans. 1896 A, pp. 727—31. 



80 PRECISION OF THE MOLECULAR PROBLEM [SECT. II 

only field (outside the theory of gases) on which these under- 
lying principles connecting molecular theory with general 
mechanics have hitherto had scope, is the theory of capillarity ; 
and this constitutes an application that has been held not to 
be free from difficulty. Now in the problem of a cloud of 
mutually influencing electrons we are on a clearer basis of 
physical reality than in a discussion of particles acting on each 
other with hjrpothetical forces at a distance obejdng undeter- 
mined laws. The constitution of an electron is quite definite ; 
and its reaction on its neighbours is quite definite, for the 
reason that its energy is located in a definite manner in the 
surrounding aether. Precision reigns eyer3rwhere in the data ; 
and the transition from the separate electrons to the aggregates 
forming the material medium, treated as continuous as it is 
presented to the perceptions of sense, must therefore be a 
definite logical process capable of explicit and precise formu- 
lation. 

The theory of the dynamical interaction between the aether 
and the matter which subsists in it is on a different plane from 
a mere formal adaptation of the equations which represent 
the constitution and activity of the free aether to the case 
where its properties are modified by the presence of matter. 
Such an empirical adaptation has worked well for the case in 
which the matter is at rest*: but for the case in which it is 
moving with velocity yielding appreciable influence on the 
phenomena, that is with velocity not wholly insensible com- 
pared with the speed of radiation, the adaptation in this way 
has involved the merest guesswork. 

The ultimate inadequacy of a method of treating material 
media, based on merely empirical or speculative additions to 
the ascertained equations of free aether, had indeed been 
clearly recognized by von Helmholtz for the last decade of his 



* "...And if we attempt to extend our theory [of radiation] to the case of 
dense media, we become involved not only in all the ordinary diffioolties of 
molecalar theories, bat in the deeper mystery of the relation of the molecules 
to the electromagnetic medium. To evade these difficulties we shaU assume 
that in certain media the specific capacity of electrostatic induction is different 
in different directions,..." Maxwell, * Treatise,' ii § 794. 



CHAP. V] HELMHOLTZ'S ACTION-THEORY 81 

life. It would appear that one main object of the close scrutiny 
of the analytical foundations of dynamics, particularly of the 
single principle of Action which may be made to cover their 
whole extent, with which he occupied himself during that 
period, was with a view to arrive at a definite interlaced de- 
duction of the complex of electrodynamic relations from a 
single analytical function which would express the state of the 
medium at each instant. 



CHAPTER VI 

DYNAMICAL THEORY OF ELECTRICAL ACTIONS 

Least Action, fundamental in General Dynamics 

49. The idea of deducing all phenomenal changes from a 
principle of least expenditure of effort or action dates for 
modem times, as is well known, from the speculations of Mau- 
pertuis. The main illustration with which he fortified his 
view was Format's principle of least time for ray propagation 
in optics. This optical law follows as a direct corollary from 
Huygens' doctrine that radiation is propagated by wave- 
motions. In Maupertuis' hands, however, it reverted to the 
type of a dogma of least action in the dynamical sense as 
originally enunciated vaguely by Descartes, which Fermat's 
statement of the principle as one of least time was intended 
to supersede*; under that aspect it was dynamically the equally 
immediate corollary of the corpuscular theory of optical rays 
which was finally adopted by Newton. 

The general idea of Maupeirtuis at once attracted the 
attention of mathematicians; and the problem of the exact 
specification of the Action, so as to fulfil the minimum relation, 
was solved by Euler for the case of orbits of particles. Shortly 
afberwards the solution was re-stated with greater precision, 
and generalized to all material systems, by Lagrange (Mem. 
Taurin., 1760) in one of his earliest and most brilliant memoirs, 
which constructed the algorithm of the Calculus of Variations, 
and at the same time also laid the foundation of the funda- 
mental physical science of Analytical Dynamics. The subse- 

* Cf. Appendix D. 



CHAP. VI] PRINCIPLE OF LEAST ACTION 83 

quent extensions by Hamilton of the Lagrangian analytical 
procedure involve, so far as interpretation has hitherto been 
enabled to go, rather fundamental developments in the mathe- 
matical methods than new physical ideas, — except in the 
weighty result that the mere expression of all the quantities 
of the system as differential coefficients of a single character- 
istic function establishes relations of complete reciprocity 
between them, and also between the various stages, however 
&i* apart in time, of the system's progress. 

It is now a well-tried resource to utilize the principle that 
every dynamical problem can be enunciated, in a single 
formula, as a variation problem, in order to help in the re- 
duction to dynamics of physical theories in which the intimate 
dynamical machinery is more or less hidden from direct in- 
spection. If the laws of any such department of physics can 
be formulated in a minimum or variational theorem, that 
subject is thereby virtually reduced to the dynamical type : 
and there remain only such interpretations, explanations, and 
developments, as will correlate the integral that is the subject 
of variation with the corresponding integrals relating to known 
dynamical systems. These developments will usually take 
the form of the tracing out of analogies between the physical 
system under consideration and dynamical systems which can 
be directly constructed to have Lagrangian functions of the 
same kind : they do not add anything logically to the com- 
pleteness and sufficiency of the analytical specification of the 
system, but by being more intuitively grasped by the mind 
and of more familiar type, they often lead to further refine- 
ments and developments which carry on our theoretical views 
into still higher and more complete stages. 

Derivation of the Eqiuitions of the Electric Field from the 

Principle of Least Action 

50. It has been seen (§ 48) that the only effective method 
of working out the dynamics of molecular systems is to abolish 
the idea of force between the molecules, about which we can 
directly know nothing, and to formulate the problem as that 
of the determination of the natural sequence of changes of 

6—2 



84 ACTION FORMULA FOR FREE AETHER [SECT. II 

configuration in the system. If the individual molecules are 
to be permanent, the system, when treated from the molecular 
standpoint, must be conservative; so that the Principle of 
Least Action supplies a foundation certainly wide enough, if 
only it is not beyond our powers of development. 

We require first to construct a dynamical scheme for the 
free aether when no material molecules are present. It is 
of course an elastic medium : let us assume that it is practically 
at rest, and let the vector (f, rj, (f) represent the displacement, 
elastic and other, of its substance at the point (x, y, z) which 
arises from the strain existing in it. We assume (to be here- 
after verified by the results of the analysis) for its kinetic 
energy T and its potential energy W the expressions 

y = i^/(l" + *' + b^T 

F=i5J(/» + (/« + A»)(iT 

in which St denotes an element of volume, A and £ are con- 
stants, the former a constant of inertia, the latter a modulus 
of elasticity, and in which (/, ^, A) is a vector defined as 
regards its mode of change** by the relation 

^-''^'"^"iirKdy dz' dz di' dx dy)""^^^ 

where the 47r is inserted in order to confonn to the ordinary 
electrical usage. 

This definition makes 

dx^dy^dz"^* 

so that (/, ffy h) is a stream vector. 

To obtain the dynamical equations of this medium, we have 
to develope the variational equation 

s[(r-F)de = o, 

subject to the time of motion being unvaried. 

"** This allows for the permanent existence, independently of (^, ^, /-), of the 
intrinsic aethereal displacement surrounding each electron. Of. Appendix £. 



CHAP. VI] DYNAMICAL EQUATIONS OF FREE AETHER 85 

Now 



S JTdt = AJdt fosf + v^ + t^t) dr 






- AJdt |(f Sf + fl&; + ^SC) dr. 
Also 

»'^-i/{/(f-S)^Kt'-f)-*(§-f)}'" 

= ^ fling -mh)B^ + (Ih - nf) Bv + (mf- Ig) S?} dS 

where (Z, m, n) is the direction vector of the element of boundary 
surface hS. 

In these reductions by integration by parts the aim has 
been as usual to express dependent variations such as S^, dB^/dy, 
in terms of the independent ones Sf, Srj, Sf. This requires the 
introduction of surface integrals : if the region under considera- 
tion is infinite space, and the exciting causes of the disturbance 
are all at finite distance from the origin, these surface integrals 
over an infinitely remote boundary cannot in the nature of 
things be of influence on the state of the system at a finite 
distance, and in fact it may be verified that they give a null 
result : in other cases they must of course be retained. 

On substitution in the equation of Action of these ex- 
pressions for the variations, the coefficients of Sf , &;, Sf must 
separately vanish both in the volume integral and in the 
surface integral, since S^, S17, B^ are perfectly independent and 
arbitrary both at each element of volume St and at each 
element of surface BS, This gives, from the volume integral, 
the equations of vibration or wave-propagation 

4f7r \dy dz dz dx dx dyl \*» /' »/ v / 



86 ELECTRONS TREATED AS SIMPLE POLES [SECT. II 

The systems of equations (I) and (II), thus arrived at, 
become identical in form with Maxwell's circuital equations 
which express the electrostatic and electrodyuamic working of 
free aether, if (f , ^, J) represents the magnetic induction and 
(/» fl^i^) *^^ aethereal displacement; the velocity of propagation is 
(47r)-^ (^M)*, so that BjA = 167r»c« where c is the velocity of 
radiation. They are also identical with MacCullagh's optical 
equations, the investigation here given being in fact due to him. 

51. Now let us extend the problem to aether contiiining a 
system of electrons or discrete electric charges. Each of these 
point-charges determines a field of electric force around it: 
electric force must involve aether-strain of some kind, as has 
already been explained: thus an electric point-charge is a 
nucleus of intrinsic strain in the aether. It is not at present 
necessary to determine what kind of permanent configuration 
of strain in the aether this can be, if only we are willing to 
admit that it can move or slip freely about through that 
medium much in the way that a knot slips along a rope : we 
thus in fact treat an electron or point-charge of strength e as a 
freely mobile singular point in the specification of the aethereal 
strain (/, g, h\ such that very near to it (/, g, h) assumes the 

form — -J— ( -T- , J- , -r- 1 - • We can avoid the absolutely in- 
47r\cuc ay dzjr •^ 

finite values, at the origin of the distance r, by treating the 

nucleus of the permanent strain-form not as a point but as a 

very minute region*: this analytical artifice will keep all the 

elements of the integrals of our analysis finite, while it will not 

affect any physical application which considers the electron 

simply as a local charge of electricity of definite amount. 

Now provided there is nothing involved in the electron 

except a strain-form, no inertia or energy foreign to the aether 

residing in its nucleus such as would prevent free unresisted 

mobility, as it is perhaps difficult to see how there could be, the 

equations (I) and (II) still determine the state of the field of 

aether, at any instant, from its state, supposed completely 

known, at the previous instant : and this determination includes 

* This substitution affects only the intrinsic molecular energy; of. Phil 
Trans. 1S94 A, pp. 812—8. 



86 ELECTRONS TREATED AS SIMPLE POLES [SECT. II 

The systems of equations (I) and (II), thus arrived at, 
become identical in form with Maxwell's circuital equations 
which express the electrostatic and electrodynamic working of 
firee aether, if (^, ^, ^) represents the magnetic induction and 
(/> 9i^) the aethereal displacement; the velocity of propagation is 
(47r)-^ {BjAf, so that BjA = 167r»c» where c is the velocity of 
radiation. They are also identical with MacCullagh's optical 
equations, the investigation here given being in fact due to him. 

51. Now let us extend the problem to aether containing a 
system of electrons or discrete electric charges. Each of these 
point-charges determines a field of electric force around it: 
electric force must involve aether-strain of some kind, as has 
already been explained: thus an electric point-charge is a 
nucleus of intrinsic strain in the aether. It is not at present 
necessary to determine what kind of permanent configuration 
of strain in the aether this can be, if only we are willing to 
admit that it can move or slip freely about through that 
medium much in the way that a knot slips along a rope : we 
thus in fact treat an electron or point-charge of strength e as a 
freely mobile singular point in the specification of the aethereal 
strain (/, g, h\ such that very near to it (/, g, h) assumes the 

form -"7~(j"» j~> Tr)"' ^® ^^^ avoid the absolutely in- 
finite values, at the origin of the distance r, by treating the 
nucleus of the permanent strain-form not as a point but as a 
very minute region* : this analytical artifice will keep all the 
elements of the integrals of our analysis finite, while it will not 
affect any physical application which considers the electron 
simply as a local charge of electricity of definite amount. 

Now provided there is nothing involved in the electron 
except a strain-form, no inertia or energy foreign to the aether 
residing in its nucleus such as would prevent free unresisted 
mobility, as it is perhaps difficult to see how there could be, the 
equations (I) and (II) still determine the state of the field of 
aether, at any instant, fix)m its state, supposed completely 
known, at the previous instant : and this deteimination includes 

* This substitution affects only the intrinsic moleoolar energy; of. Phil 
Traru. 1S94 A, pp. 812—8. 



CHAP. Vl] TRANSITION TO CONTINUOUS ANALYSIS 87 

a knowledge of the displacement of the nucleus of each strain- 
form during the intervening element of time. These equations 
therefore suffice to trace the natural sequence of change in the 
complex medium thus constituted by the aether and the nuclei 
pervading it But if the nuclei had inertia and mutual actions 
of their own, independent of the aether, there would in addition 
to the continuous equations of motion of the aether itself be 
dynamical equations of motion for each strain-form as well, 
which would interact and so have to be combined into continuity 
with the aethereal equations, and the problem would assume 
a much more complex form : in other words, the complete 
energy function employed in formulating the Principle of Least 
Action would also involve these other types of physical action, 
if they existed. 

52. But for purposes of the electrodynamic phenomena of 
material bodies, which we can only test by observation and 
experiment on matter in bulk, a complete atomic analysis of 
the kind thus indicated would (even if possible) be useless ; for 
we are unable to take direct cognizance of a single molecule of 
matter, much less of the separate electrons in the molecule to 
which this analysis has regard. The development of the theory 
which is to be in line with experience must instead concern 
itself with an effective differential element of volume, containing 
a crowd of molecules numerous enough to be expressible con- 
tinuously, as regards their average relations, as a volume-density 
of matter. As regards the actual distribution in the element of 
volume of the really discrete electrons, all that we can usually 
take cognizance of is an excess of one kind, positive or negative, 
which constitutes a volume density of electrification, or else an 
average polarization in the arrangement of the groups of 
electrons in the molecules which must be specified as a vector 
by its intensity per unit volume : while the movements of the 
electrons, firee and paired, in such element of volume must be 
combined into statistical aggregates of translational fluxes and 
molecular whirls of electrification. With anything else than 
mean aggregates of the various types that can be thus separated 
out, each extended over the effective element of volume. 



88 TOTAL ELECTRIC DISPLACEMENT DEFINED [SECT. II 

mechanical science, which has for its object matter in bulk as it 
presents itself to our observation and experiment, is not directly 
concerned : there is however another more abstract study, that 
of molecular dynamics, whose province it is to form and test 
hypotheses of molecular structure and arrangement, intended to 
account for the distinctive features of the mechanical phenomena 
aforesaid. 

As the integral 1(1/ + 'mg + nh) dS, extended over the 

boundary of any region, no longer vanishes when there are 
electrons in that region, it follows that the vector (/, g, h) which 
represents the strain or " electric displacement " of the aether, 
is no longer circuital when these individual electrons are merged 
in volume-densities, as they are when we consider a material 
medium continuously distributed, instead of merely the aether 
existing between its molecules; thus the definition of the 
mode of change of aethereal elastic displacement, namely 

4w (/, g, h) = curl (f ^, ^), 

which held for free aether, would now be a contradiction in 
terms. In order to ascertain what is to replace this definition, 
let us consider the translation of a single electron e from a point 
Pi to a neighbouring point Pg. This will cause an addition to 
the elastic strain (/, g, h) of the aether, represented by a strain- 
vector distributed with reference to lines which begin at P, and 
end at P^, the addition being in feet the electric displacement 
due to the doublet formed by - 6 at Pi and +c at P,. This ad- 
ditional flux of electric displacement from Pj to Pi along these 
lines is not by itself circuital ; but the circuits of the flux will 
be completed if we add to it a linear flux of electricity of the 
same total amount e, back again from Pi to Pa along the line 
Pi Pg. If we complete in this way the fluxes of aethereal 
electric displacenient, due to the changes of position of all the 
electrons of the system, by the fluxes of these true electric 
charges through the aether, a new vector is obtained which we 
may call the flux of the total electric displacement per unit 
volume; and this vector forms a fundamentally useful con- 
ception from the circumstance that it is everywhere and always 
a circuital or stream vector 



CHAP. VI] TWO INDEPENDENT VECTORS NOW REQUIRED 89 

We may now express this result analytically : to the rate of 
change of aethereal displacement (/, ^, A) St in the element of 
volume St there must be added 2 {ex, ey, ez\ where (i?, y, z) is 
the velocity of a contained electron e, in order to get a circuital 
result : the current of aethereal electric displacement by itself is 
not circuital when averaged with regard to this element of 
volume, but the so-called total current, made up of it and 
of the true electric current formed by the moving electrons, 
possesses that property. 

Thus we have to deal, in the mechanical theory, with a 
more complex problem : instead of only aethereal displacement 
we have now two independent variables, aethereal displacement, 
and true electric current or flux of electrons. In the molecular 
analysis, on the other hand, the minute knowledge of aethereal 
displacement between and around the electrons of the molecules 
involved that of the movements of these electrons or singularities 
themselves, and there was only one independent variable, at 
any rate when the singularities are purely aethereal. The tran- 
sition, from the complete knowledge of aether and individual 
molecules to the averaged and smoothed out specification of the 
element of volume of the complex medium, requires the presence 
of two independent variables, one for the aether and one for the 
matter, instead of a single variable only. 

53. We may consider this fundamental explanation from a 
diflFerent aspect. There are present in the medium electrons or 
electric charges each of amount e, so that for any region 
Faraday's hypothesis gives 

/((/'+ mg + nh) dS = le; 

and therefore, any finite change of state being denoted by A, 
Al(lf+mg + nh)dS is equal to the flux of electrons into the 
region across the boundary. Thus for example 

-77 j(lf+ fng + nh) dfif = — j(luo + r?iVo + nwo) dS 

in which {uq, Vq, Wq) is the true electric current which is 
simply this flux of electrons reckoned per unit time: hence 



90 stokes' ANALTTIGAL theorem GEXERALIZED [sect. II 

transposing all the terms to the same side, we have for any 
closed surface 



/< 



\lu + mv + nw) dS = 0, 

where (w, v, w) = {dfjdt + Mo, dgjdt + 1;©, dhjdt + w^. 

This relation expresses that (it, v, w\ the total current of Max- 
well's theory, is circuital or a stream. 

The true current (mq, v©, Wo) above defined includes all the 
possible types of co-ordinated or averaged motions of electrons, 
namely, currents arising from conduction, from material polari- 
zation and its convection, from convection of charged bodies. 

54. We have now to fix the meaning to be attached to 
(|, 17, 5) or (a, 6, 0) in a mechanical theory which treats only of 
sensible elements of volume. Obviously it must be the mean 
value of this vector, as previously employed, for the aether in 
each element of volume. With this meaning it is now to be 
shown that the curl of (^, 17, ^) is equal to 47r (u, t;, w). We 
shall in fact see that for any open geometrical surface or sheet 
£1 of sensible extent, fixed in space, bounded by a contour s, 
Sir George Stokes' fundamental analytical theorem of trans- 
formation of a surface integral into a line integral round its 
contour, must under the present circumstances assume the 
wider form 

where the symbol A represents the change in the integral 
which follows it, produced by the motion of the system in any 
finite time, and ^ represents the total flux of electrons through 
the fixed surface £1 during that time. To this end consider two 
sheets 8 and £1' both abutting on the same contour 8 : then as 
the two together form a closed surface we have 

foy + VI g + n'A) dS' - fa/+ wif^ + nA) dS« 2e . . . (ii) 

where Se denotes the sum of the strengths of the electrons 
included between the sheets: in this formula the direction 
vectors (V, m\ n') and (I, m, n) are both measured towards the 



JLas, _ 



CHAP. Vl] THE AVERAQED VECTORS OF CONTINUOU 

same sides of the surfaces, which for the forme 

away from the region enclosed between them. 

these included electrons moves across the sur£a.c 

the integral for that sur£Bix;e will be abruptly alt 

of it becoming infinite at the transition when t, 

the surface ; and this will vitiate the proof of Stokes' theorem 

considered as applying to the change in the value of that surface 

integral. But the form of the integral for the other surface, 

across which the electron has not penetrated, will not pass 

through any critical stage, and Stokes' theorem will still hold 

for the change caused in it. That is, for the latter surface the 

equation (i) will hold good in the ordinary way without any 

term such as % ; and therefore by (ii), for the former surfece, 

across which electrons are taken to pass, the term ^ as above is 

involved. 

The relation of Sir George Stokes, thus generalized, in 
which 8 represents the total flux of electrons across the surface 
S^ leads directly to the equation 

curl (f 17, ^) = 47r (/+ Uo,ff + Vo,h + w^). 

where the vectors now represent mean values throughout the 
element of volume. 

This relation holds, whether the system of molecules con- 
tained in the medium is magnetically polarized or not, for the 
transference of magnetic polarity across the sheet 8 cannot add 
anything to the electric flux through it : it appears therefore 
that in a case involving magnetic polarization (f , ^, 5) repre- 
sents what is called the magnetic induction and not the magnetic 
force, which is also in keeping with the stream character of the 
former vector. On the other hand the change in the electric 
polarization (/', g\ K) of the molecules constitutes an addition 
A {f\ ^, h') of finite amount per unit area to the flux through 
the sheet, so that djdt (/', g\ h') constitutes a part of the true 
electric current (tio,Vo, Wq), 

55. It has been seen that the specification of sensible 
electric motions in a material body involves both the flux of 
the electrons and the averaged disturbance of the aether as 
independent variables. In ordinary electrodynamic phenomena 



\ 



CHAP. VI] THE AVERAQED YBCTORS OF CONTIXUOU ^ 

* 

same sides of the surfaces, which for the forme 

away from the region enclosed between them. 

these included electrons moves across the sur&c 

the integral for that surface will be abruptly alt 

of it becoming infinite at the transition when tiL«^ . 

the sur£ace ; and this will vitiate the proof of Stokes' theorem 

considered as applying to the change in the value of that surface 

integral But the form of the integral for the other surface, 

across which the electron has not penetrated, will not pass 

through any critical stage, and Stokes' theorem will still hold 

for the change caused in it. That is, for the latter surface the 

equation (i) will hold good in the ordinary way without any 

term such as % ; and therefore by (ii), for the former surfeice, 

across which electrons are taken to pass, the term ^ as above is 

involved. 

The relation of Sir George Stokes, thus generalized, in 
which 8 represents the total flux of electrons across the surface 
8, leads directly to the equation 

curl (|, 17, 5) = 47r (/+ Mo, ^r + Vo, A + Wo). 

where the vectors naw represent mean values throughout the 
element of volume. 

This relation holds, whether the system of molecules con- 
tained in the medium is inagnetically polarized or not, for the 
transference of magnetic polarity across the sheet 8 cannot add 
anything to the electric flux through it: it appears therefore 
that in a case involving magnetic polarization (f , ^, ^) repre- 
sents what is called the magnetic induction and not the magnetic 
force, which is also in keeping with the stream character of the 
former vector. On the other hand the change in the electric 
polarization (/', ^, h!) of the molecules constitutes an addition 
A (/', ^, h') of finite amount per unit area to the flux through 
the sheet, so that djdt (/', g\ h') constitutes a part of the true 
electric current (t«o, Vo» '^o)' 

55. It has been seen that the specification of sensible 
electric motions in a material body involves both the flux of 
the electrons and the avcmged disturbance of the aether as 
independent variables. In ordinary electrodynamic phenomena 



^ ENERQT IN TERMS OF ELECTRIC FLOW [SECT. II 

relating to currents of conduction it is the former that we are 
by far the more directly concerned with. We have therefore 
for purposes of ordinaiy electrodynamics to transform the 
kinetic energy 

T^UJ\t- + n*+^)dr (1) 

where (|, ^, ^ represents magnetic induction as above, into a 
form which expresses it as the effect of motion of the electrons. 
This can be done most easily by introducing, after Maxwell's 
manner, a subsidiary vector {F, G, H) such that 

(dH^dO dF^dH dG_dF\_ . . • 

Uy dz' dz di' dx dy)"^^''^'^^ ^^ 

which is permissible on account of the circuital character of 
(f :• ^» k) or (a, 6, c). Then we have 

ro , . f(jLfdH dG\ fdF dH\ ffdG dF\] , 

+ 2irAJ(Fu+Gv + Hw)dr, (3) 

since by the above 

/dt dfj d^ dt dr, dl\ . , , ... 

where (w, v, w) is the total current (/+ w©, j/ + Vo» ^ + w/o). 
Combining (2) and (4) we have 

„ ry d fdF dG dH\ 
ax\ax ay dzJ 

with two similar equations : these are solved by the relations 

(F. G, H) ^ (^j^dr + F„ jldr+6,. l^dT + ir,). 

wherein (^oi Go, Ho) is determined so as to satisfy the system of 
equations 

^^{F a n\-.(^ ^ d\fdFo dGo,dHo\ 



CHAP. Vl] YECTOB POTENTIAL OF CURRENTS 93 

of which the most general solution is 

where ^ is an arbitrary function. 

This part of the auxiliary potential {F, 0, H), depending on 
4>, adds nothing to the variable (^, ^, ^) which represents the 
actual phenomenon, and therefore may be omitted. If it were 
retained it would mean that something hitherto unspecified, 
besides the motion of the aether, was fundamentally in operation. 
Substituting then our result 



(F,G,H)^j(u,v,w)r''dT, 



in which any magnetism that may be present is implicitly 
included as molecular current-whirls*, we have 

the summation taking each pair of elements Sti, 8x2 only once, 
the double integral taking them twice. Here the total current 
(Mi V, w) is made up of the drift of the electrons and the time- 
wte of change in the electric displacement (/, g, h) of the aether: 
thus we have expressed the kinetic energy in terms of these 
quantities. The potential energy W is already expressed in 
terms of the same variables by the formula 



Tr = i5[(/« + 5r^+A»)dT. 



The auxiliary quantity (F, G, H ), which proved to be the 
potential of the circuital current- vector (w, v, w), can now if it is 
thought fit be dispensed with. Its use was to facilitate an 
integration by parts, which collected together those elements of 
kinetic energy from all over the field that are, in the equation 
of Action, associated with the electric flux in the element of 
volume ir. 

* The fiarface-integral terms in (3) corresponding to any interface now 
Tanish on acooont of the continuity of (F, G, H), For the completion of this 
analytis for the case of magnetic material media, see the end of Appendix A. 



94 GENERAL EQUATION OF ACTION [SECT. II 

56. The djmamical equation expressing the sequence of 

events in the system is 81(7— W)dt^O, with the time not 

subject to variation: we are now prepared to develope the 
variation with respect to the sj'stem of independent variables 
composed of the flux of the electrons and (/, g, h) : for this 
purpose we must revert to the complete expression for T. 

The part of TjAurA which involves the single electron e 
moving with velocity {x, y, i) is, by (3), 

where Z is a quantity which our present analysis does not 
determine*, depending as it does on the size and constitution of 
the nucleus of the electron. 

We might now insert a sign to represent summation over all 
the electrons and conduct the variation, were it not for the 
circumstance that our variables are not wholly independent; 
the variation of (/, g, h) is in fact restricted by the condition 

/((/■+ mg + nh) dS = Xe 

J\ax ay dzl 
Hence we must introduce into the variational equation a 
Lagrangian undetermined function of position "9^ so that it is 
the variation of 

that is to be made null ; afterwards determining the form of ^ 
to satisfy the restriction which necessitated its introduction. 

57. Now as regards an electron e, {^'irAY^hiTdt gives 
the terms 

UtL^ixtx-^-yhy-^zhz) 

-f Idt {eFhx + eG^ + eHhz\ 

♦ Of. Phil. Trans, 1894 A, pp. 812—8. 



CHAP. Yl] REDUCTION OF SPECIAL TERICS 95 

which are equal to terms at the time limits together with 

+|ift8y{...} + frfeS^ {...}, 

where jr denotes ^ + ^^ + yj~ + ^T'» because the time- 
integral refers to a travelling electron; thus finally giving 
terms at the time limits together with 

/*«.[-x..«j,(f-f)-,(f-f)-f}] 

'\- jdtSy [...]+ jdtSz [...]. 

As regards the variation of the state of the free aether, 
represented by (/«, g^, h^) in an element of volume Sr^ con- 
taining no electrons, we have in {4nrA)~^ S JTdt the terms 

Of this the part involving the variation of the aethereal electric 
displacement in the single element of volume dr (written in 
place of Sxa in order to avoid subscripts) gives 

dr . SJdt {FSf+ GSg + HSli) 
which is equal to terms at the time limits together with 



dF r. ^ dG r^ . dH 



-dr./*(fs/*f8,^ 



hh 



dt 

Here two points are to be noticed. First, it would not have 
been correct simply to vary (4nrA)~^ JTdty involving 

ijdtj(Ff+Gg + Hh)dT, 

unless we bore in mind that (F, G, H) itself involves implicitly 
the independent variable (/, g, h) to be varied. Secondly, in 



96 RESULTINQ EQUATIONS [SECT. II 

writing here d/dt (F, G, H) it is implied that the translation of 
the aether itself is negligibly small compared with that of the 
electrons of matter that are moving through it. Strictly, if 
(i>'> 9[y ^') were the velocity of the aether itself we should have 
h'jdt (F, 0, H) instead of djdt {F, G, H), where S'/dt would 
represent d/dt + p'djdx + qdjdy + r'd/dz : this would introduce 
enormous complication into the electrodynamic equations, 
destroying their linearity in a way such as occurs for instance 
in hydrodynamics. We shall find that our present course fits 
in with all the electrodynamic phenomena ; it is also in keeping 
with the £EkCt that the most refined optical experiments have 
been unable to detect translatory movement in the aether. 

The reduction of the remaining terms of the variational 
equation is given by the formulae 



J J \d>x dy dzj 
= Idt jV (M/-f mZg + nZh) dS 



58. The variations Bx, Sy, 82: which give the virtual dis- 
placement of an electron e, and the variations Sf, Sg, Sh which 
specify the electric displacement of a point in the free aether, 
can now be considered as all independent and perfectly arbitrary : 
hence the coeflBcient of each must vanish separately in the 
dynamical variational equation. Thus we obtain two sets of 
equations, of types 

^ttA'^ dt dx 



CHAP. Vl] ELECTRIC FORCE AND AETHEREAL FORCE 97 

If as before we write (47rc)' for -B/-4, these equations become 

^ dt dx 



( , dF dfr) 



they are the differential equations which determine the sequence 

of events in the system. Expressed in the ordinary language of 

electrodynamics, which avails itself of the conception of force, 

they show that 

- dF/dt - d'ir/dx 

is the X component of the aethereal force which strains the free 
aether ; and that 

yt-zv- dF/dt - d^/dx 
is the X component of the electric force which tends to accelerate 
the motion of an electron e. Each electron has an effective 
mass Le^, of aethereal origin, which forms part and may be the 
whole of the mass of the matter to which it is attached. As 
previously explained*, the real advantage of thus introducing 
the conception of forces is that we can develope methods of 
reasoning about actual systems by attaching to each sensibly 
permanent portion of the material system the forces that are 
invariably associated with it, thereby promoting in the domain 
of dynamics the comparisons of relations on which all logical 
processes are based. 

59. We have just spoken, in order to avoid complex reser- 
vations, of the electric force acting on the single electron e: 
in strictness this is of course more than our analysis gives 
us. The equation which is thus interpreted should strictly 
have a S, a sign of summation, in front of it, to show that 
it is an aggregate equation for all the electrons in the element 
of volume with which we are in reality dealing. It will appear 
that in the subsequent sorting out of the different kinds of 
electric motion that occur in the element of volume, no harm 
will ensue from the present mode of expression, if we now 
attend to one point. 

In certain cases a sensible part of the electric force acting 
on the single electron arises from the other electrons in the 

* Of. also Appendix B. 
L. 7 



98 LOCAL TERMS IN ICAONETIZED MEDIA [SECT. II 

same element of volume: in such cases, however, when we 
express what we are really concerned with, namely the sum- 
mation throughout the element of volume, this action may 
be cancelled by a complementary reaction, so that in the 
aggregate such terms will not remain. Now in the expression 
above given for the electric force acting on an electron this 
case arises when the medium is magnetized. It has been 
shown that the vector (^, ^, ^) that occurs in the expression 
for this force is the magnetic induction (a, b, c) : and in the 
theory of magnetism it is shown* that of this induction a part 
(a, fi, y) called the magnetic force arises from the system in 
general, and the remainder 4^ (A, B, C) is the expression of 
local influence arising in the element of volume itself. The 
question arises then whether the latter part is to be rejected 
in effecting the summation over the element of volume, 
as compensated by reaction exerted by the electron under 
consideration on the magnetism existing in the same element 
of volume. If it is a question of finding the mechanical force 
acting on the complete element of volume this compensation 
will subsist : the action of the magnetism in the element on 
the electron will just cancel the action of the electron on the 
magnetism. But if it is a question of finding the electric 
force which produces a current by separating positive and 
negative electrons in the element, no such compensation will 
occur, because the reaction of the electron on the magnetism 
has no connexion with such electric separation. 

Thus we have, for our mechanical theory which considers 
only elements of volume, the expressions for the aethereal force 
(P', Q\ R) and electric force (P, Q, R) as follows : 

J, . .. dF d^ 



dt dx 



p,^_dF_d^ 
dt dx 



w 



= P-yc + i!b, 

here (P, (?, H)=j(u, v, w) r~^dT in which expression the 
magnetism is to be included as molecular current-whirls, 

* Gf. Appendix A : also p. lOS, footnote. 



CHAP. VI] MECHANICAL FORCE ON CURRENTS 99 

leading to the expressions of § 66 ff, while '*' is a function of 
position which has to be determined so as to ensure that the 
total current is circuital. We may say that the reaction 
arising from the constraint against non-circuital flow, which is 
involved in the constitution of the aether, is represented by 
a term in the aethereal force and also by a term in the electric 
force, both derived from the same potential '9, And it is 
to be remembered that in computing the mechanical force 
per unit volume, (a, 6, c) must be replaced in these equations 

by (a, yS, 7)**. 

It now remains to complete our analysis of the sequence of 

events in the medium in bulk, by classifjdng the various kinds 

of motions of electrons which are connected with this electric 

force, each according to its own law. 



Specification and Relations of a Current of Conduction 

60. First let us take the case of a current of conduction 
flowing in a linear circuit. It must be made up of a drift 
of electrons, or ions, positive ones travelling in one direction, 
negative ones in the opposite direction, under the influence 
of the electric force. There must be as many negative as 
positive in the element of volume : if not, the element would 
be electrified, and there could not be a steady electric state 
until the excess which constitutes the free charge is driven to 
the surface of the conductor. 

The aggregate of all these ions is acted on by the electric 
force (P, Q, jR) ; as there are as many negative as positive the 
last two terms in the expression above for the electric force 
give a null aggregate on summation for all of them. The first 
two terms however give a force acting on the element of 
volume, equal to (yXey — /82ei, dZez — yXex, ^Xex — aley) 

ft For the redaction of these terms, see Appendix A, or Phil. Trans. 
1S95 A, p. 816. 

** The expressions for T and IT, which form the basis of this analysis, 
inToWe only electric terms : if it should prove necessary to include other terms 
as well, there would of course be other forces and actions arising from them, in 
addition to the electric ones here obtained. 

7—2 



100 THS CUBREXT OF COXDCCnON [SECT. U 

By definition (2er, S^y, Sei)3=(ii«, r«, w^)St^ where (u*, r«, u\) 
is the ^rtitf current or electric flow per anit volume inclading 
convection as well as conduction : hence this force is (r/y — w^, 
ir«a~tvy» ti^S — r«a) per unit volume of the material medium: 
it is the mechanical force of electrodjrnamic origin (§ 65) acting 
on a conductor or other material body carrying a current. 

61. We have now to examine the character of the relation 
between the current of conduction {u', v\ vf) and the electric 
force that drives it by urging the positive electrons or ions 
one way and the negative ones the opposite way. The velocity 
of drift of each of these kinds of ions among the molecules 
of the metallic conductor is in the steady state proportional 
to the electric force: but there is as yet nothing to show 
whether these velocities are equal and opposite. In any case 
however the aggregate drift, forming the current of conduction, 
must be proportional to the electric force ; say 

where the \a\ indicates that, if the medium is not isotropic, a 
will be a vector coefficient. 

But we have a source of information as to whether the 
velocities of the pasitive and negative electrons are equal and 
opposite. We shall first consider ions, as in electrolysis, that 
is sub-atoms which each contain one or more uncompensated 
electrons, so that positive and negative ions have usually 
different masses : we know that in electrolysis they have also 
different facilities of migration through the solvent fluid, as 
we should expect. But the law of Faraday asserts that 
notwithstanding this tendency for the one to travel faster than 
the other the amounts of current delivered by the two are 
the same, as shown by the fistct that the amounts of the ions 
that are liberated at the two electrodes are electrochemical 
equivalents. Now this restriction to equality can only arise 
from some constraint imposed on the electrolyte fix)m outside, 
in this case therefore from the metallic part of the circuit. 
The fact that all electrolytes are fluid makes it reasonable to 
assume that the ions in a solid are not freely and independently 
mobile ; so that conduction in a solid would rather take place 



CHAP. Vl] THE CURRENT OF POLARIZATION 101 

by something of the nature of the passing on of the same ion 
or electron successively through different molecules which do 
not themselves migrate. If we assume that conduction in a 
metal is something akin to this, the number of ions liberated 
per unit time at the positive end must of necessity be always 
the same as that liberated at the negative end ; and must be 
the same as the number that cross any intermediate section 
of the conductor. Thus we have grounds for the conclusion 
that the current in a metal is carried, in the Qrotthus fashion 
without difiiision of ions, half by positive and half by negative 
ions: and therefore perforce this division also holds good in 
steady flow in any circuit of which part is metallic. But in 
a circuit wholly electrolytic the different mobilities of the 
various ions are not thus under control, especially if the 
solutions are dilute; aud this ratio of equality need not be 
preserved*. 

Indeed even the original Williamson-Clausius hypothesis of 
transient occasional dissociation involves that such dissociation 
shall become complete and permanent, when the molecules 
are very sparsely scattered through a foreign medium so that 
there is not much chance of immediate recombination : while 
when the molecules are very densely distributed, a very slight 
amount of very transient dissociation is all that need occur, 
especially if the ions are ver}' mobile as in metals, in fact is all 
that chemical knowledge as to molecular permanence permits 
us to assume. 



Specification of a Polarization Current 

62. When a molecule is electrically polarized to moment M, 
a displacement of positive electrons has occurred towards one 
end of it and of negative towards the other end such that Sed, 
the sum formed by adding the product of each electron and 
its displacement in the direction of the resultant moment, is 
equal to M. Thus dM/dt is equal to l^dd/dt for each molecule. 
This, being a vector statement, is true for each component of 

* Cf. Appendix C. 



102 THE CURRENTS OF CONVECTION [SECT. II 

the polarization sepcurately : and summing for all the molecules 
per unit volume, we have thus 

I (/'. /. h') = (2ex, ley. lei), 

where (x, y, z) is the velocity of the electron e. That is, there 
is a true electric flux per unit volume arising from change of 
polarization of the material, which is specified by 

Specifications of the Currents of Electric Convection arising from 
the motion of charged and of polarized Material Media 

63. A material medium moving with velocity equal at the 
point {x, y, z) to (p, q, r), and having in the neighbourhood of 
that point a charge of electrons amounting to p per unit volume, 
clearly contributes a convection current (p, q, r) p. 

The convection of a material medium merely polarized to 
intensity (/', g\ K) also supplies a part to the volume dis- 
tribution of electric current : but its determination requires 
more refined analysis. Consider in the first place the convection 
of a simple type of polar molecule involving a single electron + e 
for one pole and another — e for the 
other pole. The transfer of these 
two electrons in company, as in the 
diagram, is equivalent to the transfer 
of a positive electron round the long 
narrow circuit in the direction of 
the curved arrow: and this circuit -« 
can be divided up into sub-circuits 

of ordinary form in the Amperean manner by partitions repre- 
sented by the dotted lines. The distance between the two 
poles of the molecule is absolutely negligible compared with 
the distance that the molecule is carried by the convection, in 
a time which is effectively infinitesimal for the anal3rtical theory 
of continuous currents even in its optical applications : so that 
the circumstance that convection round the ends of the elon- 
gated circuit is not really effected is immaterial. It follows 




CHAP. VI] MAGNETISM REPLACED BY ELECTRIC FLOW 103 

that the convection with velocity (p, q, r) of a medium, con- 
taining such molecules polarized or orientated to intensity 
(/'» 9> ^')» gives rise to an Amperean system of currents round 
minute circuits, which forms effectively a magnetic polarization, 
or ^ruo^'-magnetism of the material, of intensity (rjr'—gA^pA'—r/"', 
qf'—pcD per unit volume. This result will clearly not be disturbed 
when the distribution of polarity in the molecule is more com- 
plicated than that here assumed for the purpose of explanation. 

64. It will be convenient in most cases to retain this 
mode of specification by means of a distribution of magnetiza- 
tioD, as it will enable us to take direct advantage of the known 
principles governing such distributions. But we can restore it 
to the form of a distribution of currents. Consider in feet any 
bodily magnetization (A, B, C); and taking the component A 
separately, let us represent it by Amperean current-whirls with 
their planes at right angles to the axis of x. Expand the areas 
of these whirls, and diminish their intensities in the same 
proportion, until their contours come into contact, thus forming 
a network in the plane. On summing up the currents in 
an element of volume we now readily obtain, combining the 
opposite flows along each branch of the network, dAjdz parallel 
to y and —dAjdy parallel to z, per unit volume, together with 
an uncompensated flow round the external contour of the net- 
work. Thus on superposition for all three components, we 
find that the magnetization {A, B, C) is equivalent to a bodily 

J. ., ,. - , fdC dB dA dC dB dA\ , 

distribution of current -^ =- , -^ -5- , -j r- ' to- 

\dy dz dz dx dx dy j 

gether with a current sheet on the bounding surface. The 
precise range of properties for which this equivalence holds 
good will be presently investigated: for some analytical 
purposes it is very convenient to convert in this manner all 
the magnetism and jzum-magnetism associated with the 
medium into a volume-distribution of electric currents. We 
may call the aggregate electric flux {ui, Vi, w^ obtained by 
including all this the total effective current : thus, when mag- 
netism and guem-magnetism, of aggregate intensity (-4i,£i, (7,), 
is present, and when the surface of the magnet is replaced by 



104 STNTHESIS OF TOTAL MECHANICAL FORCE [SECT. U 

a gradual transition so that the current sheet on it is absorbed 
in the bodily current, we have 

, df" dC^ dB, 



F^j^dr, 



where /" ^f^f\ and il^ = ^ + r/ - qh'. 

The complete Mechanical Force acting on the Material Medium 

65. The force of electrodynamic origin acting on the 
matter in bulk is the aggregate of the forces acting on its 
electrons, according to the formula of § 59 which gives a force on 
an electron e whose x component is 

c^yry-i^-_-_j, or «(P' + y7-i^): 

this makes up in all a static part I.eP' 

and a kinetic part S«y7 — ^ezfi. 

The static part is equal to 

^p/ , //d-P' , / dP* ,,dF 
P^-^^l^^S dj^^-di' 

of which the first term arises from the aggregate of uncompen- 
sated free ions and the second bom the aggregate of polarized 
molecules. The kinetic part contains terms arising from the 
drift of free ions constituting the current of conduction, and 
the differential drift of combined electrons constituting the 
polarization current, and the convection of free electric charges, 
making up in all 

q{wh)-r{v'-g), 

where (p, g, r) is the velocity of the element of volume of the 
matter and (w — /, v — ^, w — A) is the total current of Maxwell 
less the purely aethereal part which is not of the nature of 
electric flux : this part of the force contains also a portion 
arising frt)m the orbital motions of electrons in the molecules. 



CHAP. Vl] GENERAL FORMULA 105 

which constitute when polarized the magnetism of the medium, 
with which can be conveniently included the gwcwi-magnetism 
arising from the convection of electrically polarized molecules, 
thus giving in all 

A da n da ^ da 

where the magnetic force (a, 13, 7) is defined to be (a — 47r-4i, 
6 — 47rjBi, c — 47r(7i), in which as above Ai^A-^rg' — qh\ 

Thus we have in all for the mechanical bodily force (X, F, Z) 
an expression of type 

This expression is in agreement with Amp&re's results for 
the simple case of an ordinary current of conduction, giving 
a mechanical force at right angles to each current element. 
It has been shown* that a formula for the electrodynamic 
energy which involves the aggregate current per unit volume 
only, and not the individual electrons, cannot lead to correct 
results in this respect : its basis is too narrow for the facts. 

The part of the component X that depends on the motion 
of the matter is 

For example when a transparent isotropic body conveying 
plane-polarized electric waves along the z axis with their 
magnetic vector along the x axis and their electric vector along 
the y axis, is moving with velocity (p, q, r), its elements 
sustain alternating mechanical force arising from its motion, 
in the direction of the magnetic vector and equal to —pg'dajdz, 
or - p (/A« - 1) dE'jdt, where E' is the statical part KQ^ISirCf of 
the radiant energy per unit volume and /a' is equal to the 
dielectric constant K, while p is the component of the velocity 
of the medium in the direction of this force. 

♦ Phil, Trans., 1895 A, pp. 698—701. 



106 VECTOR POTENTIAL EXACTLY DEFINED [SECT. II 

On the specification of a Magnetic Distribution in terms of a 
continuous distribution of Electric Currents 

66. It appears from the molecular analysis that the 
electric vector potential (F, G, H) arising from a magnetic 
distribution {A, B,C) is given at points outside the magnetism 
by equations of the type 



HK-'i-y?'-- 



but that at places inside the magnetism 

i-|/(..-,.C,l^l>/(^?-^)U, 

the previous formula being then plainly inapplicable because 
it integrates to a quantity whose differential coefficients are 
indefinite when r can vanish*. Analogously, it may be recalled 
that, in the ordinary statical theory of magnetism, the mag- 
netic force is derived from the potential of the actual magnetic 
polarity only at places outside the magnet, but at places in 
its interior is derived from the potential of the Poisson volume 
and surface distributions of an ideal continuous magnetic 
substance. At a point in the interior of the magnetism the 
magnetic force should be in fact defined as the part of the force, 
acting on a unit pole there situated, that is independent of the 
local polarity at the spot, it being then shown how the definite 
value of this part can be determined. 

In all such cases the definition of the quantity concerned, 
thus amended so as to give a definite finite value at points 
in the interior of the magnetic system, extends of course to 
the exterior as well But at exterior points the whole of the 
polarity is efficient, there being no local effect to be omitted : 
thus this transformation from a polarity to a volume and 
surface distribution would as regards outside points serve 

* Cf . Appendix A. It may however be immediately verified that the latter 
is the correct form by its satisfying the relation curl (F, G, H) = {at l>, e) which 
formed the definition of the vector potential. [The above amoants to saying that 
the actual discrete distribution of magnetism mast be replaced by an averaged 
distribution which is continuous not only as regards itself but also as regards 
its gradient.] 



CHAP. VI] MAGNETISM REPLACED BY ELECTRIC FLOW 107 

no useful purpose, and only obscure the real nature of the 
formulae. 

67. It is of importance to define the scope of the equival- 
ence thus indicated by the formula for the vector potential 
between (i) a magnetic distribution (A, B, C), and (ii) an 
electric current distribution equal to 

/dC^dB dA^dC dB_dA\ 
\dy dz ' dz dx * dx dy ) 

throughout the volume together with sheets of current given by 



{nB - mC, IC-nA, mA - IB) , 

flowing along the interfaces. 

We notice that this bodily distribution of current satisfies 
the equation of continuity of flow, and is therefore everywhere 
a stream. If we represent each interface between different 
media as a gradual but very rapid transition, throughout which 
our volume integration has play, there will be no sur&ce sheets 
to be attended to ; and this will often be a great simplification, 
because the surface current-sheet is not usually a stream. 
Consider in fact any flat volume element SSSn, of thickness Bn, 
of the layer of transition : the current which flows out along 
the layer is fed by the flow into it through its opposite feces BS, 
hence the current in the layer is a stream only when there is 
no resultant flow into the layer across its faces, that is, only 
when the flux denoted by curl {A, B, C) ia continuous on the 
two sides of it, which will not usually be the case. This 
current-sheet is therefore an example of a fltuc which is not 
a streatn. 

The equivalence between these two systems, one a magnetic 
and the other a current system, includes ex hypothesi that of 
the vector potential and therefore of its curl, that is of the 
quantity (^, ^, ^) which occurs in the dynamical analysis as 
the aethereal disturbance and is always a stream vector. What 
is this quantity, in terms of the usual magnetic conceptions ? 
We have 

dy dz dx 



108 LIMITED EQUIVALENCE [SECT. II 

where J represents dFjdx + dOjdy + dHjdz and is always null 

by the formula for {F, 0, H), But V^F^-^ir [^ "^f) - 

Hence curl (^, 17, J;) = 47r curl(-4, -B, C); so that (|, ^, ^) is 
made up of the gradient of some continuous potential together 
with 4?7r(-4, JB, C). Outside the magnetism the potential 
gradient thus introduced can be none other than the magnetic 
force (a, jS, 7) of the magnetic system, as ordinarily defined : 
and a representation may be introduced which will extend 
its definition to the interior, in the usual manner, by formation 
of an ideal cavity. Thus we have 

which shows that (^, 17, ^) represents the magnetic induction 
of the magnetized system. 

It thus appears that these electric and magnetic systems 
are equivalent as regards magnetic induction. They are not 
however equivalent as regards magnetic force ; for in the one 
case the curl of the magnetic force is 4hr times the current, 
in the other it is null. In treating of a current system devoid 
of magnetism, the only quantity that occurs is the magnetic 
induction due to the currents : the portion of the expression 
for this induction which forms the contribution of the part of 
the current arising fi-om contiguous molecules or elements of 
volume being always negligible compared with the induction 
as a whole. The magnetic force is thus not one of the primary 
quantities of electrodynamic theory as here developed on the 
single basis of moving electrons** : it is a concept introduced 
by the transition from molecular dynamics to mechanical theory, 
being the mean aethereal disturbance (^, ^, ^) diminished by 
the part arising from purely local causes. 

** It may be well to recaU here that the magnetism is actaaUy oonstitated 
of pennanent currents of electric convection, of molecular dimensions, made up 
of the orbital motions of electrons that are involved in the constitution of the 
molecule. 



CHAPTER VII 

REVIEW OF THE ELECTRODYNAMIC EQUATIONS OF A MATERIAL 

MEDIUM 

Exact Dynamical Relatione 

68. In each case only one relation typical of the set of 
three equations will be set dowD. The equations marked by 
Roman numerals are of the nature of definitions of the new 
quantities that occur in them : the others are dynamical rela- 
tions. We have 

^/-^-f-s « 

P^R+qc-rb (2) 

, dH dG ... 

where « = -dy-d^' « 

also we have the total effective current (uj, V], Wi) given by 

, df" dC, dB, 

where f'^f^f (ii) 

A^ = A •\- r^ - qh! ; (iii) 

also ^=["'dT (4) 



110 EXACT EQUATIONS OF THE FIELD [SECT. II 

where ^"^ rf/ ~^® ~^'"*" "^ "^^^ ^^^^ 

a=a— 47r-4i (v) 

Exact Relations infierent in the Constitution of the Medium 

69. We>,.,e P-^-^f -f W 

S'p _ du' dv' dv/ .,-. 

dt " dx dy dz 

Here p represents the density of the true electrification, — that 
is of the unpaired electrons distributed throughout the medium 
which must have come there by conduction or convection from 
without: also 

^P denotes ^l + ^P + ^ + ^:f. 
dt dt dx dy dz 

being the rate at which the electric charge in a given 
material element changes with the time, account being of 
course taken of change of form and position of the element. 
The second of these relations, namely equation (7), expresses 
the fact that such change can take place only by conduction 
of electrons through the material medium from element to 
element : convection can merely transfer the volume electri- 
fication along with the material element in which it occurs. 

The question arises whether the relation of the conduction 
current to the electric force is altered by motion of the 
material medium which is the seat of the conduction. As the 
current is made up half of the positive electrons urged one 
way by the electric force and half of the complementary 
negative ones urged the opposite way, it follows that any 
influence of the motion of the medium on the one half is 
neutralized by its influence on the other half, unless it be an 
influence involving the square^ or higher even powers, of the 
velocity of the medium. Hence the coefficients of conduc- 
tivity of a medium are altered, by motion of the conductor, 
at most only to the order of the square of the ratio of its 
velocity to the velocity of radiation. 



CHAP. VIl] DERIVED EQUATIONS 111 

Further exact Relations deduced front the above 

70. It follows from (3) combined with (6) and (7) that 

duy dvi dwt 

T^ + T^ + ^ = (8) 

aw ay dz ^ 

Thus the total eflTective current, as well as the Maxwellian 
total current, is always a stream vector, like the flow of an 
incompressible fluid. 

This relation combined with (4) gives 

dF dG dH ^ . 

dx dy dz ~ ^ ^ 

Thus the vector potential of the electrodjuamic system is also 

always a stream vector. 

On substituting from (1) and (i) in (6) we obtain, by aid 

of (9), 

1 rr^T, fdf da' dh\ 

As the right-hand side is equal to p -f p', where p' is the Poisson 
density of ideal electrification which is the equivalent (for 
certain purposes, cf. Appendix A) of the electric polarization, 
it follows that ^, originally introduced into the analysis as an 
undetermined multiplier, is always the static electric potential 
of a distribution of density p -h p\ or say p'\ where p" is what 
Maxwell called the density of the ' apparent electrification ' of 
the medium. This result, that a term explicitly occurring in 
the formula for the electric force is in fact the static force due 
to all the electrification and polarity in the field, in their actual 
situations at the moment, is in one respect remarkable. It 
looks at first glance as if this static potential '*' were propa- 
gated instantaneously from the distant parts of the field : but 
there is really nothing in the analysis to support such a view, 
any more than there is to suggest the view that the vector 
potential of the current system given by (4) is instantaneously 
propagated fi"om all parts of the field ; we might also just as 
well say the same of the Action belonging to an element of 
volume, which includes contributions from all parts of the 



112 APPABENT ACTION AT A DISTANCE [SECT. U 

system. In deducing the dynamical relations from the 
principle of Action, which involves the interactions of the 
whole system, it has merely been found desirable, for analytical 
simplification, to introduce these auxiliary functions V, F, 0, H 
which do not directly represent physical quantities. But it 
will appear that by the suitable analytical procedure, namely 
by the operation of integrating round linear circuits, we shall 
be able to eliminate these potentials, and all the necessary 
relations will be expressible solely in terms of the physical 
quantities that are propagated, without the aid of auxiliary 
mathematical conceptions. 

Relations which express with more or less approxiinationy as 
the result of observation and experivnenty the physical 
properties of the Material Medium 

71. In any given material medium, devoid of hysteretic 
quality, the intensity of electric polarization {f\ g\ K) must 
be a mathematical function of the electric force (P, Q, R) 
which excites it : it is the electric force (P, Q, R) and not the 
aethereal force (P', Q, R') that is thus operative, because it is 
the former that acts on the electrons of the matter, the latter 
being on the other hand the forcive of type requisite to call 
out the complementary aethereal elastic displacement {f g, h). 
In ordinary cases, certainly in all cases in which the excit- 
ing force is small, the relation between (/', g\ h') and 
(P, Q, R) is a linear one : thus in the general problem of 
an aeolotropic medium there will be nine static dielectric 
coefficients. The principle of negation of perpetual motions 
requires this linear relation to be self-conjugate, and so reduces 
these nine coefficients to six ; we can arrive at a knowledge of 
their values only by experimental determination for the case 
of each substance. In the special case of isotropy there is 
only one coefficient, and the relation may be expressed in the 
usual form 

(/'./. A') "-^(P.Q.iZ). 

where K is the single dielectric constant of the medium. 



CHAP. VIl] INFLUENCE OF TRANSLATION ON STRUCTURE 113 

In problems relating to moving material media, the 
question arises at the threshold whether the value of K for 
the medium is sensibly affected by its movement through the 
aether. When it is considered that each molecule that is 
polarized by the electric force has effectively two precisely 
complementary poles, positive and negative, it becomes clear 
that a reversal of the motion of the material medium cannot 
alter the polarity induced : hence the influence of the motion 
on K can depend only on the square and higher even powers 
of the velocity. Thus the effect of motion of a material 
medium on its dielectric constant, or on other coefficients of 
electric polarization, is of the order of the square of the ratio 
of the velocity of the medium to the velocity of radiation. 

In cases in which the magnetization induced in the medium 
is of sufficient magnitude to be taken into account, similar 
statements will apply to it. In the general crystalline medium 
there are six independent coefficients of magnetization : these 
reduce for an isotropic medium to a single coefficient specified 
by /c, the magnetic susceptibility, or by /a, the magnetic per- 
meability, as defined by the equations 

(il,J5,0)=^(a,)8,7) = -(a,6,c), 

/A = 1 + 47r#c. 

And, as before, motion of the material medium does not alter 
K OT fjk except to the second order of the ratio of the velocity 
of the medium to the velocity of radiation. 

A simple equation of this kind, representing linear and 
reversible magnetization, applies to substances such as iron 
only when the field is of small intensity. As to the constancy 
of the dielectric susceptibility in strong fields exact data are 
wanting, but it seems likely that there also effects of hysteresis 
will be developed. In such cases, any empirical law of polarity 
that is found to suit the case sufficiently, including usually a 
constant term representing permanent polarization, can take 
the place of these linear relations. 

72. Finally, the relation between the current of conduction 
(ii', i/, vf) and the electric force may be taken as a linear one 

L. 8 



114 ANALYSIS OF AEOLOTBOPIC CONDUCTION [SECT. II 

involving in the general case nine independent coefficients of 
conductivity : in the case of isotropy these reduce to a single 
coefficient. In the general case this relation, of type 

v' = cTaP + cTaQ +<r„R 
vi = cr„P + cr„Q + cr,i2, 
may be written, after Sir George Stokes, in the form 

v' = ^ + i ( era, - <r a) Q - i ( cTi, - cr,i ) fl 

where JD = icriP*+iaaQ» + icr,iP 

+ (o-« + <r„) QR + (<r„ + (Tu) RP + (cr„ + cTa) PQ. 

The part of the current depending on the function D is related 
in a scalar manner to three principal axes of conduction in the 
crystalline medium, those namely for which the product terms 
do not occur in D. But the remaining part of the current is 
at each point at right angles to the electric force, and to an 
axis fixed in the material medium with its direction vector 
proportional to (cn — c^, o",i — ctu, ctm — era); and it is in 
magnitude proportional to the component of the electric force 
perpendicular to this axis, the direction of the flow being 
determined by a screw rule with reference to a definite assigned 
direction along the axis taken as the standard one. Thus the 
existence of terms of this latter type in the equations of con- 
duction implies the presence of a directed quality of some 
kind, related to this axis, which afifects the conduction : this 
may for example be of the nature of crystalline hemihediy, 
or it may arise from the influence of an imposed extraneous 
magnetic field (Hall eflfect), or conceivably (though not accord- 
ing to the present theory) from a translatory motion of the 
material medium through the aether. But in all ordinary 
crystalline and other media, in which the constitution of the 



CHAP. VIl] POTENTIAL FUNCTIONS ELIMINATED 115 

molecule is simply dipolar, so that directed quality whether 
intrinsic or imposed from without is absent, the nine coefficients 
of conduction will, as in the previous cases, reduce to six. 

It has been found by experiment that coefficients of electric 
conduction, unlike the other coefficients above considered, 
remain constant for all intensities of the current up to very 
high limits, so long as the temperature and physical condition 
of the conducting substance are not altered. This is what was 
perhaps to be anticipated from the circumstance that conduc- 
tion arises from the filtering of the simple non -polar electrons 
or ions through the conducting medium under the directing 
action of the electric force, not from orientation of polar 
complex molecules which may originate hysteretic changes in 
their cohesive grouping in the substance. 

Elimination of Mathematical Potentials: scheme expressed in 

terms of the Circuital Relations 

73. It follows from the formula for (P, Q, R) that 

dR _dQ_^_^Sa / d^ h — ^ ^ — (^P ^^ ^^\ 
dy dz dt \ dx dy dz) ^ \dx dy dz) * 

This is the analytical expression of Faraday's circuital relation 
that the line-integral of electric force round any circuit which 
is carried along with the matter is equal to the time-rate of 
diminution of the magnetic induction through it**. When 
the velocity {p, q, r) of the material medium is uniform in 
direction and magnitude, it becomes simply 

dR_dQ^__Ba 

dy dz dt 

Again, since (F, G, H) is a stream vector, 

dc db ^m -r, 
-_. — — = — V^^p 

dy dz 

^ ( dC, dBA 
-'^{^'-dy'-d^)' 

** This relation is nniyersally valid, the amount of tubes of induction cut 
across l^ the motion of an element of the circuit being represented by the 
element of the line-integral of the first terms in the eleotrio force. 

a— 2 



.(I) 



116 THE EQUATIONS IN TERMS OF PHYSICAL VECTORS [SECT. II 

Hence, introducing the definition expressed by the equations 
(a, )8,7) = (a-47ril„ b-^B,, c-A^irC,) (i) 

we have ~ — -^- = 4w-m; (II) 

this is the expression of Ampere's circuital relation that the 
line-integral of magnetic force round any circuit, fiaed or 
moving, is at each instant equal to the flow of the Maxwellian 
total current through it multiplied by 4/7r. It is important to 
notice that as (a, )8, 7) is here introduced into the theory it is 
a subsidiary quantity defined in terms of (a, b, c) and the 
magnetization. In this magnetization moreover, — not now in 
the current for what was called the total effective current 
(i/i, Vif Wi) does not appear in this mode of formulation — is 
included the electrodynamic equivalent of the convection of 
electric polarization : thus 

A, = A + rg'^qh\ (ii) 

where, assuming the possibility of permanent magnetization 
(ilo, ^0, Go) in addition to magnetization induced according to 
a linear vector coefficient |/c|, we have 

(A, B, (7) = (^, ^0, Q+ kl (a, )8, 7). (1) 

To these circuital relations (I) and (II), in which all 
potential functions have disappeared because from their nature 
such functions give null results on integration round linear 
circuits, we have only to add the specification of the electric 
current, namely 

n = u'+ j^^-^pp. (iii) 

where {u\ v\ v/) = \(r\ (P, Q, E) (2) 

r=/+/' (iv) 

/=A»(^-90 + r6) (Ill) 



(f\9\h') = (f,\g,\K)'^\~^^ 



(P, Q, i?), (3) 



the term (/©', g^', A©') representing any permanent electric 
polarization that may exist, as for example, in pyro-electric 



CHAP. VIl] COMPARISON WITH MAXWELL'S SCHEME 117 

crystals. A complete scheme of electromotive equations, in- 
volving only the physical changes that are propagated, is thus 
obtained. When the motion of the medium is uniform, the 
final equations of propagation, however heterogeneous the 
medium may be, are expressible in terms of either the elec- 
tric force (P, Q, R) or the magnetic induction (a, b, c). When 
the motion is not uniform, so that the circuital relation (I) 
requires modification, the latter will be the more convenient 
set of independent variables. 

As the equations of this complete scheme have been here 
numbered, a capital Roman numeral represents an exact 
relation of pure dynamics, a small Roman numeral indicates a 
relation of mere definition, and an Arabic numeral a relation, 
more or less exact, depending in a manner more or less empirical 
on the constitution of the material medium. 

74. When the material medium, however heterogeneous, 
is at rest in the aether, these electromotive equations reduce 
precisely to Maxwell's scheme, of type 

dR_dQ^_da 
dy dz ~' dt* 

dy dz 

(/", g'\ h") = (//, g,\ V) + (47rcV 1^^ I {P. Q, R% 

a = a + 4^A, 
(A, B, C) = (ilo, 5o, (7o) + kl (a, )8, 7), 

in which the coefficients \k\, \K\ may vary fix)m point to point 
of the medium, and in which permanent magnetic and electric 
polarizations {A^, Bo, Cq) and (/o', go\ ho') have for the sake of 
completeness been retained. 

When the material medium is in motion these equations are 
modified in the following respects: (a) relation (I) is further 
altered unless the motion is one of uniform translation : 03) there 



118 MODIFICATIONS FOR MOYINO STSTElfS [SECT. II 

is a new term, arising from convection of electric polarization, 
added to the magnetism, which changes A to ili as in (ii): 

(7) there is the current arising from convection of electric 
charge which supplies the term pp in (iii), a term which 
Maxwell in some connexions temporarily overlooked, but which 
has already been fully restored by FitzGerald and others: 
(S) there is the modification in the expression for the total 
electric displacement that is involved in the terms containing 
the velocity which occur in (III). Of these changes 08) and 

(8) are jointly required, if we are to obtain the correct value 
for the influence of material convection on the velocity of 
radiation, — they are thus experimentally verified in so far as 
one verification can include two relations: (7) is partially 
verified by Rowland s experiments on the electrodynamic 
eflfect of electric convection, while the influence of (/3) has also 
been to some extent directly detected in a similar manner by 
Bontgen. When the mateiial system moves without change 
of form, the influence of (a), which is involved in Mcucwell's 
equations of electric force, extends only to a very slight redis- 
tribution of electric charges. 

MaxwelVa original Electromotive scheme determinate for the case 

of Media ai rest 

75. In Maxwell's development of electromotive equations 
(the equations of mechanical force being excluded) for media 
maintained at rest, the indeterminateness which arose from the 
deficiencies of experimental knowledge, was represented, when 
the eflfective current was by his main hypothesis of circuitality 
confined to flow in complete circuits, by the presence of the 
unknown potential '*', contributing to the electric force a part 
which integrates to nothing round each complete circuit. When 
this potential is got rid of by elimination, the scheme assumes 
the form of circuital relations. It follows directly frtjm the form 
of these relations that, starting from any given initial condition 
of the system, they suffice to determine uniquely its subsequent 
course: thus, given the initial distribution of the vectors 
(P, Q, R) and (a, )8, 7), the circuital relations express directly 
the initial distribution of their time-gradients djdt (P, Q, R) 



CHAP. VIl] maxwell's SCHEME DETERMINATE 119 

and dldt(a, /3, 7), and therefore also the values of the vectors 
themselves at the succeeding instant of time ; and so on, step 
by step, for all successive instants of time. This proves that, 
when the material media are at rest, the potential 'V thus 
introduced is not an independent variable, and is in fact not 
necessary for the electrodynamic problem at all ; that its value, 
if for any purpose it is desired, is implicitly involved in the 
distribution of electric and magnetic forces alone, — the dis- 
tribution of electric charge and polarity, of which 'V is then 
the potential, being determinable directly from the concentra- 
tion of the electric force. 

76. Electric Theory of Double Refraction : comparison with 
von Helmholtz's Oeneralization, — To illustrate the bearing of 
this result, we shall consider Maxwell's investigation of optical 
propagation in a crystalline medium at rest, referred to its 
principal dielectric axes. The equations are 

p n m«_/^Z d^ dQ d^ ^.^\ 
(r, y, it)- \^-^^ + ^ , ^^ + ^y . dt'^ dzj' 

where "^ is an undetermined function which might originally, 
as Maxwell constructed the theory, have been supposed to 
involve possible phenomena hitherto unelucidated : 

(u, V, w) = (47rc«)-^ ~ {K,P, K,Q, KJR\ 

where K^, K2, K^ are the inductive capacities in the directions 
of the principal electric axes, which are chosen as axes of 
reference: while 

curl {F, G, H) = (a, 6, c), curl (a, )8, 7) = 47r {u, v, w) : 

and we take the medium to be non-magnetic so that 

(a, 6, c) = (a, fi, 7). 

The latter equations lead to 



aw 






■•■ dxdt) ' 



120 AEOLOTROPIC WAVE-PROPAGATION [SECT. U 

where J represents dFjdx + dGjdy + dHjdz. In Maxwells 
indirect way of introducing {F, 0, H) this vector is made up 
of a definite part due to the magnetism, a definite part due 
to the current, and an undetermined part such as must not 
affect the integrated electric force round a complete circuit: 
we can arrange (and therefore ought to so arrange in order 
to avoid the danger arising fix)m too many variables apparently 
but not really independent) that the latter part is absorbed 
in "*" so that (F, 0, H) becomes definite, this definite expression 
making J null identically since the current is circuital Now 
in order to develope from these equations the circumstances of 
electric disturbances travelling in plane sheets, let F, O, H and 
^ all be functions of ii? + my •\-nZ'- Vt, or say of oo, so that 
V is the velocity of propagation of a disturbance travelling in 
the direction (Z, m, n) : on substitution in the electrodynamic 
equations, writing (a*, 6*, c*)** for c" {Ki~\ ^,~^ Kr^), we obtain 

d^F^V^^^lVd^ 
dw* "" a* do)* a* dm^ ' 

that is 

with similar expressions for d^O/dco* and d^ff/da>\ The relation 
J null or 

dF^dO^dH^Q 

dx dy dz 



then gives for the velocity of propagation Fresnel's equation 

m* TV 



12 ^,a *,2 



the alternatives V null, or '9* independent of oo, being irrelev- 
ant as referring to a steady state. 



«* 



This notation will not here be confused with that for magnetic indaction. 
* The Investigation as given by MaxweU in * Treatise,' §§ 794 — 7, is vitiated 
by making ^ vanish, apparently by an oversight: that quantity is the static 
potential of the polarization of the material medium and so travels along with 
the waves. It does however vanish when the medium is isotropic, in so far as 
it is not a stationary potential due to permanent electric charge : of . § 36. 



CHAP. VIl] DIRECTIONS OF THE VARIOUS VECTORS 121 

In the electric propagation the current (w, v, w) and the 
magnetic induction (a, 6, c) are both, quite irrespective of the 
character of the medium, in the plane of the wave-front, simply 
because they are both circuital : and they are moreover at 
right angles to each other on account of the curl relation. 
This may be at once verified by referring the disturbance for 
a moment to coordinate axes one of which is at right angles to 
the wave-firont. 

To determine the direction (X, /a, v) of the current vector in 
the wave-front, we have 

dP „ „ d^F 
— Kcr^ —- = V^F = -— 
dt da>* ' 

so that 

IV d^ 

hence 

^ I m n 

Thus the electric vector, and therefore also the magnetic vector, 
is parallel to one of the principal axes of the section of Fresnel's 
ellipsoid af^ja? + y^jb* + z^Jc^ = 1 by the plane of the wave-front. 

77. It may be remarked that Maxwell's own investigation 
{loc, dt) is apparently more general than the above in that it 
shows that the same law of velocity of propagation would hold 
good if in the final equations of propagation 

dFjdx + dGjdy + dHjdz 

did not vanish identically, but were denoted by a new variable J, 
the reason in fact being that '^, on which J depends, travels 
along with {F, 0, H). Substituting F, G,H,^ b& functions of 
to in the equations of propagation, then of type 






dx \dt^ dxdt) 

we would then have 



('-?) 



dti>*~ dm a* da^ 



122 HELHHOLTZ'S GENERALIZATION [SEGT. II 

with similar equations for G, H : 80 that 



dJ f aH^ bhn^ (W_\ dJ 



m* n* \ ^^d*^ 



~(^SrrF"*'*"6»^^»"*"c»-FV dai» 



/dJ 1 d'^N/ Z« m= w' \ ^ 



\da> F d 



O)" 



Thus the alternatives would be that the waves are propagated 
according to Fresnel's law of velocity, or that the state of dis- 
turbance is one in which there is no electric force. 

The situation is revealed at a glance on transforming the 
equations of propagation from the potential (F, (?, JBT) to the 
electric force (P, Q, R) as independent variable: they then 
become of type 

dx\dx dy dz ) a* d^ 

in which J and ^ disappear simultaneously : thus waves of 
electric force are propagated according to the same laws 
whether/ is taken to vanish or not. In either case the electric 
force (P, Q, R) is not itself in the plane of the wave-front, but 
the vector (a'^P, 6~'Q, c~^R) is so and corresponds to Fresnels 
radiation-vector. 

In his discussion of the Maxwellian dielectric scheme fh)m 
the point of view of action at a distance, von Helmholtz started 
from the assumption of a definite generalization of the Neu- 
mann electrodynamic energy formula, which led him to a 
scheme in which the current was not circuital, and thence to 
electric condensational waves propagated with a definite finite 
velocity, while there were still waves of exactly transverse type 
propagated with the velocity given by Maxwell's law. It has 
been noticed that this result is much wider than von Helm- 
holtz's special hypothesis*. The restriction to circuital currents 
however at once excludes any such condensational waves. 

* Ray. Soc. Ptoc. xux., 1891, p. 682. 



CHAP. VIl] THE MOST GENERAL TYPE OF WAVE-SURFACE 128 

In Maxwell's original analysis of double refraction {Phil. 
Trans., 1866), the possibility of magnetic aeolotropy was 
included, with the same principal axes however as the 
electric aeolotropy: the wave-surface then appeared in the 
form of Fresnel's surface as modified by homogeneous shear 
made up of uniform shrinkages on the directions of its principal 
axea The interesting remark has been made by Heaviside, 
and also by A. McAulay, that the wave-surface would still 
be Fresnel's surface subjected to a homogeneous strain if the 
magnetic and electric axes of the crystal were ditferent. In 
£Ekct refer the equations of the circuital system to the magnetic 
axes: by altering (x, y, z) in certain ratios, and also the 
components of the various vectors, the equations readily assume 
with these new variables the form suitable to magnetic isotropy, 
with its corresponding Fresnel wave-surface : hence trans- 
forming back again, the statement is proved. This simple 
correspondence does not however extend to the dynamical 
laws of phenomena such as reflexion. 

Oil the Transition from Molecular to Molar or Mechanical 

Theory 

78. A definite and consistent scheme of electrodynamic 
equations has thus been obtained by regarding the material 
system as made up of discrete molecules, involving in their 
constitutions orbital systems of electrons, and moving through 
the practically stagnant aether. It is not necessary, for the 
development of the equations, to form any notion of the con- 
stitution of the electron, or of how its translation through 
the aether can be intelligibly conceived. But, inasmuch as 
the absence of disturbance of the aether by its motion, or 
by the motion of a system of such electrons, when viewed in the 
light of the disturbance of a material medium produced by 
motion of material bodies through it, has often led to an 
attitude of entire agnosticism with reference to aethereal 
constitution, it seems desirable that a kinematic scheme* 
explaining or illustrating the phenomena, such as may be based 
on the conception of a rotationally elastic aether, should have 

* Ct Appendix £. 



124 ADEQUACY OF PRESENT AETHER-SCHEME [SECT. II 

a place in the foundations of aether-theory. Any hesitation, 
resting on d priori scruples, in accepting as a working basis 
such a rotational scheme, seems to be no more warranted than 
would be a diffidence in assuming the atmosphere to be a 
continuous elastic medium in treating of the theory of sound. 
It is known that the origin of the elasticity of the atmosphere 
is something wholly diflferent from the primitive notion of 
statical spring, being in fact the abrupt encounters of molecules: 
in the same way the rotational elastic quality of the incom- 
pressible aether, which forms a sufficient picture of its effective 
constitution, may possibly have its origin in something more 
fundamental that has not yet even been conceived. But in 
both cases what is important for immediate practical applica- 
tions is a condensed and definite basis from which to develope 
the interlacing ramifications of a physical scheme : and both in 
the theory of sound and the theory of radiation this is obtained 
by the use of a representation of the action of the medium 
which a deeper knowledge may afterwaixls expand, transform, 
and even modify in detail. Although however it is possible 
that we may thus be able ultimately to probe deeper into the 
problem of aethereal constitution, just as the kinetic theory 
has done in the case of atmospheric constitution, yet there 
does not seem to be at present any indication whatever of any 
faculty which can bring that medium so near to us in detail as 
our senses bring the phenomena of matter : so that from this 
standpoint there is much to be said in favour of definitely 
regarding the scheme of a continuous rotationally elastic aether 
as an ultimate mode of physical representation. 

79. A formal scheme of the dynamical relations of free 
aether being thus postulated after the manner of Maxwell and 
MacCullagh, and a notion as clear as possible having been 
obtained of the aethereal constitution of a molecule and its 
associated revolving electrons, by aid of the kinematic rota- 
tional hypothesis, it remained to effect with complete generality 
the transition between a molecular theory of the aethereal or 
electric field which considers the molecules separately, and a 
continuous theory expressed by differential equations which 



CHAP. Vll] MECHANICAL TERMS DISTINCT FROM STRUCTURAL 125 

take cognizance only of the properties of the element of volume, 
the latter alone being the proper domain of mechanical as 
distinct from molecular science. This transformation has been 
accomplished by replacing summations spread over the dis- 
tribution of molecules by continuous integrations spread over 
the space occupied by them. In cases where the integrals 
concerned all remain finite and definite, when the origin to 
which they refer is inside the matter so that the lower limit of 
the radius vector is null, there is no difficulty in the transition: 
this is for example the case in the domain of the ordinary 
theory of gravitational forces. But in important branches of 
the electric theory of polarized media some of the integral 
expressions became infinite under these circumstances ; which 
was an indication that it is not legitimate to replace the efifect 
of the part of the discrete distribution of molecules which is 
adjacent to the point considered by that of a continuous 
material distribution*. The result of the integration still, 
however, gave us a valid estimate of the efifect of the material 
system as a whole, when we bore in mind that the infinite 
or rather undetermined term entering at the inner limit 
really represents the part of the result which depends solely on 
the local molecular configuration, a part whose actual magnitude 
could be determined only when that configuration is exactly 
assigned or known. The consideration of this indeterminate 
part is altogether evaded by means of the general mechanical 
principle of mutual compensation of molecular forcives. This 
asserts that in such cases, when a sensible portion of the efifect 
per molecule arises from the action of the neighbouring 
molecules, that part must be omitted from the account in 
estimating the mechanical efifect on an element of volume of 
the medium; indeed otherwise mechanical theory would be 
impossible tf. The mutual, statically equilibrating, actions of 

* Cf . Appendix A. 

ft In the language of pore mathematics the integrals or rather summations 
expressing the forcives are divergent at the lower limits ; which does not matter 
lor purposes of mechanical theory because it is only their principal values in 
Caubhy's sense that are there involved. 

In case the mechanical and molecular terms in the complete energy function 
of the material medium were not independent, a mechanical disturbance would 



126 AXIOM OF MOLECULAB 8TABIUTT [SECT. IJ 

adjacent molecules are efifective towards determiniDg the 
structure of the material medium, and any change therein 
involves change in its local physical constants and propeilies, 
which may or may not be important according to circum- 
stances: but such local action contributes nothing towards 
polarizing or straining the element of mass whose structure 
is thus constituted, and therefore nothing to mechanical ex- 
citation, unless at a place where there is abrupt change of 
density. 

affect its molecular stractore and so lead to change of its oonstitntion : snch 
are cases in which pressure alters, gradually or suddenly, the state of dissocia- 
tion, or of aggregation, of a gas. All such cases are beyond the limits of rational 
mechanics. The independence between mechanical and molecular theory is 
therefore not a principle that can be demonstrated theoreticaUy by any process 
of averaging over the molecules, because it is not always true : it is an inference 
from the molecular stability and permanence of each special system to which it 
applies. 




CHAPTER VIII 

OPTICAL AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTS RELATING TO ENERGY 

AND STRESS 

MechaniccU Forcive expressed in terms of Stress 

80. It follows from the analysis of Maxwell, ' Treatise/ ii 
§ 640, that in cases in which the polarization current is insigni- 
ficant so that {u-fy v — g, w—h) is practically the same as 
(m, v, w), the mechanical electrokinetic forces acting on any 
portion of a material system at rest would be statically equival- 
ent to a traction over its boundary specified as follows, |^ 
denoting magnetic force and 23 magnetic induction: (i) a 
hydrostatic pressure |^V^^> (^) ^ tension along the bisector of 
the angle € between |^ and J8, of intensity |^J8 cos" €/47r, and 
(iii) a pressure along the bisector of the supplementary angle 
of intensity fl^iS sin'^ €/47r — were it not for an outstanding 
bodily torque of intensity |^i3 sin 2€/47r tending to rotate 
from 23 towards |^. When 23 and |^ are in the same direction, 
as they are in isotropic media not permanently magnetized, the 
torque vanishes, and this representation of the mechanical 
electrokinetic forces in the form of a stress is perfect: the 
traction on any sur&ce that arises from the stress is then a 
hydrostatic pressure '^jSir together with a tension /x-|^'/^ 
along the lines of magnetic force. 

In a similar manner we can derive from the theory of a 
polarized dielectric the result that the mechanical electrostatic 
forces, for a system involving only isotropic dielectrics, are 
derivable from a stress consisting of a hydrostatic pressure 
i&*/S7rC* together with a tension KiB^/4/7rC* along the lines of 



128 EQUIVALENT MECHANICAL STRESS-SYSTEM [SECT. II 

the electric force ffi, to which is however to be added a pressure 
(K —!)(&* /Sircf* acting over the surface of each conducting 
region. These mechanical forces differ from the ones derivable 
from the Faraday-Maxwell type of electrostatic stress, according 
to which the function of a uniform dielectric is merely to 
transmit the forces without adding anything to them : since we 
here regard the material dielectric as polarizable analogously 
to a magnet, it will be more than a mere medium of transmis- 
sion as regards the mechanical force. 

Repulsion of condiLCting masses by Magnetic Alternators 

81. An elegant application of these results is to the case 
of oscillatorj' or alternating electric currents in conductors, of 
wave-length long compared with the linear dimensions of the 
material system so that the influence of the polarization 
current and of the electrostatic forces is negligible compared 
with that of the current of conduction, but yet so rapidly 
alternating that the currents do not penetrate into metallic 
conductors further than a thin outer skin. In such a case the 
magnetic induction must be, close to the surface of a conductor, 
wholly tangential, — being continuous normally and null inside. 
As the magnetic field arises from the conduction currents, its 
modification by the displacement currents in the surrounding 
dielectric is negligible : thus by Ampere's circuital relation the 
magnetic force (a, jS, 7) in the dielectric, where there is no 
sensible current, is derived from a magnetic potential U. The 
equations of propagation of magnetic force in the surrounding 
space are then equivalent to the equation of propagation of 
aereal sound-waves in which U represents the condensation, 
the velocity of propagation being however that of radiation 
instead of that of sound; indeed with these restrictions, 
nothing is gained in accuracy by not taking the propagation to 
be instantaneous. The condition of magnetic force tangential 
along a conductor makes the conductor correspond to a solid 
wall. Hence there is perfect formal analogy between the 
maintained magnetic oscillations of long wave-length in the 
space between the conductors, and standing aereal sound- 




CHAP. VIIl] COPPER FILINGS IN ALTERNATING FIELD 129 

waves in a region of the same form. Thus the acoustical 
analysis for standing waves long compared with the dimensions 
of the boundary has an application to alternating electric 
fields. Moreover the conductors in the alternating electro- 
dynamic field are repelled from the alternating source (by 
Maxwell's theorem above) with the forces arising from a normal 
pressure of intensity f^^/Sir : this again is an exact analogue, 
except as to sign, of the attrdction of solid obstacles by the 
aereal sound-waves issuing from a vibrator. With wave-lengths 
long, as here, compared with the dimensions of the obstacles, the 
acoustic problem is virtually one of oscillatory flow of a fluid 
not sensibly subjected to compression: and the pull on the 
wall is simply the defect of pressure due to the head of velocity 
at the place. Whenever the electric oscillation is of a steady 
character we may express the corresponding result in Faraday's 
manner by saying that a small piece of metal, say copper or 
iron, is urged towards the places where the energy of the steady 
oscillation is weakest, the force so urging it depending only on 
its form and not on its material. A small elongated piece of 
metal will moreover tend to set itself across the lines of 
alternating magnetic force for the same reason that a small 
elongated obstacle will tend to set itself across lines of aereal 
flow. It might thus prove practicable to use copper filings 
(suitably treated to avoid cohesion) to map out the magnetic 
field of an alternating motor, just as iron filings are employed 
to map out a steady magnetic field : each filing will tend to set 
its length across the magnetic field, not along it, and will at the 
same time tend to move towards regions of weaker alternating 
magnetic force. 

The penetration and transmissicm of progressive dielectric 
waves, such as Hertzian aethereal waves, through metallic pipes 
and channels is however not (or is only roughly) analogous to 
the collection and transmission of aereal sound-waves of the 
same length through speaking tubes. Thus there is only rough 
general similarity between electric telegraphy across space and 
the corresponding sound signals. The action of the ground and 
of intervening obstacles is practically much the same in both 
cases, though non-metallic obstacles would usually be more 

L. 9 



130 AETHEREAL TELEORAPHT [SECT. U 

absorptive in the electric case. In both cases the radiation 
attenuates rapidly with increasing distance from the source, 
roughly according to the same law. Situations which are 
suitable for the one are also suitable for the other. The advan- 
tage possessed by the electric method, irrespective of greater 
initial intensity and greater delicacy in the receiver, is 
facility in picking up the signal from the surrounding space : 
the function of the wire, extending up into the air, that is 
usually connected with the receiver is presumably to surmount 
intervening obstacles, or to tap a stronger stratum of radiation 
wherever it happens to be : for the different parts of its length 
could hardly have time to act in a cumulative manner, unless 
the waves are very long**. 

Mechanical Pressure of Radiation 

82. In cases in which radiation is important, the Max- 
wellianelectrodynamic stress-formula is, as seen above, inapplic- 
able. The case in which it comes nearest to being useful for 
obtaining exact results is that of electric disturbance, of any 
kind, in a uniform non-conducting isotropic medium which is at 
rest and also devoid of magnetization. In that case the electro- 
kinetic part of the mechanical bodily forcive (X, Y, Z) is of type 

X = (v'-g)y-(w-h)l3 

= (l-ir-0(t^-t^^), 
because the total current is K times the aethereal current; 
so that the forcive acting over any region of such a uniform 
medium is statically equivalent to 1 — K'^^ times Maxwell's 
traction over the outer boundary. 

83. The discussion of the mechanical forcives connected 
with the absorption and reflexion of radiation is thus best 
conducted directly. For the case of a beam of light passing 
across a medium whose properties change but slightly in lengths 
comparable with a wave, there is practically no reflexion ; and 
it will appear that it is only absorption that is accompanied 
by mechanical force, which is in the direction of propagation of 
the light and depends on the rate of absorption of energy. 
But at an interface where the transition is practically abrupt, 

** The wire connected with the radiator may however secore this. 



CHAP. VIIl] MECHANICAL FORCES IN WAVE-TRAIN 131 

there will also be a turning back of energy of the waves owing 
to a finite reflexion, and this will involve mechanical traction 
acting on the interface. The validity of Fresnels laws of 
reflexion at an interface of transparent optical media shows 
that, even in comparison with the length of light-waves, the 
layer of transition is thin: as regards Hertzian waves it 
is of course obviously so. It is natural to assume like 
abruptness in the transitions between absorbing optical media, 
where the data are as yet hardly precise enough to test the 
fact. 

Consider the simple case of a train of plane-polarized waves 
advancing in the direction of x, so that all the quantities are 
functions of x only, the electric force being (0, Q, 0) and the 
magnetic force (0, 0, 7). We shall retain a magnetic per- 
meability fi in view of possible application to long Hertzian 
waves: and we shall suppose (so far as a simple analysis is 
found to permit) that both /i and K and also the conductivity a 
are functions of x. The equations of propagation are 

dri dQ d7 ^^ K dQ 

The mechanical force per unit volume is given by equations of 
type 

^ ( dg\ ( dh\^ ^,dP . ,dP . ,,dP 

thus here X = (v - ^) 7, F= 0, Z= 0. 

Now I v^dx = — 7*/87r 

so long as 7 is continuous between the limits of integration, 
which is always. Also 

while for harmonic oscillatory motion of period 27r/n 

^ dt" fi dxdt ' 

9—2 



132 MECHANICAL PBESSURE OF BAOUTION [SECT. U 

hence this integral is equal to 

that is, 

I /dOV !*• 
-(8.cVnV|(^)K 

provided that fi is constant, and also that dQ/dt is continuous 
throughout the range of integration as is always the case, though 
K may change gradually or abruptly. 

We have thus 

which gives the aggregate mechanical forcive on the stretch of 
the medium between Xi and a^ in the form of pressures, of the 
amount in |...|, acting on its ends. Thus for the simple 
harmonic time-alternations of 7 and Q that we have stssumed, 
the time-average of the pressure on either end is 

(167r)-U7* + <?//^C^X 
7 and Q now representing the magnetic and electric amplitudes 
of the vibration ; this is the sum of the mean kinetic and 
potential energies per unit volume of the radiation, less that 
involved in the electric polarization of the molecules, divided 
by /Lc; hence on any portion of the medium there is a 
mechanical force, directed along the waves, equal per unit 
cross-section to the difference of these densities of energy at 
its ends. 

In a transparent medium 



[dtJ ^KpL\dxJ " K \dt) ' 



so that the above internal pressure may be expressed in the 
form 



<->-{^^i^„.(S)l- 



If there is in the medium a directly incident wave whose vibra- 
tion at the interface is 71 cos nt and also a reflected wave 
73 cos (nt — e), and a refracted wave, this result may be applied 
to a layer of the medium containing the interface ; thus there 



CHAP. VIIl] PHASES OF VECTORS IN DAMPED WAVE-TRAIN 138 

will be a mechanical traction on the interface represented by a 
difference of pressures on its two sides, that on the incident side 
being 

(Stt)"* [{71 cos n^ + 7a cos (nt — €)}^+^~^ {71 sin nt+yi sin (nt — e)}']. 

In air or vacuum that is (71* + 7a' + 27173 cos €)/87r, or simply 
y^/Sir, where 7 is the amplitude of the resultant magnetic 
vibration on that side. 

When the radiation is directly incident on an opaque medium 
7 and dQ/dt are null in its interior: so that, when the surrounding 
medium is air or vacuum, it.s surface sustains in all a mechanical 
inward normal traction of intensity ff/Sir, that is, equal to the 
mean energy per unit volume of the radiation just outside it, in 
agreement with Maxwell's original statement. 

Absorption : Perfectly Black Bodies : Perfect Reflectors 

84. On the molecular conception of the constitution of 
a material body capable of propagating radiation, which is the 
foundation of the present theory of material media, it becomes 
important to inquire whether there can exist either a perfectly 
absorbent body or a perfect reflector, in view of the general 
theory of exchanges of radiation that is usually based, after 
Balfour Stewart and Kirchhoff, on arguments which assume 
the theoretical existence of such bodies. 

The following analysis, forming in the main a scrutiny 
of the nature of steady absorption of radiation, will determine 
how closely either of these ideal properties may be approximated 
to, in cases in which the transition at the surface is so abrupt 
that the ordinary dynamical laws of reflexion and transmission 
apply. 

Consider a train of plane waves travelling parallel to the 

axis of X in an absorbing medium, the waves being polarized 

so that the magnetic force is 7, parallel to the axis of z, and the 

electric force is Q, parallel to the axis of y. The equations of 

propagation are, as above, 

A _^ dy dQ ^ dc 

" dx' dx " dt * 



134 STATIC ENERGY EXCEEDS KINETIC IN A DAMPED TRAIN [SECT.U 

in which c = /A7, the coefficient /i being sensibly different from 
unity only in magnetic substances and then only for long 
waves. 

It follows that 

and therefore 

dQ K^ ^ J_ d^ 
^ 3f 47rC» df ^ ^fi da!" ' 

which is the equation of propagation. 

Considering the case of radiation of period 27r/n so that 

Q = Qo«*"*"^, 

K 1 

this gives am — -, — 1 n' = - — p" 

* 47rC* 47r/Lt^ 



or 



y«'---^m|^l-^^cnj , say =y, + ip,. 



On separating the real parts, we have 

Q = Qo^^** cos (n« - p^X 
corresponding to 

c = Qonr^ (pi^ + jPj')* e^»* sin (n^ — pa^? + €), where tan 6 = p^lpi , 

and V = Qo (47rn/i)~^ (pi* + y,«) 6~^»* sin (nt — pa^? + 26). 

Thus the magnetic flux is in a different phase from the electric 
force, involving a diminution in their vector product which 
determines the energy transmitted across any plane ; while the 
lag of phase of the electric current behind the time-gradient 
of the electric force is twice as great as that of the magnetic 
flux. The energy per unit volume of the radiation at any 
part of the wave consists of an electric part ^Qg'', or KQ^/SirC/^, 
and a magnetic part firf/Sw : the ratio of the time-averages of 
these parts is 

KfiC^ln^(p,^'\'PJ'\ or (1 -h 167r»<r«a*/n«-F»)-*, 

which is constant, but not unity except for transparent media. 
The time-rate of propagation of radiant energy is, by Poynting's 
theorem, which applies since the matter is at rest, 



CHAP. VIIl] ENERGY OF WAVES NOT ALL PROPAGATED 135 

Across the plane a? = it is therefore on the average 
Qo'Pi/STm/A, which corresponds to a density of energy equal 
to mean square of electric force divided by 47r/i, travelling 
with the speed n/pa of the waves. This involves the result 
that only the fraction 

of the total energy of the wave-system can be considered as 
propagated; in the case of an undamped wave-train this 
is only the purely aethereal part. The aethereal wave-train, 
passing across the material medium, sets its molecules into 
sympathetic independent electric vibration : the energy of these 
vibrations constitutes a part of the total energy per unit 
volume, but that part is not propagated. This remark applies 
equally to all optical theories in which change of velocity of 
propagation is traced to the influence of sympathetic vibrations 
of the molecules ; in tact it applies to all cases in which velocity 
depends upon wave-length. Delicate considerations then arise 
as to the manner in which the front of a train of simple waves 
advances in a material medium : a simple wave-train with an 
abrupt front could not carry sufficient energy to establish itself 
as it goes along, and in fact the complete energy of the train is 
only established with the smaller velocity of the group of waves 
which constitutes the real advancing disturbance*. 

85. To determine how perfect the absorption of an actual 
medium with an abrupt interface may become, we have to 
solve the problem of direct reflexion. Let the expressions for 
the incident, reflected, and transmitted beams be respectively 

Q = expt^n^-%j, 7= -Q 
Qi^C exp {mt - px\ ry^ = - 1^ Qj ; 

iJLTh 

* Cf. Baylei^, * Theory of Sound,* toL i. Appendix, referring to O. BeynokU. 



136 STRUCTURE OF A PERFECT ABSORBER [SECT. II 

where by the equation of propagation 

so that for downward waves 

p = + imo~^\ (sin ^ + ( cos \6), 

where tantf=*^^. andX = f^y. 

K n \ficosffJ 

A real solution will ultimately emerge on rejection of the 
imaginary parts of these expressions. 

At the interface Q + Q' = Qi, 7 + 7' = 7i, 
sothat 1+5 = 0, l-£=-t^(7: 

hence ^(7= (l-^*)"' 

_ 1 + X COS 1^0 + iX sin ^0 
1 + 2X. cos i^ + X' ' 

and 5= (l + £?.)/fl-2-^) 

\ fin Jl\ fin J 

1 - X» 4- 2a sin ^g 
l + 2Xcosi^ + X« • 

The amplitude of the reflected vibration is the modulus of J5, 

given by 

^ __ ( l--2X'co8g + X0 * 

' " 'l-2Xcosi^ + X»'* 

Thus I B I cannot vanish, so that there cannot be a perfect 

absorber or "absolutely black body" bounded by an abrupt 

interface; but that does not preclude the possibility of a 

molecular constitution of the interface, of a loose and gradual 

kind such as may exist in lamp-black, which might absorb 

light as soft porous bodies absorb sound*. It may readily 

be shown that the body is a total reflector, \B\ being unity, 

only when K is infinite, or else when is equal to ^ir and 

therefore ajK is infinite. 

* The character of this latter process, as depending on degradation throogh 
heat-condnotion in the pores, has been fully elucidated by Rayleigfa, ' Theory of 
Sound,* Ed. 2 §§ 350—1. 



CH. Vin] RADIANT ENERGY IN PART MECHANICALLY AVAILABLE 137 

Relation of Intensity of Radiation to Temperature 

86. An important application has been made by Boltzmannf, 
following Bartoli, of the result above verified, that the pressure 
exerted on an opaque body by direct radiation in free space 
is equal to the density of radiant energy just in front of it. 

If we consider an enclosure in which a steady state of 
radiation is established so that radiation is traversing it equally 
in all directions, we have to average the direct pressures for 
the different values of the angle of incidence 0, there being no 
sideway pressure: the foreshortening of the element of area 
pressed gives a &ctor costf, and resolving the pressure normally 
gives another cos 0, so that the resultant pressure on the inter- 
fieu^e is equal to one-third of the total density of radiant energy 
in the enclosure. 

Now let us consider an opaque body (it need not be 
perfectly black), surrounded by a space filled with the radiation 
appropriate to its temperature, which is bounded externally 
by a totally reflecting and therefore impervious flexible 
envelope. This envelope sustains the pressure of the radiation 
inside it: by changing its form the volume enclosed can be 
contracted, and the radiant energy that filled the part of the 
volume that thus disappears will be driven into the central 
body. But the total energy that so disappears is this volume- 
distribution of vibrational energy together with the work done 
by the envelope against the radiant repulsion, amounting in 
all to four times the latter part. This process is reversible ; so 
that the energy emitted in radiation is in part mechanically 
available. But it is not to be classed with mechanical energy, 
because the availability is not complete ; it is not possible to 
execute a cyclic process by which radiant energy is changed 
directly into mechanical energy. 

87. We can however construct a system involving differ- 
ences of temperature through which a reversible cycle can be 
operated, and to which therefore Camot's principle can be 
applied. We have to suppose an interior body Ai at tempera- 

t Cf. Bayleigh, Phil, Mag. 1S98. 



138 RELATION OF RADIATION TO TEMPERATURE [SECT. U 

ture r,, surrounded by an exterior body A^ at temperature T,, 
but separated from it by a perfectly reflecting shell in the 
space between, which will prevent equalization of temperature 
through passage of radiation from the one body to the other. 
The spaces on the two sides of the shell will each be filled with 
radiation of the constitution and density corresponding to the 
temperature of the body on that side. We can imagine an 
ideal pump, constructed of perfectly reflecting material, that 
will pump radiation from the one side of this shell to the other, 
working against the difference of radiant pressure between the 
two sides : when the piston of such a pump is drawn out, the 
energy of the radiation that is isolated in the cylinder must be 
diminished by the work done by its pressure on the retreating 
piston. The result will be that if pi and />, are the pressures 
of radiation on the two sides, then for each unit volume of 
radiation transferred by the pump from outside to inside, the 
outer body A^ must emit energy of amount 4p,, made up of 
the energy E^ of the radiation and the work p^ done by it on the 
piston, while the inner must absorb exactly what remains of this 
after the mechanical work W is performed. Now by Camot's 
principle, we have for such an engine working reversibly between 
temperatures T^ and Ti 

H^_H^ W 

In the present case, if the temperatures T^ and Ti on the two 
sides of the partition differ by a fiuite amount, the determination 
of the work W will involve an integration : let us therefore take 
the difference of temperatures to be infinitesimal**, say ST, 
when the work will be equal to Pt—pu or Bp, to the first order. 
As H^ is 4p3 or |^,, we have thus 

T, BT ' 
which yields on integration 

log E = 4i log T 4- const. 

Thus we arrive at the empirical law enunciated by StefiEin, 
that the density of radiant energy corresponding to any given 

See § 87** at the end of this Chapter. 



•• 



CH. VIIl] IDEALMECHANISMSPERMISSIBLEINTHERMODYNAMICS139 

absolute temperature is proportional to the fourth power of 
that temperature*. A consideration of the further develop- 
ments of W. Wienf, who takes into account the Doppler effect 
in order to obtain a relation between the constitutions of the 
complete radiations at diflFerent temperatures, would take us 
too far from our subject. 

The argument here sketched implies that absolutely none 
of the radiation is absorbed by the surface layers of the dividing 
shell or by the pump ; for such absorption would soon generate 
an appreciable change of temperature in this surface layer and 
so modify the application of the thermodynamic principle. 
This requires the screen to be of a purely ideal kind, in that 
it is absolutely totally reflecting for all radiation, a property 
which cannot be possessed by any actual screen of molecular 
material constitution. The question arises whether this in- 
troduction of an ideal mechanism vitiates the thermodynamic 
proof: as its function is only to produce constraint in bulk, 
not as regards individual molecules, and therefore is a 
mechanical one, it can reasonably be held that its use is 
legitimate. In fact if the radiation is constituted of Hertzian 
waves of considerable length, a metallic screen of good con- 
ducting quality approximates very closely to the ideal required, 
as it produces practically complete reflexion and therefore no 
absorption. Another assumption in this mode of argument is 
that the motion of the screens does not disturb the structure 
of anything that may exist in the space between the black 
bodies: thus that space must be empty of all matter. We 
must also consider the screens to be freely pervious to aether, 
which may form a real diflBculty in the argument. We have 
seen moreover that in a material dielectric medium the pressure 
of a train of radiation directly incident on a perfect reflector or 
on a black body is not equal to the density of the radiant energy 
just in front of it. 

* With the above may be compared the thermodynamic argument which 
shows that in weakly paramagnetic material the magnetic susceptibility varies 
inversely as the absolute temperature : Phil. Trans, 1897 A, p. 287. 

t Berlin. SitzungBberichte, 1898. 



140 CRITERION OF REVERSIBILITY [SECT. U 

On Dynamical and Material Symmetry: General Deductions 

88. The criterion that the motion of a system may he 
revereihle is that on reversing the time, that is on writing — t 
in place of + 1, the dynamical equations shall remain unchanged: 
for this analytical operation involves the change of sign of every 
velocity such as dxjdi, while the coordinates of position such as x 
are not changed : nor are any of the accelerations such as d^xjdP 
thereby changed. A non-dissipative dynamical system is revers- 
ible provided the kinetic energy jP is a function of the velocities 
in which all the terms are of the second or other even degree with 
coefficients involving the coordinates in any manner, while the 
potential energy TT is a function of the coordinates alone : for 
change of sign of ^ then leaves unaltered the Lagrangian function 
T—W on which the course of the motion depends. But if the 
dynamical problem has been modified after the manner of Bouth 
and Lord Kelvin, by eliminating such of the coordinates as 
appear only through their velocities in the expression for the 
energy, and introducing in place of them the corresponding 
momenta, which are under these circumstances constant, then 
the modified Lagrangian function contains mixed terms, in- 
volving these constant momenta and the remaining velocities 
each in the first degree, in addition to quadratic terms in the 
remaining velocities and in the cyclic momenta respectively: 
and the motion thus specified cannot be reversed unless these 
cyclic constant momenta are reversed at the same time. If the 
motion of any given system prove to be reversible, there can be 
no latent cyclic momenta involved in it : there may be latent 
possibilities of cyclic motion, that is coordinates representing 
cyclic freedom, but the momenta attached to them must then 
be null As the coordinates cannot in the nature of the case 
be all cyclic, the only kind of exception to this irreversible 
quality of dynamical systems involving latent cyclic momenta is 
the approximate one in which the part of the kinetic energy 
involving in any way the remaining velocities is negligible : this 
will be the case when the remaining sensible coordinates of the 
system change their values very slowly ; and the system may 
then be described as a static system of cyclic character. The 



CHAP. Vni] CYCLIC SYSTEMS 141 

chaDges of the system, and its configurations of steady cyclic 
motion, will then be determinated solely by a modified static 
energy function, in the same manner as the equilibrium con- 
figurations and the trend of all very slow changes of an ordinary 
acyclic system are determined by its potential energy alone. 
But in this the only case of reversibility of a material system 
with latent cyclic momenta, the property is only approximate : 
it disappears altogether when the velocities of the sensible 
coordinates become comparable with those of the latent ones. 

89. The general dynamical system involving latent cyclic 
momenta, as well as finite sensible momenta, has been utilized* 
as an analytical representation of the thermodynamic relations 
of an ordinary material system. The main feature of absence 
of direct reversibility is common to both : thus in both cases 
the sensible velocities enter in the first degree into the available 
energy function. But the range of the analogy is a restricted 
one : in the thermal system there can be no really steady motion 
until all relative sensible motions have disappeared and it moves 
as a rigid body, while this is clearly not the case for every cyclic 
system : the latter is therefore in one respect more general. In 
the former system the thermal energy gives rise to forces 
(passive reactions) which uniformly act against and retard the 
motions belonging to the sensible coordinates, being in part 
energy in the individual molecules of a more or less cyclic type, 
but also in part energy of their irregular translatory velocities. 
The latter part of it is certainly related to forces that are wholly 
viscous: it must therefore be excluded from a purely cyclic 
scheme, the analogy of which is accordingly confined to systems 
not subject to transmission of heat by conduction between 
bodies at finitely different temperatures**. 

90. There is another simple transformation, analogous to 
reversal, which can sometimes serve as a clue to the dynamical 
relations of physical systems. If the sign of the x coordinate of 
position of each point of the system is changed, but the sign of 
the time not changed, the actual motion is changed into its 

* Ct von Helmholtz's memoirs on the Dynamics of Monocyclic Systems, in 
Vol. iii of his Collected Papers. 

** A closer relation may possibly be developed between cyclio systems and 
the constitutive molecular part of the energy. 



142 DYNAMICAL PERVERSION [SECT, II 

reflexion in a mirror lying along the plane of yz*. Right- 
handed relations with reference to the axis of x are thereby 
changed to left-handed ones. If in any given case it is known 
that the reflected motion can exist spontaneously, just as the 
original motion, it follows that there is nothing right-handed or 
left-handed, nothing chiral in Lord Kelvin's phrase, with regard 
to this axis, in the constitution of the system. For example, 
consider the propagation of a right-handed circularly polarized 
train of light- waves in a sugar-solution: its velocity usually 
differs slightly from that of a left-handed train, thus giving rise 
to the phenomena of rotation of the plane of polarization : on 
reflexion it becomes a left-handed train travelling backwards, 
and goes with a different speed, that appropriate to lefi-handed 
waves: thus the medium has chiral properties and change of 
sign of X must affect the equations of propagation. But if the 
wave-train is travelling in a medium magnetized along the 
direction of «, the change of its chirality by reflexion no longer 
produces any change in the velocity : there is thus no essential 
chirality in the medium, and the magnetic rotatory polarization 
must be traced to some other source. It is in fact related to 
the imposed magnetism, which is a vector agency directed along 
the axis of ar, and therefore can be connected with difference of 
velocity for different directions along that axis. 

91. When the reflexion is direct, the reflected motion is 
simply the reversed motion with chirality changed : thus in a 
simply chiral medium the motion is completely reversible ; but 
in the magnetized medium it is not so, and the complete con- 
dition of reversion must then involve the reversal of the magnetic 
field or other extraneous vector agency which causes the rotation 
by interacting with the material system. It will be of interest, 

* This case of reflexion in the plane of yz is the most general one that need 
be considered here. For successive reflexions in two planes produce merely a 
bodily rotation, round their line of intersection as axis, and of amount equal to 
twice the angle between them, on the principle of the sextant : thus any even 
number of plane reflexions produces a simple bodily displacement, and any odd 
number produces a bodily displacement combined with a single reflexion. The 
latter reduction is however not unique: the reflexion can be changed into 
another reflexion by adding on a rotation round the intersection of their planes, 
and this may be chosen so as to simplify the bodily displacement. 



CHAP. VIIl] APPLIED TO OPTICALLY ROTATING SYSTEMS 143 

following Lord Kelvin's train of ideas, to examine how much more 
closely we can specify the character of an imposed physical 
vector agency that will be competent to produce optical rotation. 
Dynamically, an agency which is to aflfect the character of the 
rotational motion of a circularly polarized wave must be of the 
nature of a moment round the axis rather than a translatory 
eflfect along it — it must in fact be a moment of momentum 
rather than a linear momentum — the only case of exception 
being when the medium has itself chiral property, in which 
case a linear momentum reacting with that property would 
produce an influence of this kind, but of the second order. The 
reason of this restriction is simply that if an imposed agency 
along an axis is to affect a motion around it, the analytical 
expression of the relation between them must involve screw 
coefficients with respect to the medium : if the medium has no 
intrinsic screw relation in its constitution the effect must be 
null*. Thus an imposed magnetic field must partake dynamic- 
ally of the nature of rotation round its axis : the only way in 
which rotation of the aether itself has been imagined for the 
purpose is by the assumption (by Maxwellf) of vortical whirls 
in it such as could only be associated with contained matter. 
This, conjoined with the fact that magnetic rotation does not 
exist in free aether, goes far to establish that an imposed mag- 
netic field implies internal rotation in the molecules of the 
matter with respect to its axis, which agrees with our modified 
Weberian theory ascribing magnetism to the orientation of the 
molecular orbits of the electrons associated with the molecules. 
We can in fact, on the assumption that the molecule is con- 
stituted solely of moving electrons with or without added 
extraneous inertia, define the magnetisation per unit volume as 
proportional to the moment of momentum per unit volume of 
the internal molecular motions, provided that in estimating it 



* . In a similar maimer it would appear that an extraneous modification of a 
medium, constituted by an arrangement of fluid vortices in planes at right 
angles to the axis, could only produce optical rotation by modifying a struc- 
tural chiral property already existing in the medium. 

t 'Treatise' ii § 822 *0n the hypothesis of molecular vortices/ the title 
suggesting that the interpretation above given was present to Maxwell's mind. 



144 INFLUENCE OF CX)NVECTION ON CHIRAL QUALITY [SECT. II 

regard is had to the signs as well as the velocities of the 
electrons: this latter restriction supplying the reason why a 
magnet does not exhibit gyrostatic mechanical reactions**. 

92. Modification of the physical constants of a material 
medium by translaiory motion through the aether. — An im- 
portant application of these principles of symmetry arises in 
determining to what extent the dielectric and magnetic 
constants of a material medium are affected by motion of 
translation through the aether. Let us suppose that the 
molecular structure of the medium is polar, as in the ordinary 
theory of magnetic and dielectric media, and that it is devoid 
of chiral quality. Then the only change produced by reversal 
of its velocity of translation is that this velocity has now the 
same relations to the negative poles that it previously had to 
the positive ones. Now on any view hitherto conceivable of 
electric and magnetic polarity, based on a stationary aether, 
a motion of translation of the medium must affect and be 
affected by a polarity in the same way as by the reversed 
polarity. Hence reversal of the velocity of translation will not 
affect anything essential: the influence of the translation 
therefore depends on even powers of its velocity compared with 
that of radiation, or — to an approximation sufficient for all 
purposes — it is proportional to the square of the ratio of the 
velocity of translation of the medium to the velocity of radia- 
tion. The changes in the physical constants, including therein 
possible changes of dimensions, of the material medium 
produced by translation through the aether are therefore 
second-order effects. 

**It seems worthy of notice that Lord EeWin's argument, oonneoting 
magneto-optio rotation with rotatory motion of matter .in the magnetic field, 
rests essentially on the same foundation as Newton's statement {Prineipia, 
Scholium to Dejinitionet) that the amount of the absolute rotation of a material 
system may be detected by the centrifugal reaction it affords to circular motion, 
for example by the change of form of the steady parabolic surface of liquid in a 
rotating bucket when the direction of the rotation is reversed. In the Newtonian 
experiment it is implied that the forces between the parts of the system depend 
on configuration only : the structure of the system may thus be chiral, but it 
must not involve any rotational affection relative to a definite axis or direction 
in it, which would impart gyrostatic quality to its inertia. 



CHAP. VUl] ON PRESENT THEORY ABSENT ] 45 

But there is one class of possible exceptions to this result, 
that namely of directed or chiral properties as distinguished 
from bipolar ones. There is nothing in the mere formal 
character of the quantities involved to prevent the optical 
rotation of vector type arising from an imposed magnetic field 
from being aflfected to the first order by a motion of trans- 
lation of the material medium. The coeflScient of the chiral 
optical rotation in a chirally constituted medium will not 
however be affected to the first order, because reversal of the 
medium end to end will not reverse its chiral relation : but in 
such a medium there is room formally for a new rotatory effect, 
arising from convection, of the same type as magnetic rotation, 
and of the order of the product of its chiral coeflScient and 
the first power of the ratio of its velocity of convection to the 
velocity of radiation. 

On our present theory of a stagnant aether and discrete 
distribution of electricity both these possible eflFects should 
certainly vanish up to the first order (§ 109) : while the second- 
order theory to which that view leads (§ 112), which satisfies 
the requirements of the Michelson interference experiment, 
would also require the eflFect of convection on the rotatory 
property to be null up t/o the second order. Cf. §§ 141 — 3. 



87**. The exact scope of the relations of § 87 will appear 
more clearly in a procedure involving finite range of tempera- 
ture, where we follow in the main a process already given by 
Boltzmann*. Let E denote the energy per unit volume of the 
steady distribution of radiation in an enclosure, and p the 
pressure it exerts on the walls. When the walls of the enclosure 
are perfectly reflecting and therefore adiabatic, there will be no 
connexion between E and the temperature of the walls : but in 
all cases p must be a function of E alone, iia,yf{E). When the 
volume V of such an adiabatic enclosure is altered, by change of 
its form or by advance of a piston, the conservation of energy 
in its interior requires 

d(Ev) = —pdv, 

* Wied. Ann, xxii. 18S4, p. 294. 
L. 10 



146 ADIABATIC COMPRESSION OF RADIATION [SECT. lU 

SO that vdE^-[f!-hf{E)}dv, (i) 

which is the adiabatic relation between the intensity of the 
radiation and the volume of the enclosure containing it. 

We can now consider volume v, of radiation admitted into 
the cylinder of the ideal pump of § 87, at the intensity Ei of the 
radiation surrounding the body of lower temperature Tj, then 
compressed adiabatically by the piston to a volume r, at the 
intensity E^ which is in equilibrium with the other body oi 
higher temperature T,. This radiation can thus be considered 
as initially emitted by the first body, and finally absorbed into 
the second body, but in diminished amount because the energy 
required for the performance of this mechanical work of 
compression must be deducted. The process is mechanically 
reversible ; so that the application of Camot's principle would 
give 

Vi y— = ^^9 -^ - (u) 

As the variables E^, p,, v, refer to any state that can be 
derived from the state Ei, j^i, Vi by an adiabatic process for 
which (i) holds, we have, on omitting the suffixes, the general 
relations 

vdE=^''{E+p)dv, 

E + p . 

where J. is a constant independent of T and v. To eliminate 
v, and thus obtain the relation between E and p, we take 
diflFerentials of the second of these equations, giving 

jE+p E+p, 
vd-'Y^= Y^dv: 

hence from the first equation 

E-¥p^_dE 
T — 7* ' 

,, , dp dT ....V 

80 that W-l'p^ " ~T ^^^^ 



CHAP. VIIl] MECHANICAL VALUE OF RADIATION 147 

The adiabatic relation (i) between the volume v and the 
mechanical pressure p of radiation may also be expressed in the 
form 



v{E^p) = AT,OTv~^=A (iv) 



The existence of the mechanical pressure p determined by 
(iii) would thus render cyclic processes involving radiation 
consistent with Camot's principle. 

According to the investigation of §§ 83, 86, p = ^E, provided 
the radiation is in free space, not in a material medium. By 
(iii) this gives E proportional to T\ By (iv) it gives for 

adiabatic change of volume of radiation the relation pv^ 
constant. 

In estimating the mechanical value or availability of a 
distribution of radiant energy existing in free aether, we must 
thus assign to each portion of it a temperature equal to that of 
the walls of the enclosure that would be in equilibrium with it. 
But this principle applies only to the steady uncoordinated 
radiant energy in an enclosure, for which there is no particular 
direction of propagation, or which may be considered as propag- 
ating itself equally backwards and forwards in all directions in 
the enclosure. The radiation travelling in a definite direction 
from a radiant source can on the other hand theoretically be 
restored to its original density by aid of a lens or reflector ; its 
theoretical availability therefore remains unimpaired as it be- 
comes less intense with increase of distance from the source. 
By well-known optical theorems, it cannot be concentrated to 
greater intensity than it had originally: that would in fact 
involve increcise of availability without compensatory decrease 
elsewhere, in other words perpetual motion. 

The difficulty mentioned on p. 139 as to the possibility 
of imagining an ideal screen impervious to radiation but pervious 
to the aether is not peculiar to the present discussion ; for 
precisely the same properties are required in an adiabatic 
envelope in the ordinary applications of Camots principle. 
What is wanted to establish the argument on a practical basis 
is a first approximation to this impermeable quality: in 

10—2 



148 IDEAL IJIPEBMEABLE SCREEN [SECT. UI 

theoretical physics it is a common procedure to ide£|lize from 
the imperfect qualities of actual matter to a limiting perfection. 
As has been already remarked, if the radiation is of the type of 
long Hertzian waves, a metallic screen possesses the requisite 
properties : it is therefore perhaps legitimate to imagine a 
screen of ideal very fine-grained matter which would serve the 
purpose for the much shorter waves of light. 




SECTION III 



CHAPTER IX 



INFLUENCE OF STEADY MOTION ON AN ELECTTROSTATIC 

MATERIAL SYSTEM 

93. The general equations formulated in the preceding 
section enable us to treat in detail the question whether there 
is any change in the steady distribution of electric charges on 
a system of conductors, when they are set in motion, whether 
along with dielectric bodies or not, through the aether. In 
order that a steady electric state may be possible, without 
permanent currents of conduction, the configuration of the 
matter must remain unchanged; moreover it must always 
present the same aspect relative to its motion, and also relative 
to extraneous electric and magnetic fields when such are 
present. The motion of the material system must therefore be 
a uniform spii-al or screw motion on a definite axis fixed in the 
aether, including as special cases translation along and rotation 
round this axis: and the imposed or extraneous fields when 
such exist must be symmetrical round this axis. Otherwise 
the circumstances would be continually changing, and there 
could be no steady state of electrification of the system. 

In such steady state, when it exists, the magnetic induc- 
tion through every circuit moving along with the material 
system remains constant on account of the steadiness. It 
follows by the Faraday circuital relation, which holds good 
universally for circuits moving with the matter, that the 
line integral of the electric force (P, Q, R) round every circuit 



150 THE ELECTRIC FORCE HAS A POTENTLAL [SECT. lU 

vanishes. Hence the electric force is derived throughout the 
field from an electric potential V, so that 

(P, Q,R) = - {didx, didy, d/dz) V. 

Moreover, inside the conductors the electric force must vanish, 
for otherwise electric separation would be continually going on, 
leading to steady currents of conduction ; thus in problems in 
which such currents are by symmetry excluded on account of 
the absence of a return path, the potential V must be constant 
throughout each conductor and therefore over its surface. 

The aethereal force (P', Q', R') which produces elastic dis- 
placement (/, ffy A), equal to (47rc')"* (P', Q', R'), in the aether 
is connected with this electric force (P, Q, iJ), which acts on 
the electrons and thus produces movement of electrification*, 
by the relation 

(P, Q', /2') = (^ - 9C + r6, Q-ra+yx:, R-pb + qa), 
where (p, q, r) is the velocity of the matter. 

94. For purposes of analysis it is clearly convenient to 
refer the problem of steady motion to a space, or say an ideal 
frame, moving along with the material system ; thus (p, g, r) 
is the velocity of this moving space at the point (x, y, z\ 
with reference to the stagnant aether. 

When the region surrounding the material conductors is 
free space, the total current in it is the displacement current 
in the aether, equal to d/rff (/, (7, //) where the diflferentiation 
refers to a point fixed in the stagnant aether. Now the con- 
dition of steadiness of state relative to the moving axes gives 
B/dt (f, g. h) = where B/dt represents 

d/dt -i-pd/dx 4- qd/dy 4- rd/dz. 
Hence the total current at a point (x, y, z) in free aether is 

But in dielectric insulating matter there is to be added to 
this aethereal current the effect of the convection of the steady 

* The electric force at a point in the free aetlier is here the force that would 
act on unit charge ntnated at the point and moving with the material system. 



CHAP. IX] EQUATIONS FOR UNIFORM TRANSLATION 151 

material polarization (/', g\ A'), which (§ 63) is represented for 
purposes of continuous electromotive analysis by a current 



[^L'4y^4yf''^^^^- 



dy 

Case of uniform translation 

95. When the motion of the material system is restricted 
to one of uniform translation so that (p, q, r) is constant, 
the circuital relation of Ampfere, now of type 

4iiru = dy/dy — d/S/dZy 

necessitates, as regards free aether, and in fact at all places where 
the total current is one of aethereal displacement, the relation 

(a, /9, y)/4i7r = (qh-rg, rf-ph, pg-qf) 

— (d/da, d/dy, d/d2)<f), 

in which <f> is an undetermined function continuous as to itself 

and its gradient except at the surfaces of transition; this is 

clearly the most general value of (a, /9, 7) which is consistent 

with that circuital relation. The part of it depending on ^ 

includes the extraneous magnetic field, and also the field due 

to magnets, if any, that belong to the material system itself, 

as well as the magnetic field due to the convection of the 

electric charges on the conductors. It will appear in ^ 99, 100 

that this convective effect may safely be neglected, so that 

— 4^^ is simply the magnetic potential of all the magnets in 

the field. Combining the relation thus obtained between 

(/, g, h) and (a, 6, c) with the direct constitutive relation of 

type 

47rcy=P-5C + r6, 
we have 

(ff— P/4i7r -qipg — qf) -h r (rf—ph) -f qd<f>ldz— rd(f>/dy 
that is 

(c^ - p» - g* - r^)/= P/47r -p ( j[)/-f qg 4- rh) + qdi^ldz-rdi^jdy 
= P/47r '-pl4!'rrC^(pP + qQ + rR) + qd<f>ldz - rdi^jdy, 
wherein as above 

(P, Q, R)^-{dldx, djdy, dldz)V. 



152 POTENTIAL AS INDEPENDENT VARIABLE [SECT. IH 

96. Now the total current is always a stream, just as much 
flowing out of any region as flows into it; therefore in free 
space 

dx dy dz ' 

which in &ct merely expresses the electric incompressibility of 
the aether. Hence finally we obtain for free space 



'"'-'-(ps+'l^'i)'''' 



in which ^ has disappeared, as the characteristic equation from 
which the single independent variable V of the problem is to 
be determined, subject to the condition that it is to be constant 
over each conductor (§ 94) inasmuch as the surface-charge is in 
equilibrium. When V has thus been determined, its gradient 
is the electric force (P, Q, jR) ; and the value of (/, g^ h) is 
then given by the equations above in terms of the latter and ^, 
and finally (a, /3, 7) or (a, 6, c) is obtained in terms of (/, g, h) 
and <^. 

For the interior of the conductors F is constant and the 
electric force (P, Q, R) vanishes : yet the aethereal displace- 
ment (/, g, h) does not vanish in the conductors, being now 
given by equations of type 

(c* — p' — 9* — r")/= qd<f)/dz — rd<f)/dt/, 

which make it circuital, so that there is no volume-density 
of electrification. 

In an investigation in detail of the change in the free 
electric distribution produced by the motion, it will conduce 
to brevity to take (p, ^, r) to be a velocity v parallel to the 
axis of X, The characteristic equation for V is then 

c' da^ ' 

subject to V being constant over each conductor ; as the change 
in the form of this equation arising from the motion depends 
on (v/cy, the differences thereby introduced will all be of the 




CHAP. IX] CORRELATION WITH A STATIONARY SYSTEM 153 

second order of small quantities. Thus, e denoting (1 — l;'/o')~^ 
we have 

cPV *F d«F ^ 

provided dan' = e^dx. 

Now imagine a correlative material system such that to the 
point (a?, y, z) of the actual system corresponds the point 

(a/, y, z) or {e^x, y, z) of the new one, and solve the problem 
of free electric distribution on the conductors of the new system 
supposed at rest ; then the electric potentials of the actual 
moving system and of this stationary system will be the same 
at corresponding points in the surrounding free aether. The 
charges in corresponding elements of volume will be pro- 
portional : for these may be considered as expressed by a 
volume density equal to the concentration of the aethereal 
displacement (/, g, h), there being no electric polarization, 
while we obtain from the expression for this displacement 



\ C^JKdx dy dzj \ cVdx dy 



a^v d^v d^v 
+ - ,^ + 



9- 



M^ df d£ 

The electric charge in any region of the moving system is thus 
6 times that in the corresponding region of the correlative 
system at rest. To institute a correspondence for equal charges 
in the two systems we must multiply the field of the stationary 
system by e. The magnetic force at auy point where the 
current is wholly one of aethereal displacement is as above 
49r (0, — uA, vg) together with the gradient of a magnetic 
potential — 47r^. 

97. A simple example is afforded by the case of a single 
isolated spherical conductor: the field arising from a free 
charge Q on the sphere 

aj* + y" + -?' = r-« 



154 ELECTRIC FIELD OF A MOVING CONDUCTOR [SECT. Ill 

moving with velocity v along the axis of x will correspond to 
that of a charge e"*Q on the ellipsoid 

€-»«:» + y« + 5" = r" 

at rest. The charge on the moving sphere will thus be 
uniformly distributed over its surface*. The lines of electric 
force in the surrounding space, which are to be considered as 
carried on steadily by the motion of the sphere, will not be 
radial in the immediate neighbourhood, but will be the cur\'es 
linearly corresponding to the lines of force of the steady 
distribution on this stationary ellipsoid. At a distance large 
compared with the dimensions of the stationary ellipsoid its 
lines of force will however be sensibly radial, and uniformly 
distributed around it : hence at a distance from the moving 
sphere its lines of electric force will be radial but concentrated 
towards that diametral plane which is at right angles to the 
direction of motion. 

In the absence of an extraneous magnetic field, iirn aethereal 
displacement around the moving system (on which the statical 
energy directly depends) is connected with the electric force 
by the relation 

Wc'{f.g.h) = {P, €(2, ^R), 

thus, 6 being greater than unity, the displacement is still more 
concentrated towards the diametral plane than is the electric 
force. 

In the case of a conductor of any form with charge e, in 
uniform motion of translation, the electric force of its steady 
field, at places in the surrounding free, aether whose distance 
is great compared with the linear dimensions of the conductor, is 



"^ V di* du' dzjr* 



dy 
while the aethereal displacement is 



/ A ^K y f \ d d d\e 



dy 

* It is easy to see that the distribution of a charge on an ellipsoid moving 
with any uniform velocity of translation wiU also be the same as if it were at 
rest. 



CHAP. IX] ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION UNAFFECTED 156 

98. The main general result is that, whatever be the 
extraneous or imposed magnetic field, the distribution of 
charges on the moving system of conductors is identical with 
thai of equal charges on a stationary system which is the same 

as the actual one uniformly elongated in the ratio e^or 1 + Jv'/^ 
in the direction of motion. Now on a physical hypothesis to 
be presently discussed (§ 112) one eflfect of the motion is to 
actually cause a material system to shrink in this direction 
in the ratio €~*. Combining these statements, and neglecting 
{vjcYy the actual shrinkage cancels this hjrpothetical elongation, 
and we reach the conclusion that when the material system is 
put into steady uniform motion it shrinks in this ratio €"* in 
the direction of the motion, while the electric distribution 
throughout it and the distribution of electric force around it 
remain the same as if it were at rest. This constitutes a direct 
verification for the special case here under consideration, of 
general results to be developed subsequently (§ 112). 

99. We have still to trace the change of the magnetic 
field, which will involve the determination of <f>. Throughout 
the field 

a , dd> 

4^ = 9A-r^-^ 



_ qR-rQ 

47r 



(,.pl±f + r^\d<t>p f d<l> dif, d,f>\ 



with similar expressions for /8 and 7, correct up to the second 
order, where the force (P, Q, R) is the gradient of an electric 
potential. The characteristic equation for (f> is now to be 
derived from the stream condition 

da dh ^^ _(\. 
dx dy dz ' 

it does not involve F: it is to be solved so as to preserve the 
suitable continuity across the surface, namely that of tangential 
aethereal displacement. 



156 INFLUENCE ON AETHEREAL FIELD [SECT. Ill 

Thus taking for simplicity the velocity v of the system to 
be parallel to the axis of x, we have 

a _ d0 
4^" dx* 



47r "" We" dz \ O^J dy' 



iiw 4^C» dy \ '^ (^) dz* 



so that 






where x' = e* 



X = €'X. 



Hence ^ is a Laplacian function of (of, y, z) inside each con- 
ductor, and another such function of (x\ y, z) in the surrounding 
free space, having poles where the magnetism is situated, these 
functions being determined by satisfying the condition of 
continuity of tangential aethereal displacement, that is, of 
aethereal stress, at the moving interfaces. 

100. Let us consider first the case when there are no 
permanent magnets in the field: if <f> were then devoid of 
discontinuity at each interface it must be identically null. 
Now the effect of assuming such continuity would be to de- 
range the distribution of aethereal displacement only in the 
second order. Thus up to the first order the assumption is 
justified : moreover, if the form of the material system is 
considered as altered by its motion through the aether in the 
manner of § 112 infra, it may be verified that there is no 
discrepancy even of the second order. Hence the motion 
of the system produces no effect on the electric force or 
the electric distribution in it; while the magnetic field is 
u/c' . (0, — i?, Q) and the aethereal displacement is augmented 
by the second-order term (47r)~* {^/c^Y (0, Q, i2), in agreement 
with the general theory of Chapter X. 




CHAP. IX] NEGATIVE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 157 

If there are permanent magnets convected along with the 
steadily moving electric system, this argument still proves 
that any electric effect depending on ^ is transmitted wholly 
from them, and does not involve a part arising from convection 
of the electric charges. But the considerations of § 41 shew that 
the electric force arising from theii* motion is masked by an in- 
duced electrification in the magnets themselves. Thus, even up 
to the second order, the convection, along with the Earth in its 
orbital motion, of a powerful magnet, either itself conducting 
or surrounded by a conducting screen, will not produce any 
eflFect on electric distributions in neighbouring bodies by intro- 
ducing a new term into the electric force, as has sometimes 
been suggested. 

As, on the above hjrpothesis of a very minute material 
deformation of a moving system when it is put into uniform 
motion of translation, the electric force remains absolutely 
unaltered at each point in its neighbourhood, it follows that 
those mutual mechanical forces between the electrically charged 
conductors forming the system, which arise from the operation 
of this electric force, are unaltered. We have seen however 
that the convection produces a magnetic force of the first order 
depending on the electric force at the place, which we might 
seek means of detecting in the case when it arises from the 
motion of the Earth. That cannot be done by deflexion of 
a magnetic needle, for the needle would experience a counter- 
acting electric distribution over its surface which would annul 
the electric force inside it, so that the magnetic force of con- 
vective origin, acting on its elements, would be annulled also : 
while we have just recognised that the forces exerted by the 
surrounding electric charges on the distribution induced on the 
needle are not affected by the Earth's motion. The result of an 
experiment depending on the deflexion of a magnetic needle 
should therefore be negative, as Rontgen has found it to be. 

101. It is worth while to definitely formulate the scheme 
of equations which applies to dielectric masses belonging to 
the moving system. The Faraday circuital relation gives as 
before 



158 INFLUENCE ON MOVING MATERIAL DIELECTRIC [SECT. Ill 

(P, e, ii) = - (d/efe, d/dy. didz) F. 
Also 47rcy = P, 47rcy = (^-l)P 

47rc«fir = + i;c, 47r(7»fir' = (iT - 1) Q 

while by § 04, a = a, 6 = /8 + 47ri;A', = 7- ^vg\ 

The total current in the dielectric is made up of a displace- 
ment current - vdjdx (/, g, h) belo!iging to the stagnant aether 
and a current of convection of polarization 4 xfdjdx^f', g', h') 
arising from the moving dielectric matter. 

Hence Ampere's circuital relation gives 



du dz c* ^ ^ da 



dz dx~ c^^ ~ ^ dx~ c^ \dx " ^^ ~dx) 
dp da V dR v^fdfi dh'\ 

On elimination of (a, /8, 7) we obtain, after some reductions, as 
the characteristic equation of the electric potential, 

c'J da^ "^1/ "^if + 2oVUy* "^ d^/"" 

It is however futile in this mode of procedure to attempt to 
carry the approximation beyond the first order of v/c. as the 
value (and form) of K will be itself affected to the second order 
in a manner as yet unknown. Up to this order V will satisfy 
the same characteristic equation as if the system were at rest ; 
as it is constant over each conductor, it follows that the electric 
force will be the same everywhere as if the system were at rest. 
Also up to this order the magnetic field (ct, /3, 7) will be that 
arising from the iin posed magnetic system together with a 
distribution of currents derived from a flow-potential 



CHAP. IX] 



ROTATING MATERIAL SYSTEM 

Case of uniform rotation. 



159 



101**. In further illustration of the general principles, the 
case of rotation round a fixed axis in a symmetrical magnetic 
field will be briefly considered The axes of coordinates will 
DOW be taken fixed in the aether. In any steady state the 
electric force (P, Q, R\ given by P = gc - rt - dFjdt - cNr/cLc, 
is derived from a potential F. Thus 





cLc dy dz 




dr rdff dz 


d(>p-r) = 


p q r 


^ 


o)r 




a b c 




a h c 



the second determinant corresponding to the present problem 
with columnar coordinates. When the first determinant is not 
an exact differential, the steady motion must involve electric 
flow. In the present case 

^ —V= a)J{crdr — ardz) ; 

so that (a, c) should be derived from a stream function, as it is 
by the circuital quality of (a, 6, c) whenever b is the same all 
round the axis. Further in this case 

dc da 2c' 



trf/vi. ir\ /cw da . zc\ 



which is equal to 2<oc at places where there is no current. 

In a conductor V is constant because electric force would 
induce compensating charge : thus (§ 70) the electrification in 
it is that belonging to the static potential ^ here determined, 
involving a volume-density — (ccj^irc^ as well as a surface distri- 
bution. Outside the conductor the circuitality of the aethereal 
displacement requires that V*^ is null : and "V must be itself 
continuous across the surface because there cannot be discon- 
tinuity in the aether-strain. Moreover, in "V is included the 
potential of the steady influencing electric field arising from 
neighbouring stationary electrified bodies: but it is F, or 
^ — ft) J(crdr — ardz), and not "V, that is constant over the 
sur£Eice of the conductor. 

In a dielectric portion of the rotating system, (/", g'\ K') is 



160 MODIFICATION OF SURROUNDINQ FIELD [SECT. Ill 

circuital, while Wc^f = - (if - 1) dV\dx and 47rcy = - d^/dr ; 

thus V«>I^ is equal to ( 1 - /T-^ ^' C^ - ^) and is therefore 
known, being null in free aether. If there is no surface charge 

on the dielectric body, if , —(/T— 1) , — must be 

continuous across the surface, as well as ^ itself: thus the 
efifect on the surrounding electric field of the rotation of the 
dielectric body is the same as would be that of an electric 
charge in it of volume-density — {K — l)6>c/27rC-, and surface- 

density . — ~ , of which the last factor is the tangential 

magnetic force just outside multiplied by tor. The magnetic 
effect of the rotating polarization of the dielectric body may 
be directly calculated, up to the first order, as that due to 

its equivalent current-system, of intensity {JC -\) r- ^ ,— 

flowinor in circles around the axis. 

It may be verified that in a charged solid spherical conductor 
of radius a, rotating in a uniform magnetic field c, and referred 
to polar coordinates (p, 0) measured from the axis of rotation 
which is that of the field. ^ = C + ^6>c/3* sin" <^, thus involving 
an electric volume-density — Q)c/27rC' and surface -density 

i + r;- -1 (5 sin' <6 — 4), in which C is determined by the 

amount of the charge when the sphere is insulated, or by the 
point of it which is in connexion with Earth, being null when 
the axis of rotation is uninsulated*. This approximation may 
be improved, if it is so desired, by including the inappreciable 
modification of the extraneous magnetic field arising from the 
convection of the electric charge of the sphere. 

The general case of steady spiral motion, including that of 
uniform translation, may also be treated in this manner. 

• Phil. Mag., Jan. 1884, p. 4 : cf. also Phil. Trant. 1896 A, pp. 727— 31. 



CHAPTER X 

GENERAL PROBLEM OF MOVING MATTER TREATED IN RELATION 

TO THE INDIVIDUAL MOLECULES 

Formulation of the Problem 

102. We shall now consider the material system as con- 
sisting of free aether pervaded by a system of electrons which 
are to be treated individually, some of them free or isolated, 
but the great majority of them grouped into material mole- 
cules : and we shall attempt to compare the relative motions of 
these electrons when they form, or belong to, a material system 
devoid of translatory motion through the aether, with what it 
would be when a translatory velocity is superposed, say for short- 
ness a velocity i; parallel to the axis of x. The medium in which 
the activity occurs is for our present purpose the free aether 
itself, whose dynamical equations have been definitely ascer- 
tained in quite independent ways from consideration of both 
the optical side and the electrodynamic side of its activity; 
so that there will be nothing hypothetical in our analysis on 
that score. An electron e will occur in this analysis as a 
singular point in the aether, on approaching which the elastic 
strain constituting the aethereal displacement {f, gr, h) in- 
creases indefinitely, according to the type 

— ejAiir . {dlda\ d/dy^ djdz) r~* : 

it is in fact analogous to what is called a simple pole in the 
two-dimensional representation that is employed in the theory 
of a function of a complex variable. It is assumed that this 
singularity represents a definite structure, forming a nucleus of 
strain in the aether, which is capable of transference across that 
medium independently of motion of the aether itself: the 
L. 11 



162 SINGULAR POINTS IN THE AETHER [SECT. Ill 

portion of the surrounding aethereal strain, of which the dis- 
placement-vector {fyQ, h) is the expression, which is associated 
with the electron and is carried along with the electron in its 
motion, being as above — ej^ir . (didx, djdy, didz)T-K It is to be 
noticed that the energy of this part of the displacement is 
closely concentrated around the nucleus of the electron, and 
not widely dififused as might at first sight appear. The aethereal 
displacement satisfies the stream-condition 

d//dx + dg/dy + dh/dz = 0, 

except where there are electrons in the effective element of 
volume : these are analogous to the so-called sources and sinks 
in the abstract theory of liquid flow, so that when electrons 
are present the integral of the normal component of the 
aethereal displacement over the boundary of any region, instead 
of being null, is equal to the quantity Xe of electrons existing in 
the region. The other vector which is associated with the 
aether, namely the magnetic induction (a, 6, c), also possesses 
the stream property; but singular points in its distribution,^ 
of the nature of simple poles, do not exist. The motion of an 
electron involves however a singularity in (a, 6, r), of a rota- 
tional type, with its nucleus at the moving electron** ; and the 
time-average of this singularity for a very rapid minute steady 
orbital motion of an electron is analytically equivalent, at 
distances considerable compared with the dimensions of the 
orbit, to a magnetic doublet analogous to a source and 

** Namely as the distance r from it diminishes indefinitely, the magnetic 
induction tends to the form evr~^ sin $, at right angles to the plane of the angle $ 
between r and the velocity t; of the electron : this arises as the disturbance of 
the medium involved in annulling the electron in its original position and 
restoring it in the new position to which it has moved. The relations wiU 
appear more clearly when visualized by the kinematic representation of 
Appendix E ; or when we pass to the limit in the formulae of Chapter is relating 
to the field of a moving charged body of finite dimensions. 

The specification in the text, as a simple pole, only applies for an electron 
moving with velocity v, when terms of the order (v/c)* are neglected : otherwise 
the aethereal field close around it is not isotropic and an amended specification 
derivable from the formulae of Chapter ix must be substituted. In the second- 
order discussion of Chapter xi this more exact form is implicitly involved, the 
strength of the electron being determined (§ 111) by the oonoentration of the 
aethereal displacement around it. The singularity in the magnetic field which 
is involved in the motion of the electron, not of coarse on intrinsic one, lias no 
concentration. 



CH. X] THEIR MOTIONS INVOLVED IN THE AETHER-EQUATIONS 1 63 

associated equal sink. Finally, the various parts of the aether 
are supposed to be sensibly at rest, so that for example the 
time-rate of change of the strain of any element of the aether 
is represented by differentiation with respect to the time 
without any additional terms to represent the change due to 
the element of aether being carried on in the meantime to 
a new position ; in this respect the equations of the aether 
are much simpler than those of the dynamics of fluid motion, 
being in fact linear. The aether is stagnant on this theory, 
while the molecules constituting the Earth and all other 
material bodies flit through it without producing any finite 
flow in it; hence the law of the astronomical aberration of 
light is rigorously maintained, and the Doppler change of 
wave-length of radiation from a moving source holds good ; but 
it will appear that all purely terrestrial optical phenomena are 
unaffected by the Earth's motion. 

103. Subject to this general explanation, the analytical 
equations which express the dynamias of the field of free aether» 
existing between and around the nuclei of the electrons, are 

47r -j^ (/, g, h) = curl (a, 6, c) 

- ^ (a, 6, c) = 47re2 curl (/, gr, h\ 

in which the symbol curl (a, 6, c) represents, after Maxwell, the 

vector 

'dc ^ db da dc db ^ da\ 

^dy dz* dz dx' dx dy) * 

and in which c is the single physical constant of the aether, 
being the velocity of propagation of elastic disturbances through 
it. These are the analytical equations derived by Maxwell in 
his mathematical development of Faraday's views as to an 
electric medium : and they are the same as the equations 
arrived at by MacCuliagh a quarter of a century earlier in his 
formulation of the dynamics of optical media. It may fairly 
be claimed that the theoretical investigations of Maxwell, in 
combination with the experimental verifications of Hertz and 
his successors in that field, have imparted to this analytical 
formulation of the dynamical relations of firee aether an exact- 

11—2 



(; 



164 THE PROBLEM DETERMINATE [SBCT. Ul 

11686 and precision which is not sarpassed in any other depart- 
ment of physics, even in the theory of gravitation* 

Where a more speculative element enters is in the con- 
struction of a kinematic scheme of representation of the 
aether-strain, such as will allow of the unification of the various 
assumptions here enumerated. It is desirable for the sake of 
further insight, and even necessary for various applications, 
to have concrete notious of the physical nature of the vectors 
(/» 9^ ^) A^d (^> ^> ^) ^hich specify aethereal disturbances, in 
the form of representations such as will implicitly and in- 
tuitively involve the anaU-tical relations between them, and will 
also involve the conditions and restrictions to which each is 
subject, including thereinthe permanence and characteristic pro- 
perties of an electron and its free mobility through the aether*. 

104. But for the mere analytical development of the 
aether-scheme as above formulated, a concrete physical repre- 
sentation of the constitution of the aether is not required: 
the abstract relations and conditions above given form a 
sufficient basis. In point of fact these analytical relations are 
theoretically of an ideal simplicity for this purpose : for they 
give explicitly the time-rates of change of the vectors of the 
problem at each instant, so that from a knowledge of the state 
of the system at any time t the state at the time t-^-ht can be 
immediately expressed, and so by successive steps, or by the 
use of Taylor s differential expansion-theorem, its state at any 
further time can theoretically be derived. The point that 
requires careful attention is as to whether the solution of these 
equations in terms of a given initial state of the system deter- 
mines the motions of the electrons or strain-nuclei through 
the medium, as well as the changes of strain in the medium 
itself: and it will appear on consideration that under suitable 
hypotheses this is so. For the given initial state will involve 
given motions of the electrons, that is the initial value of 
(a, by c) will involve rotational singularities at the electrons 
around their directions of motion, just such as in the element 
of time ht will shift the electrons themselves into their new 
positions** : and so on step by step continually. This however 
* See Appendix £. ** Cf. footnote, p. 162. 



CHAP. X] PROVIDED MATTER IS CONSTmJTED AETHERBALLT 165 

presupposes that the nucleus of the electron is quite labile as 
regards displacement through the aether, in other words that 
its movement is not influenced by any inertia or forces except 
such as are the expression of its relation to the aether: we 
in fact assume the completeness of the aethereal scheme of 
relations as above given. Any difficulty that may be felt on 
account of the infinite values of the vectors at the nucleus 
itself may be removed, in the manner customary in analytical 
discussions on attractions, by considering the nucleus to consist 
of a volume distribution of electricity of finite but very great 
density, distributed through a very small space instead of being 
absolutely concentrated in a point: then the quantities will 
not become infinite. Of the detailed structure of electrons 
nothing is assumed : so long as the actual dimensions of their 
nuclei are extremely small in comparison with the distances 
between them, it will suffice for the theory to consider them 
as points, just as for example in the general gravitational 
theory of the Solar System it suffices to consider the planets 
as attracting points. This method is incomplete only as 
regards those portions of the energy and other quantities that 
are associated with the mutual actions of the parts of the 
electron itself, and are thus molecularly constitutive. 

105. It is to be observed that on the view here being 
developed, in which atoms of matter are constituted of aggre- 
gations of electrons, the only actions between atoms are what 
may be described as electric forces. The electric character 
of the forces of chemical affinity was an accepted part of the 
chemical views of Davy, Berzelius, and Faraday; and more 
recent discussions, while clearing away crude conceptions, have 
invariably tended to the strengthening of that h}rpothesis. The 
mode in which the ordinary forces of cohesion could be in- 
cluded in such a view is still quite undeveloped. Difficulties 
of this kind have however not been felt to be fundamental in 
the vortex-atom illustration of the constitution of matter, 
which has exercised much fascination over high authorities on 
molecular physics : yet in the concrete realization of Maxwell's 
theory of the aether above referred to, the atom of matter 



1G6 LIMITED POSSIBILITIES OF EXPLANATION [SECT. Ill 

• 

possesses all the dynamical properties of a vortex ring in a 
frictionless fluid, so that everything that can be done in the 
domain of vortex-ring illustration is implicitly attached to the 
present scheme. The fact that virtually nothing has been 
achieved in the department of forces of cohesion is not a valid 
objection to the development of a theory of the present kind. 
For the aim of theoretical physics is not a complete and 
summary conquest of the viodus operandi of natural pheno- 
mena: that would be hopelessly unattainable if only for the 
reason that the mental apparatus with which we conduct the 
search is itself in one of its aspects a part of the scheme of 
Nature which it attempts to unravel. But the very fact that 
this is so is evidence of a correlation between the process of 
thought and the processes of external phenomena, and is an 
incitement to push on further and bring out into still clearer 
and more direct view their inter-connexions. When we have 
mentally reduced to their simple elements the correlations of 
a large domain of physical phenomena, an objection does not 
lie because we do not know the way to push the same principles 
to the explanation of other phenomena to which they should 
presumably apply, but which are mainly beyond the reach of 
our direct examination. 

The natural conclusion would rather be that a scheme, 
which has been successful in the simple and large-scale physical 
phenomena that we can explore in detail, must also have its 
place, with proper modifications or additions on account of the 
difference of scale, in the more minute features of the material 
world as to which direct knowledge in detail is not available. 
And in any case, whatever view may be held as to the necessity 
of the whole complex of chemical reaction being explicable in 
detail by an efficient physical scheme, a limit is imposed when 
vital activity is approached: any complete analysis of the 
conditions of the latter, when merely superficial sequences of 
phenomena are excluded, must remain outside the limits of 
our reasoning faculties. The object of scientific explanation is 
in fact to coordinate mentally, but not to exhaust, the inter- 
laced maze of natural phenomena: a theory which gives an 
adequate correlation of a portion of this field maintains its 



CHAP. X] EQUATIONS RELATIVE TO THE MOVING SYSTEM 167 

place until it is proved to be in definite contradiction, not 
removable by suitable modification, with another portion 
of it. 

Application to moving Material Media: approximation up to 

first order 

106. We now recall the equations of the free aether, with 
a view to changing from axes (a:, y, z) at rest in the aether to 
axes {x\ y\ z') moving with translatory velocity i; parallel to 
the axis oi x\ so as thereby to be in a position to examine how 
phenomena are altered when the observer and his apparatus 
are in uniform motion through the stationary aether. These 
equations are 

A df _dc db .. ^. J da ^ dh dg 

dH dy dz ^ di" dy dz 

. dg ^ da dc .. ^.^ db __ dfi dh 

dt dz dx ^ di^ dz dx 

dh __ db da ., ^.^ dh __ dg df 

dt dx dy ^ dt^ dx dy' 

When they are referred to the axes {x\ y', /) in uniform motion, 
so that {x\ y\ z') = (x — vt, y, z), t' = t, then d\dx, djdy, d/dz 
become d/dx\ djdy\ d/dz\ but d/dt becomes d/dt' - vd/dx' : 
thus 

df_d^_db' ' ,.,da_dhf__dg' 

^'^df'dy' dz' ^^'^'^^ di'dxf ti. 

^ dg ^ da' dc' .. ^^._^ db __ d/' dh' 

dt' ~~ dz dx' ^ dt' dz dx' 

dh ^ db' da' .^^ ^.^ dc __ dg' df 

^'^di''dx'''dj/ -{^0) 5^'-^'-^-- 

where 

(a\ 6', c') = (a, b + 4i'rrvh, c — 4nrvg) 

We can complete the elimination of (/, g, h) and (a, 6, c) so 



168 TRANSFORMATION TO STANDARD TYPE [SECT. Ill 

that only the vectors denoted by accented symbols shall remain, 
by substituting from these latter formulae : thus 

so that ^"'^"^'"^i^^^'' 

where € is equal to (1 — t/'/c'")"*, and exceeds unity ; 

and ^=^'-4^^(*'-4^,^) 

so that €~^b = 6' — -jhri;// ; 

giving the general relations 

€~* (a, 6, c) = (€~*a', b' — ^ttvK, c' + ^nrvg'^ 



€-» 



Hence 



df'dy' dz' 



. dq' da / rf . i; d\ , 
. dK I d V d\j, da' 
/A « V yda' dh! da' 

Now change the time-variable from f to f\ equal to t' — -^, eo:'; 

this will involve that -i-^ "^ "^i ^ w? ^® replaced by ^, , while the 

other differential operators remain unmodified ; thus the scheme 
of equations reverts to the same type as when it was referred to 
axes at rest, except as regards the factors € on the left-hand sides. 



CHAP. X] CORRELATION WITH A STATIONARY STSTKK 169 

107. It is to be observed that this factor e only differs 
from unity by (v/cy, which is of the second order of small 
quantities ; hence we have the following correspondence when 
that order is neglected. Consider any aethereal system, and 
let the sequence of its spontaneous changes referred to axes 
(a;', y\ /) moving uniformly through the aether with velocity 
(i;, 0, 0) be represented by values of the vectors (/, ff, h) and 
(a, 6, c) expressed as functions of x\ y\ z' and t\ the latter 
being the time measured in the ordinary manner : then there 
exists a correlated aethereal system whose sequence of spon- 
taneous changes referred to axes (x\ y\ z) at rest are such that 
its electric and magnetic vectors (/', g\ h') and {a', b\ c') are 
functions of the variables x\ y\ z and a time-variable <", equal 

to t' — -^x, which are the same as represent the quantities 



[f^3-j~.c,h^-^^h) 



and (a, 6 + \irvh, c — ^irvg) 

belonging to the related moving system when expressed as 
functions of the variables x\ y\ z and f'. 

Conversely, taking any aethereal system at rest in the 
aether, let the sequence of its changes be represented by 
C/** ff y ^') ^'^d (c^'» ^'j c) expressed as functions of the co- 
ordinates (jr, y, z) and of the time t'. In these functions change 

t- into t—-^x\ then the resulting expressions are the values of 



{^' ^ - i^^'' ^' -^ 4^0'^) ' 



and (a, b + 4rrrvh, c — iirvg), 

for a system in uniform motion through the aether, referred to 
axes (x, y, z) moving along with it, and to the time t. In com- 
paring the states of the two systems, we have to the first order 

dx ^ dx c' dt 



d ( 



dyV Amc* ) " dy 
d f, . " r^ dh' 

i^ ) " dF 



170 THE TWO SYSTEMS IDENTICAL [sECT. Ill 

hence bearing in mind that for the system at rest 

rfc'_d6' df 

dy dz" dt" 

or, what is the same, 

dc' dV . (df df\ 
dy'Tt^^Kdi''" &)' 

we have, to the first order, 

dx dy dz dx dy dz * 

Thus the electrons in the two systems here compared, being 
situated at the singular points at which the concentration of 
the electric displacement ceases to vanish, occupy corresponding 
positions. Again, these electrons are of equal strengths : for, 
very near an electron, fixed or moving, the values of (/. g, h) 
and (a, ft, c) are practically those due to it, the part due to the 
remainder of the system being negligible in comparison: also in 
this correspondence the relation between {/, g, h) and the 
accented variables is, by § lOG 

e-U/.<7./0 = (^-y',/+J^,c'./.'-J^,6'); 

hence, since for the single electron at rest (a, ft', c') is null, we 
have, very close to the correlative electron in the moving 
system, (/, g, h) equal to (/', eg, eh'), where e, being (1 — xj^/cf*)"^, 
differs from unity by the second order of small quantities. 
Thus neglecting the second order, (/, g, h) is equal to (/', g\ h') 
for corresponding points very close to electrons; and, as the 
amount of electricity inside any boundary is equal to the 
integral of the normal component of the aethereal displacement 
taken over the boundary, it follows by taking a very contracted 
boundary that the strengths of the corresponding electrons in 
the two systems are the same, to this order of approximation. 

108. It is to be observed that the above analytical trans- 
formation of the equations applies to any isotropic dielectric 
medium as well as to free aether : we have only to alter c into 




CHAP. X] ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION UNAFFECTED 171 

the velocity of radiation in that medium, and all will be as 
above. The transformation will thus be different for different 
media. But we are arrested if we attempt to proceed to 
compare a moving material system, treated as continuous, with 
the same system at rest; for the motion of the polarized dielec- 
tric matter has altered the mathematical type of the electric 
current. It is thus of no avail to try to effect in this way 
a direct general transformation of equations of a material 
medium in which dielectric and conductive coefficients occur. 

109. The correspondence here established between a 
system referred to fixed axes and a system referred to moving 
axes will assume a very simple aspect when the former system 
is a steady one, so that the variables are independent of the 
time. Then the distribution of electrons in the second system 
will be at each instant precisely the same as that in the first, 
while the second system accompanies its axes of reference in 
their uniform motion through the aether. In other words, 
given any system of electrified bodies at rest, in equilibrium 
under their mutual electric iufiuences and imposed constraints, 
there will be a precisely identical system in equilibrium under 
the same constraints, and in uniform trauslatory motion through 
the aether. That is, uniform translatory motion through the 
aether does not produce any alteration in electric distributions 
as far as the first order of the ratio of the velocity of the system 
to the velocity of radiation is concerned. Various cases of this 
general proposition will be verified subsequently in connexion 
with special investigations. 

Moreover this result is independent of any theory as to the 
nature of the forces between material molecules: the structure 
of the matter being assumed unaltered to the first order by 
motion through the aether, so too must be all electric distribu- 
tions. What has been proved comes to this, that if any 
configuration of ionic charges is the natural one in a material 
system at rest, the maintenance of the same configuration as 
regards the system in uniform motion will not require the aid 
of any new forces. The electron taken by itself must be on any 
conceivable theory a simple singularity of the aether whose 



172 AETUEREAL FIELD AFFECTED [SECT. Ill 

movements when it is free, and interactions with other electrons 
if it can be constrained by matter, are traceable through the 
ditferential equations of the surrounding free aether alone : and 
a correlation has been established between these equations for 
the two cases above compared. It is however to be observed 
(cf § 99) that though the fixed and the mo\-ing system of 
electrons of this correlation are at corresponding instant-s 
identical, yet the electric and magnetic displacements belonging 
to them differ bv terms of the first order. 



CHAPTER XI 



MOVING MATERIAL SYSTEM : APPROXIMATION CARRIED TO 

THE SECOND ORDER 

110. The results above obtained have been derived from 
the correlation developed in § 106, up to the first order of the 
small quantity u/c, between the equations for aethereal vectors 
here represented by (/', g\ h') and (a', h\ &) referred to the 
Axes {x\ y\ z) at rest in the aether and a time ^", and those 
for related aethereal vectors represented by (f,g, h) and (a, 6, c) 
referred to axes {x\ y\ z') in uniform translatory motion and 
a time t\ But we can proceed further, and by aid of a more 
complete transformation institute a correspondence which will 
be correct to the second order. Writing as before ^' for 

t' ex, the exact equations for (/, g, h) and (a, 6, c) referred 

c 

to the moving axes {x\ y\ /) and time t' are, as above shown, 
equivalent to 

dt"~ dy' d£ ^ ' dif' ~ d^ d/ 

, d(f da' dc' ,, ,, , dh' df dh' 

^-^'W'-^di'—dx' -<*^^> *d?' = d?-^' 

dh' _db' d,^ dc' _d£ df 

*^Ut'~ dx'~ di/ ^^^^ ^d1f'~dx' dy'- 

Now write 

(a'l.yi, ^i) for (€*«', y', «') 

(o,, hx, Ci) for (6~* a', V, c') or (e~*o, 6 + ifirvh, c — 4nrvg) 



174 COBRELATION WITH STATIOXART SYSTEM [SECT. Ill 

■ 

(/i, gu K) for (6-V', 9\ A') or (e"*/, (7 - J^c, A + J^-6^ 

d^ for €-*d«" or c""* [d«' - ^ cda?'] , 

where c = (1 — v^/c*)"^ ; and it will be seen that the factor € is 
absorbed, so that the scheme of equations, referred to moving 
axes, which connects together the new variables with sub- 
scripts, is identical in form with the Maxwellian scheme of 
relations for the aethereal vectors referred to fixed axes. This 
transformation, from (x\ y\ /) to (xi, y^, z^) as dependent vari- 
ables, signifies an elongation of the space of the problem in 
the ratio 6^ along the direction of the motion of the axes of 
coordinates. Thus if the values of {fi, gi» Ai) and (oi. 61, Ci) 
given as functions of arj, yi, Zi, ^ express the course of spon- 
taneous change of the aethereal vectors of a system of moving 
electrons referred to axes (xi, yi, Zi) at rest in the aether, then 

and (€"*«, 6 + 47n;/i, c — 4nrvg), 

expressed by the same functions of the variables 

will represent the course of change of the aethereal vectors 
(/, g, h) and (a, 6, c) of a correlated system of moving electrons 
referred to axes of {x\ y\ z') moving through the aether with 
uniform translatory velocity (i;, 0, 0). In this correlation be- 
tween the courses of change of the two systems, we have 

'^^^^^-^^ equal to ^'--^ ''^■ 



where 



dy'(^~4W} 


dgi 

" dy. 


i^i'-^fcc') 


dhi 

dz, • 


dc db 


.(df df 



dy' 



CHAP. Xl] ESTABLISHED UP TO SECOND ORDEB 175 

and also ^ ^ 4-\ 

ati at 

k df , dg dh v fdf df\. , , 



dx 



fl *dgi dhi ^ v^ df 
^1 di/idzi c» dt' 



so that, up to the order of (v/cy inclusive, 

df .dg dh ^dfi dg^ dh^ 
dx dy' dz! dx^ dy^ dzi ' 

Thus the conclusions as to the corresponding positions of the 
electrons of the two systems, which had been previously 
established up to the first order of v/c, are true up to the 
second order when the dimensions of the moving system are 
contracted in comparison with the fixed system in the ratio 
€~*, or 1 — ii;*/c', along the direction of its motion. 

111. The ratio of the strengths of corresponding electrons 
in the two systems may now be deduced just as it was pre- 
viously when the discussion was confined to the first order 
of v/c. For the case of a single electron in uniform motion 
the comparison is with a single electron at rest, near which 
(ai. 6i, Ci) vanishes so far as it depends on that electron: now 
we have in the general correlation 

hence in this particular case 

(g»h)^€(giJi,\ while /=€*/,. 
But the strength of the electron in the moving system is the 
value of the integral lj(/dy'dz' +gdzdx' + hdx'dy) extended 
over any surface closely surrounding its nucleus ; that is here 
€* I k/idyidzi + gidzidxi + Aid^idyO, so that the strength of each 

moving electron is €* times that of the correlative fixed electron. 
As before, no matter what other electrons are present, this 



176 SHRINKAGE PRODUCED BY TRANSLATION [SECT. Ill 

argument still applies if the surface be taken to surround the 
electron under consideration ver}- closely, because then the 
wholly preponderating part of each vector is that which belongs 
to the adjacent electron**. 

112. We require however to construct a correlative system 
devoid of the translatory motion in which the strengths of the 
electrons shall be equal instead of proportional, since motion 
of a material system containing electrons cannot alter their 
strengths. The principle of dynamical similarity will eifect this. 

We have in fact to reduce the scale of the electric charges, 

and therefore of ~- + » + -7- > in a system at rest in the ratio 

ax ay dz "^ 

€"*. Apply therefore a transformation 

{x, y, z)=^k{Xu yi, z^\ t = lU, 

and the form of the fundameutal circuital aethereal relations will 
not be changed provided k = l and ^ = e"* k\ Thus we may have 
k and I both unity and &=€""*; so that no further change of 
scale in space and time is requireii, but only a diminution of 
{% by c) in the ratio e"^. 

We derive the result, correct to the second order, that if the 
internal forces of a material system arise wholly from electro- 
dynamic actions between the systems of electrons which con- 
stitute the atoms, then an effect of imparting to a steady 
material system a uniform velocity of translation is to produce 

a uniform contraction of the svstem in the direction of the 

ft 

motion, of amount €~* or 1 — Ji;Vc-. The electrons will occupy 
corresponding positions in this contracted system, but the 
aethereal displacements in the space around them will not 
correspond : if (/, g, h) and (a, 6, c) are those of the moving 
system, then the electric and magnetic displacements at corre- 
sponding points of the fixed systems will be the values that the 
vectoi-s 



:J ^-i 



•^^-4^c^^^* + 4^c;«^) 



»» 



This result follows more immediately from § 110, which shows that 
corresponding densities of electrification are equal, while corresponding volumes 
are as €» to unity. 



CHAP. Xl] OPTICAL PROPAGATION IN MOVING HATTER 177 

and €*(€"* a, b + 4nrvh, c — 47rvgr) 

had at a time const. + vx/o^ before the instant considered 
when the scale of time is enlarged in the ratio e*. 

As both the electric and magnetic vectors of radiation lie in 
the wave-front, it follows that in the two correlated systems, fixed 
Slid moving, the relative wave-fronts of radiation correspond, 
.as also do the rays which are the paths of the radiant energy 
relative to the systems. The change of the time variable, in 
the comparison of radiations in the fixed and moving systems, 
involves the Doppler eifect on the wave-length. 

The Correlation between a stationary and a moving Medium^ 

as regards trains of Radiation 

113. Consider the aethereal displacement given by 

which belongs to a plane wave-train advancing, along the 
direction (Z, m, n) with velocity F, or c/fi where fi is refractive 
index, equal to 

in the material medium at rest referred to coordinates (otj , yi, Zi), 
In the corresponding wave-train relative to the same medium 
in motion specified by coordinates (x, y, z), and considered as 
shrunk in the above manner as a result of the motion, the 
vectors (/, g, h) and (a, 6, c) satisfy the relation 

= (Z, M, N)F\u^x-\'my'^nz-p€-^\t-j^€xyt 

= (i, M, N)F[{le^-{'^Ax'¥my + nz-p€-^^. 

As the wave-train in the medium at rest is one of transverse 
•displacement, so that the vectors (/,, g^^ hj) and (oj, 6i, c,) are 
both in the wave-front, the same is therefore true for the 
vectors {/, g, h) and (a, 6, c) in the correlative wave-train in 
the moving system, as was in fact to be anticipated from the 

U 12 



178 VELOCITY or LIGHT IN MOVING MATTEB [SECT. Ul 

circuital quality of these vectors : the direction vector of the 

front of the latter train is proportional to (l^+'^f^, m, nu 
and its velocity of propagation is 

Thus, when the wave-train is travelling with velocity V^ 
along the direction of translation of the material medium, that 
is along the axis of a? so that m and n are null, the velocity of 
the train relative to the moving medium is 

which is, to the second order, 

The second term in this expression is the Fresnel effect, and 
the remaining term is its second order correction on our 
hypothesis which includes Michelson's negative result. 

In the general correlation, the wave-length in the train of 
radiation relative to the moving material system differs from 
that in the corresponding train in the same system at rest by 
the factor 

where I is the cosine of the inclination of the ray to the direction 
of u ; it is thus shorter by a quantity of the first order, which 
represents the Doppler effect on wave-length because the period 
is the same up to that order. 

When the wave-fronts relative to the moving medium are 
travelling in a direction making an angle ^, in the plane xy so 
that n is null, with the direction of motion of the giedium, the 
velocity V of the wave-train (of wave-length thus altered), 
relative to the medium is given by 

cosj^ _ Ze v€ sin 0^ ^ m€^ 
where (P H- m^)lp' = V'-. Thus 



CHAP. XI] earth's motion OPTICALLY INOPERATIVE 17& 

( €-^ COS ff i/y^ 6-^8in«y J^ 

so that neglecting (iz/cV, 

F'=F-^,cos^-Hl-/*-)^(l+3cos'<9'). 

where fi^^c/V, of which the last term is the general form of 
the second order correction to Fresnel's expression. In free 
aether, for which fi is unity, this formula represents the velocity 
relative to the moving axes of an unaltered wave-train, as it 
ought to do. 

As (/, g, h) and (a, 6, c) are in the same phase in the free 
transparent aether, when one of them is null so is the other : 
hence in any experimental arrangement, regions where there is 
no disturbance in the one system correspond to regions where 
there is no disturbance in the other. As optical measurements 
are usually made by the null method of adjusting the apparatus 
so that the disturbance vanishes, this result carries the general 
absence of effect of the Earth's motion in optical experiments, 
up to the second order of small quantities. 

Influence of translatory motion on the Structure of a Molecvle : 

Hie law of Conservation of Mass 

114. As a simple illustration of the general molecular 
theory, let us consider the group formed of a pair of electrons 
of opposite signs describing steady circular orbits round each 
other in a position of rest**: we can assert from the correlation, 
that when this pair is moving through the aether with velocity 
t; in a direction lying in the plane of their orbits, these orbits 
relative to the translatory motion will be flattened along the 
direction of v to ellipticity 1 — ii;*/c', while there will be a 
first-order retardation of phase in each orbital motion when the 
electron is m front of the mean position combined with 
acceleration when behind it so that on the whole the period 
will be changed only in the second-order ratio 1 + i^v^jc^ The 
specification of the orbital modification produced by the 

** The orbital velocities are in this illustration supposed so small that 
radiation is not important. Cf. §§ 151—6 infra. 

12—2 



180 UELATIVE RADIANT PERIODS UNAFFECTED [SEGT. Ill 

translatory motion, for the general case when the direction of 
that motion is inclined to the plane of the orbit, may be made 
similarly: it can also be extended to an ideal molecule con- 
stituted of any orbital system of electrons however complex. 
But this statement implies that the nucleus of the electron is 
merely a singular point in the aether, that there is nothing 
involved in it of the nature of inertia foreign to the aether : it 
also implies that there are no forces between the electrons 
other than those that exist through the mediation of the 
aether as here defined, that is other than electric forces. 

The circumstance that the changes of their free periods, 
arising from convection of the molecules through the aether, 
are of the second order in u/c, is of course vital for the theory 
of the spectroscopic measurement of celestial velocities in the 
line of sight. That conclusion would however still hold good 
if we imagined the molecule to have inertia and potential 
energy extraneous to {i.e. unconnected with) the aether of 
optical and electrical phenomena, provided these properties are 
not affected by the viii/orrn motion : for the aethereal fields of 
the moving electric charges, free or constrained, existing in the 
molecule, will be symmetrical fore and aft and unaltered to the 
fii-st order by the motion, and therefore a change of sign of the 
velocity of translation will not affect them, so that the periods 
of free vibration cannot involve the first power of this velocity. 

115. The fact that uniform motion of the molecule through 
the aether does not disturb its constitution to the first order, 
nor the aethereal symmetry of the moving system fore and aft, 
shows that when steady motion is established the mean kinetic 
energy of the system consists of the internal energy of the 
molecule, which is the same as when it is at rest, together with 
the sum of the energies belonging to the motions of transla- 
tion of its separate electrons. This is verified on reflecting 
that the disturbance in the aether is made up additively of 
those due to the internal motions of the electrons in the 
molecule and those due to their common velocity of transla- 
tion. Thus in estimating the mean value of the volume- 
iniegi-al of the square of the aethereal disturbance, which is 



CHAP. Xl] LAW OF CONSTANCY OF MASS 181 

the total kinetic energy, we shall have the integrated square of 
each of these disturbances separately, together with the 
integral of terms involving their product. Now one factor of 
this product is constant in time and symmetrical foje and aft 
as regards each electron, that factor namely which arises from 
the uniform translation ; the other factor, arising from the 
orbital motions of the electrons, is oscillatory and symmetrical 
in front and rear of each orbit : thus the integrated product is 
by symmetry null. This establishes the result stated, that the 
kinetic energy of the moving molecule is made up of an 
internal energy, the same up to the first order of the ratio of 
its velocity to that of radiation as if it were at rest, and the 
energy of translation of its electrons. The coeflScient of half 
the square of the velocity of translation in the latter part is 
therefore, up to that order, the measure of the inertia, or mass, 
of the molecule thus constituted. Hence when the square of 
the ratio of the velocity of translation of the molecule to that 
of radiation is neglected, its electric inertia is equal to the sum 
of those of the electrons which compose it ; and the funda- 
mental chemical law of the constancy of mass throughout 
molecular transformations is verified for that part of the mass 
(whether it be all of it or not) that is of electric origin. 

116. Objection has been taken to the view that the whole 
of the inertia of a molecule is associated with electric action, on 
the ground that gravitation, which has presumably no relations 
with such action, is proportional to mass : it has been suggested 
that inertia and gravity may be different results of the same 
cause. Now the inertia is by definition the coefficient of half 
the square of the velocity in the expression for the translatory 
energy of the molecule : in the constitution of the molecule it 
is admitted, from electrolytic considerations, that electric forces 
or agencies prevail enormously over gravitative ones : it seems 
fair to conclude that of its energy the electric part prevails 
equally over the gravitative part : but this is simply asserting 
that inertia is mainly of electric, or rather of aethereal, origin. 
Moreover the increase of kinetic electric energy of an electron 
arising from its motion with velocity v depends on i;*/c*, on the 



182 HASS NOT OF GRAVITATIONAL ORIGIN [SBCT. Ill 

coefficient of inertia of the aether, and on the dimensions of its 
nucleus, where c is the velocity of radiation : the increase of its 
gravitational energy would presumably in like manner depend 
on x^l&^t where & is the velocity of propagation of gravitation 
and is enormously greater than c. On .neither ground does it 
appear likely that mass is to any considerable degree an attribute 
of gravitation. 

The Transition from Electrons to Molecules 

117. The main additional result derived from this second- 
order discussion is that if we assume all molecular forces to be 
electric forces, motion of a material system through the aether 
alters its dimensions in a minute but definite manner. A 
scrutiny, on all sides, of the basis of this inference is of course 
desirable. As a preliminary it is to be noticed that the mole- 
cular forces on the action of which it depends are extremely 
great in comparison with any distributions of force arising 
from finite currents or electrifications produced in the system 
as a whole. In the comparison between the two identical 
systems, one at rest the other in motion, of the analogy above 
developed, their electrons occupy corresponding positions in 
their spaces at all times : thus at first sight it is only systems 
in which the electrons are absolutely at rest that can be thus 
compared. But evea in the case of dielectric bodies at rest, 
though the molecules are fixed the electrons are revolving in 
the molecules : yet that does not sensibly affect the application 
of the correspondence. For the only difference thereby intro- 
duced in it is that the phases of the orbital motions of those 
molecules of the moving material system that are situated 
further in advance, in the direction of the movement of the 
system, are slightly accelerated in comparison with the cor- 
responding phases in the fixed system. Now the permanent or 
secular relations between molecules, supposed far enough apart 
not to interfere in a structural manner with each other so as to 
form compound molecules, are independent of these relative 
phases : to obtain them we in fact replace each molecule by its 
steady secular equivalent in the Gaussian sense, as has to be 



CHAP. Xl] RESULTS NOT DISTURBED BY CONDUCTION 183 

done in a representation of their magnetism, and thus the 
phase-change makes no difference for the present purpose. 
The case is however different when there are electric currents 
flowing in the system, for that involves the transfer of some 
electrons into entirely new positions, it may be at a finite 
distance : these wandering electrons or ions interfere with the 
exact statement of the correlation, and they interfere to a like 
extent with any conclusions that may be drawn from it, as to 
change of form of solid bodies carrying currents arising from 
their motion with the Earth through the aether. 

How far then is the correlation between the fixed material 
system and the moving system modified by electric conduction ? 
In the theorem the position of each electron in the material 
medium in motion, at time t, corresponds with that which it 
would occupy in the medium at rest at time t — vx/c\ When 
the material medium is a solid dielectric mass, the mean position 
of the electron is the same at all times, and as we have seen 
this element of time does not enter into the comparison at all : 
but when the medium is conducting, the electric currents in it 
involve migration of electrons through it, and we must consider 
how far the correspondence is thereby prejudiced. Only two 
views of the nature of conduction, in this connexion, are open. 
The current in metals may possibly (but not likely) be carried 
by very few electrons, in which case they will migrate with 
sensible speed ; but the smallness of their number, compared 
with the total number of combined electrons, prevents their 
changes of position from sensibly affecting the molecular 
structure of the medium : we know in fact that the mechanical 
structure of a conductor is not sensibly affected when it carries 
a current. On the other hand a considerable proportion of the 
electrons may take part in carrying the current ; in which case 
their velocity of migration is excessively minute, as for instance 
follows from the phenomena of migration in electrolysis*; and 
the discrepancy of position of those electrons, in the application 
of the correlation theorem, involving the factor v/c^ as well as 
this velocity, is negligible to an order higher than the second, 
just as was the discrepancy of phase in the individual molecular 

* Of. Appendix B, § 6. 



184 CONDUCTION UNINFLUENCED BY CONVECTION [SECT. HI 

orbits. To reach this conclusion, it is by no means necessary to 
assume that we have any knowledge of the process by which 
ionisation, or the passing on of electrons from molecule to 
molecule, occurs in conductive processes. 

Influence of Convection on Conductivity 

118. In this connexion we can gain some knowledge of the 
nature and amount of the effect of the Earth's motion on 
electrolytic conduction. If the convective velocity t; is in the 
direction of the current, and the actions between the ions are, 
as usual in electrolytic theory, assumed to be wholly electric, 
and w and w* represent velocities of positive and negative ions, 
then the position of the positive ion in the electrol}i;e at rest is 
given by x^wt\ hence (§ 112) in the electrolyte in motion 

with the same electric force it is given by x^w it ^ x j , so 

w 

that X = , ,-- t ; thus the velocity of the positive ion relative 

l + in«;/c'» ^ ^ 

to the moving electrolyte is u» ( 1 + —J . The velocity of the 

negative ion is similarly w'l ( 1 — -^]- The electric current, 

being determined by the sum of these velocities, is altered as 

regards these ions in the ratio of w; + m;' — - (iv' — w'*) to tv + ti/ 

approximately ; it is thus diminished in the ratio 1 — v (?/; — w'); c^; 
and the conductivity of the electrolyte is diminished in this 
ratio, where now w — w' represents an average value, the differ- 
ence of the velocities of drift of positive and negative ions. 
This change of conductivity is a unilateral one, being reversed 
when the direction of the current is reversed : it is at most of 
the second oitier of small quantities : it vanishes altogether, or 
rather becomes of two orders higher, when the velocities of the 
positive and negative ions are the same. It may be remarked 
incidentally that, as the numbers of positive and negative ions 
taking part in the current of conduction are the same, the 
specification of that current with reference to moving matter is 
just the same as with reference to the stationary aether. 



CHAP. Xl] LORENTZ*S CONSTITUTIVE SUGGESTION 185 

The Argument of LorenU regarding the Michelson experiment 

119. As an assistance to the formation of a judgment on 
these questions, it will be convenient to insert here a free 
translation of the considerations by which Lorentz* supported 
the possibility of an explanation, of the kind above developed, 
of the negative result of Michelson's experiments on the 
influence of material convection on phenomena of optical 
interference. 

" However extraordinar}' this hypothesis may appear at 
first sight, it must be admitted that it is by no means gra- 
tuitous, if we assume that the intermolecular forces act through 
the mediation of the aether in a manner similar to that which 
we know to be the case in regard to electric and magnetic 
forces. If that is so, the translation of the matter will most 
likely alter the action between two molecules or atoms in a 
manner similar to that in which it alters the attraction or 
repulsion between electrically charged particles. As then the 
form and the dimensions of a solid body are determined in the 
last resort by the intensity of the molecular forces, an altera- 
tion of the dimensions cannot well be left out of consideration. 

" In its theoretical aspect there is thus nothing to be urged 
against the hypothesis. As regards its experimental aspect 
we at once notice that the elongation or contraction which it 
implies is extraordinarily minute. It would involve a shorten- 
ing in the diameter of the Earth of about 6^ centimetres. 
The only experimental arrangements in which it could come 
into evidence would be just of the type of this one of Michel- 
son's which first suggested it. 

" It is worthy of remark, that we are led precisely to this 
law of alteration of dimensions when we assume first that, 
without taking account of molecular motions, in a solid body 
left to itself the forces of attraction and repulsion acting on 
each molecule maintain themselves in equilibrium, and secondly 
— for which there is admittedly no evidence — that the same 
law applies to these molecular forces, as regards their alteration 

• • Vereuoh einer Theorie...' 1896, §§ 91—2. 



186 PRECISION OF MICHELSON'S NULL RESULT [SECT. Ill 

by convection, that has been demonstrated for the electrostatic 
attractions of moving charges. Let us understand by Si and 
S^, not as previously two systems of charged particles, but 
two systems of molecules, — the second at rest and the first 
in motion with velocity v in the direction of the axes of x, — 
between whose dimensions the previously given relation holds ; 
then since in both systems the x components of the forces 
are the same, while the y and z components differ by the 
factors given, it is clear that the forces in Si will balance when 
that is the case for those of S,. If therefore S^ is the state of 
equilibrium of a solid body at rest, the molecules in Si have 
just those positions in which they could subsist under the 
influence of the motion of translation. The displacement into 
this new configui*ation would therefore take place of itself, 
involving a contraction in the direction of motion in the ratio 
of unity to (1 - v'/c^)K 

"In reality the molecules of a body are not at rest, but 
corresponding to each position of equilibrium they are in a 
state of stationary motion. How far this difference is of 
importance for the phenomena treated, must be left undeter- 
mined : the experiments of Michelson and Morley leave for it 
a comparatively wide range of effect on account of the un- 
avoidable errors of observation." 

The force of the last remark is removed by Michelson's 
more recent observations* with a longer ray-path, in which 
the delicacy was so great that it was necessary for consistent 
results to get rid of the air; even then no trace of un- 
compensated effect was observed. 

Are the linear equations of the Aether exact t 

120. In favour of the view that the interactions between 
atoms are in very great part those necessitated by the aether 
whose properties are revealed in electric and optical phenomena, 
there is, in addition to the inherent theoretical difficulty in 
conceiving any other kind of interaction, the actual fact that 
on the lines of the above argument such a view does account 
for a definite and well-ascertained experimental result, that of 

* American Journal of Science, 1897. 




CHAP. Xl] ARB THE AETHER-EQUATIONS EXACT ? 187 

Michelson, above discussed, which has hitherto stood by itself 
as the only quantitative observational evidence that has a 
bearing on this question. It can be said on the other side 
that this view of aethereal action does not directly cover 
gravitational phenomena, unless the rather artificial pulsatory 
theory of gravity is allowed*. But there is another aspect of 
the matter. The equations of the free aether, as revealed by 
MacCullagh's optical analysis, are linear equations: they in 
fact must be so if all kinds of radiations are to travel with 
the same speed in the celestial spaces. In Maxwells hands, 
equivalent relations with the appropriate generalization were 
arrived at on the electric side, and formed a basis for the 
explanation of the whole plexus of electrodynamic and optical 
phenomena. Further theoretical discussion has in all directions 
tended to widen the scope and enhance the inherent simplicity 
of this scheme. The question arises whether there is anything 
to gainsay a view that this simple linear scheme is only the 
first approximation, a very close one however, to an analytical 
specification of the aether: just as the linear scheme of equa- 
tions of the theory of propagation of sound covers the whole 
of the phenomena of acoustics, although in ariiving at those 
equations from the dynamics of the atmosphere all terms 
involving the square of the ratio of the velocity of the actual 
aereal disturbance to the velocity of its propagation are neg- 
lected, for the reason that their consequences are outside the 
limits of observation in that domain. Why then should not 
relatively minute phenomena like gravitation be involved in 
similar non-linear terms, or terms involving differentials of 
higher orders, in the analytical specification of the free aether, 
which are as insignificant compared with the main fully ascer- 
tained linear terms as is the gravitation between two electric 
systems compared with their mutual electric forces ? Against 
this there is a subjective reluctance to disturb the ideal 
simplicity of the aethereal scheme : but there is no help for 
that if its content is not sufficiently extensive for the facts. 
Of more weight is the circumstance that a train of radiation 
from a distant star would change its form as it advanced across 

* Cf. Phil, Tram. 1897 A, p. 217. 



188 DOES THE AETHEB POSSESS STRUCTURE ? [SECT. Ill 

space, that there would in fact be optical dispersion in the free 
aether if such second-order terms existed. The amount of 
such dispersion that would be at all allowable is known to be 
excessively minute, from the circumstance that celestial bodies 
on emerging from eclipse or occultation show no changes of 
colour: the smallness of the amount that would be required 
may be estimated by comparing the electric force between 
two ions with their gravitational attraction. Unless the effects 
of such terms of higher order, in the equations of aethereal 
activity, increased enormously in importance at molecular 
distances, relatively to the main linear terms, the proposition 
that the interactions of molecules are mainly of electric quality 
would remain valid : now such increase of importance does not 
seem likely as regai-ds the mechanism of gravitation, for gravity 
and electric force both obey the same law of the inverse square 
of the distance, a law which in fact belongs, of mathematical 
necessity, to the steady pennanent interactions between any 
kinds of molecular nuclei of elastic or motional disturbance in 
an extended medium, which are of the tjT)e of simple poles. 

A question of some interest arises, as to whether the as- 
sumption that the linear equations of free aether are a first 
approximation, obtained by the omission of non-linear terms, 
would imply a virtual recognition of structure in that medium. 
A presumption of this kind would be useless except for pur- 
poses of vivid illustration after the manner of mechanical 
models, so long as there is absolutely no means of experimenting 
on the properties of free aether : and this practically comes to 
the same thing as taking such structure to be non-existent. 

121. There is thus little to be urged in favour of leaving 
this loophole for the explanation of gravitation. On the other 
side moreover there appears to be the fatal objection that any 
action accounted for in this way would have relations with 
radiation, including a velocity of transmission of the same order 
as that of light. The knowledge that the speed of transmission 
of gravitation, if finite at all, enormously transcends that of 
radiation, shows that it forms no objection to a theory of 
electric and radiant phenomena that gravitation is not found 




CH. Xl] GRAVITATION OUTSIDE ORDINARY AETHER-THEORY 189 . 

to be involved in it. An analogy in fact euggests itself with 
the molecular electric theory as developed by Weber, Kirch- 
hoff and their school, which gave a complete account of ordinary 
material electric phenomena, and only failed when the totally 
different region of radiation came into the discussion. It seems 
fair to conclude, in the one case as in the other, that in the 
constitution of the energy-relations on which the phenomena 
depend, a new property of the medium becomes explicitly 
involved in the more refined theory (not merely implicitly as in 
the energy-function that suffices for ordinary material electro- 
dynamics) such for instance as the incompressibility that is 
utilized in the pulsatory theory or illustration of gravitation. 
The general reasons against the notion that the fundamental 
property of mass in matter is in direct connexion with the 
mechanism by which gravitation is transmitted have been given 
above (§ 116). There appears then, as yet, to be nothing to 
tempt us to depart from the natural prepossession, by considering 
the simple linear equations of the aether to be other than exact. 

Dimeimonal Relations: in connexion with the definite scale of 

magnitude of Atomic Structure 

122. Important considerations bearing on the question as 
to how far atoms of matter are constituted simply of singul- 
arities in the aether, practically point-nuclei, may be derived 
from the Newtonian principle of dynamical similarity, as 
utilized above (§ 112). Let us compare two such aethereal 
systems represented one by ordinary the other by subscripted 
variables, between which there is a correspondence given by 

(a, b, c) = 'it(ai, ij, Ci), (/ g, h)^^{fu ffi, Ai); 

the aethereal equations for the one system will be identical 
with the aethereal equations for the other provided 

so that 

^ = (f> and k^l. 



190 DEFINITE SCALE OF ATOMIC STRUCTURE [sECT. Ill 

Hence, given any one existing system of electrons with point- 
nuclei, another system is possible in the same aether having all 
distances and times reduced in any the same ratio, and electric 
displacement and magnetic flux independently reduced in any 
other the same ratio. But if the electrons of this correlated 
system are to be of the same strengths as the original ones 
il>/k must be unity; hence the scale must be altered in the 
same ratio throughout, as regards length, time, and the 
inductions. Thus, given any existing steady system of elec- 
trons, the same system altered to any other scale of linear 
magnitude is possible if there are none but electric actions. 
This is on the hypothesis which is here generally adopted, that 
the dimensions of the nucleus of an electron are so small, 
compared vrith the mutual distances of electrons, that these 
dimensions are not sensibly involved in the forces between 
them. If this condition is left out the constancy of volume of 
the nucleus will have to be taken into consideration in the 
dimensional transformation, so that k must be unity ; and this 
indefiniteness of linear scale in a material body cannot exist. 
The size of a molecule would also be rendered determinate if 
residual non-linear terms in the aethereal equations became 
sensible at intermolecular distances. Thus, these saving 
hypotheses being excluded, if the atoms of matter were consti- 
tuted electrically, and the forces between them were wholly of 
electric origin, there would be nothing to determine the scale 
of an isolated system as regards time and space : and different 
systems need not be always of the same scale of magnitude 
as regards their atomic structure. 

123. A similar deficiency of definite scale would also be 
expected to exist in any hydrodynamical theory or illustration 
which would construct an atom out of vortex rings. Thus let 
us consider a system of vortex rings, (f, 17, f ) being the vorti- 
city at the point (x, y, z), and compare with another system in 
another space (x, y\ z') such that the coordinates of correspond- 
ing points are connected by the relation 

(a!, y\ z') = k {x, y. z), 



CHAP. Xl] SCALE OF A VORTEX-SYSTEM INDEFINITE 191 

while the vorticities at these points are connected by the 
relation 

(f '. »;'. r) = * (I V. ?). 

The formula of von Helmholtz for the velocity (w, v, w) of the 
fluid in terms of the vorticity, being of type 

gives (u\ f/, w') = kx (w, v, w). 

But the systems will maintain their correspondence of configur- 
ation throughout succeeding time, only provided always 

hence ic = 1 while k is arbitrary. Thus if any vortex-system 
is compared with another one expanded as regards linear scale 
A; times, and the vorticity is at each point unaltered, so that 
the circulations of the vortices in the new system are all 
increased k^ times, then their subsequent histories will corre- 
spond exactly. 

The circulation of the vortex is however in the djmamical 
theory an unalterable constant, so that the one system cannot 
be changed by natural processes into the other. Let us trj' 
therefore to avoid this diflference by a change of the time scale 
as well, so that t' =^\t; then for continued correspondence 

(u\ v\ v/) = k\~^ («, V, w) : 

hence kK^k\~^^ so that #c = \'"^; and the strengths of the 
vortices are altered in the ratio k^X"^, which must be a 
constant. Thus if the scale of time is increased \ times, and 
that of linear magnitude \~* times, and the corresponding 
vortex filaments are of the same strengths, the systems will 
continue permanently in correspondence. This is however on 
the assumption that the vorticity is around a vacuous core, or 
a fluid core so thin that its actual section does not afiect the 
mutual actions of the vortices : for the change of linear scale 
will alter the volume of the core of each ring. There is under 
these conditions nothing in the hydrodynamical forces to fix 
the scale of magnitude of an isolated vortex-system with 



192 ATOXIC jrrcLEi xot mere podtr [sect, ni 

Tacaoa« core^ : the same system can eqoallj exist with linear 
dimensions k times as great when all the time constants will be 
diminished £' times. 

124. The definiteneas of $cale of the molecules of material 
svfttenis thus precludes the posstibility of their being con- 
stituted of singularities of a uniform continuum, of either of 
these kinds with nuclei undistinguishaUe from mathematical 
pointi». The constancy of inertia and gravity throughout all 
chemical transformations forms practically suflScient evidence 
for the physicist that all matter is built up out of the same 
primordial stuff: this stuff, if it is constituted of intrinsic 
siogularities in a uniform aethereal continuum with relations 
exactly linear, must thus be made up of elements of type 
rather more complex than simple positional and motional 
singularities with nuclei devoid of sensible volume. Another 
element apart from finiteness of dimensions of nuclear structure 
that could enter, on the theorv of an aether exactly linear in 
its relations, is that of time : for example it has been seen how 
the gravitation of atoms can be imitated by supposing a 
definite periodic time of pulsation to be associated with each 
electron. A change of scale such as that above discussed 
would then change the forces of gravitation, unless possibly 
the time of pulsation could be suitably altered and the change 
thus counteracted. 

125. In the above considerations there is strong evidence 
that gravitation is not to be expected to be appreciably involved 
within the scheme which suffices to cover the phenomena of 
electrodynamics and optics. The introduction of the time- 
relation inherent in pulsating nuclei seems still to be the only 
obvious way of representing it, in default of its arising from 
second-order terms in the dynamical relations of the aether. 
The permanence of scale of magnitude of the material atoms 
of various types involves the presence of actions depending on 
the magnitude and structure of the electric nuclei, which 
though they may be purely aethereal are local, and thus not 
pertinent to general electrical and optical theory : the existence 



CHAP. Xl] EXCEPT AS REGARDS MECHANICAL THEORY 193 

of a configuration of minimum energy in the molecule in fact 
implies finite structure in the nuclei in some such way. At 
the same time the Michelson interference-result indicates that 
these other agencies play a quite subordinate part in our 
present problems : for the correlation above established, which 
involves that result, only holds strictly for electrons whose 
nuclei are considered as mere points in comparison with their 
mutual distances. Atomic inertia other than that which comes 
from the aether in some way it seems impossible to conceive : 
but in other respects we are hardly on the threshold of the 
structure of the atom. The problem there involved is not to 
assign a structure so minutely definite that it will include the 
whole complex of chemical actions, but rather to ascertain how 
much must be postu hated in order to correlate the main features 
of those universal agencies, affecting all kinds of matter, with 
"vvhich the theoretical side of physical science deals. 



13 



SECTION IV 



CHAPTER XII 

ox OPTICAL ROTATIONS MAGKETIC AND STRUCTURAL 

126. The rotation of the plane of polarization of light, 
whether by naturally active media, or under the influence of 
magnetism induced in ordinary' media, is dynamically a secondary 
and subordinate phenomenon. But in the testing of theories 
regarding the interaction of aether and matter, particularly in 
questions relating to velocity of propagation, it can take an 
important part. The ordinar}- mode of determining, by means 
of interference bands, how much one wave-train has outrun 
another proceeds by counting wave-lengths, only considerable 
fractions of a wave-length being recognizable. But in the 
interference of circularly polarized waves the single wave-length 
is so to speak spaced round a circle, and the delicacy of the 
measurement is limited only by the angular fraction of the 
circumference to which the instrumental graduations can be 
set with precision in order to obtain extinction of the light: 
thus an extremely minute alteration in the velocity of a circular 
wave can be recognized. The change of circular waves into 
elliptic ones, on reflexion, however practically limits this method 
of observing interference to the phenomena of media which 
rotate the plane of polarization. 

As preliminary to an investigation of the interaction of 
optical rotation with the Earth's motion through space, we 



CHAP. XIl] MAGNETO-OPTIC ENERGY TERM 195 

proceed to a review of its general character on the lines of the 
present theory. 

In attempting to treat the optical relations in a material 
substance, considered as a single modified medium instead of as 
simple aether under the reaction of material molecules, the 
only mode of representation of magneto-optic phenomena that 
lay open was* by addition of a subsidiary mixed term to the 
energy function, so as to express a connexion between the 
optical waves and the magnetic field. The working out of that 
hypothesis into the theory of reflexion necessitates the intro- 
duction of an electromotive pressure in the incompressible 
aetherf , which is a type of stress not excited at all in ordinary 
refraction. 

The method of taking into consideration the influence of 
the separate imbedded molecules, which has formed the basis of 
the present discussion, puts us in a position to scrutinize the 
ultimate validity of that type of abstract formulation of the 
problem. A molecular investigation of this kind is in fact also 
called for on other grounds, in so far as physico-chemical 
experiment has indicated the existence of molecular equivalents 
in both the magnetic and the structural kinds of optical rotation. 
It will suflice to consider radiation of one definite period : the 
effect of dispersion on the rotation will be obtained by simply 
changing to a new period and to the corresponding new optical 
constants, because the interaction of the minute rotational pro- 
perty with ordinary dispersion is negligible. We thus have to 
deal with electric and magnetic force and electric and magnetic 
flux, such that each flux is derived from the other force by the 
universally valid circuital relations ; while the influence of the 
molecules of the ponderable medium will as usual impress itself 
only on the form of the relations, depending on the constitution 
of the medium, which connect each flux with the corresponding 

* Maxwell, * Treatise*, § 824. 

t This refers to MazweU's type of energy-term, which is of the qoadratio 
character that would natarally be assumed : Mr Basset has shown that a form 
of term can be specified, involving the continned product of the impoBed 
magnetic field, the electric polarization, and its time-gradient, which will lead 
to the equations of the theory described below. 

13—2 



196 RELATION OF POLARIZATION TO ELECTRIC FORCE [SBCT. IV 

force. In light-waves we can safely take the magnetic per- 
meability to be unity ; so that there remains at our disposal, 
for modification in rotational manner, only the form of the 
relation between the total circuital electric displacement 
(/", 9\ A"), equal to (/', g\ K)^{^c^r^{P, Q, R\ and the 
electric force (P, Q, K). The relation between the induced 
polarization (/', g\ K) of the molecules, and the electric force, 
would under ordinary circumstances be a simple linear one, 
which must be self-conjugate however aeolotropic the medium 
may be, as Lord Kelvin showed, in order to avoid perpetual 
motions. Under circumstances of optical rotation, the law of 
rotatory dispei-sion inversely as the square of the wave-length, 
verified by Biot and by Verdet, easily shows that the rotatory 
terms in the equations of propagation in the medium must be 
of the third order in the differential coefficients; and this 
requires that the polarization shall be a linear function of the 
first differential coefficients of the inducing electric force, as well 
as of that force itself For the case of the structural rotatory 
property of quartz and other substances these differentiations 
will naturally be spacial: in magnetic rotation various con- 
siderations* show that they must be with respect to time. The 
condition has still to be introduced that these linear relations 
between flux and force, thus extended to include differential 
coefficients of the vectors concerned, are consistent with an 
energy function, and so avoid the possibility of perpetual motions. 

127. Let us consider first the case of electric polarization 
induced in a body situated in a magnetic field. The energy of 
the distribution of polarization (/', g\ W) established by the 

electric force (P, Q, R) must be i[(P/' + 05f' + iiA')dT, and 

thus, per unit volume, a quadratic function of (P, Q, R) and to 
a minute extent of djdt (P, Q, i2), the rotatory property coming 
in through the latter part. It must therefore be of the form 

||l',(P.(2.ie) + a„P^| + ... + a„P^ + a„Q^ + ...ldT, 

* Cf. British Assooiation Report, 1893, * On the inflnence of Magnetiam on 
Light.' 



IS 



CHAP. XIl] IN THE MAGNETO-OPTIC CASE 197 

where -F, (P, Q, R) is a quadratic function equal in the case of 
an isotropic medium to (K - l^SirCf^ . (P* + Q* + R^). The 
variation of this volume-integral must, by the definition of 
(P. Q, R) as the force producing change of polarization, be equal 
to 

j(PSf + QSg'^RSh')dT; 

but it is J S l(Pf' + Qg' + Rh')dr: hence it is also expressible 

in terms of (P, Q, R) as independent variable, in the form 

\{fZP-{-g'hQ + KhR)dT, 

This expression must be identical with the result of direct 
variation of the energy expressed in terms of (P, Q, R\ except as 
regards terms at the time-limits, arising from partial integration, 
which are inoperative in the formation of dynamical equations. 
We thus obtain the relations 

/,, _ dPa , ^3 dQ a, dR 
^ ^dP i^C^li^'if^'dt' 

, dFq Ui dR O] dP 



where 



, , _ dF^ ^a^ dJP _ Ui dQ 
"dR 47rC^ dt iirC^ dt 



(tti, Oa, ai)/4f7rC^ = («a - a», On - Chs, Oi, - On). 



The effect on the material medium, of the extraneous magnetic 
field or other vector agency, is thus to modify the induced 
electric polarization, by addition of a part at right angles to 
d/dt (P, Q, R) and to the vector (a,, a„ a8)/47rc', and equal to 
their vector product. But the question also arises whether the 
ordinary dielectric coefiicients, those namely of the function 
Pa (P, Q* R), are sensibly altered by the imposed magnetic field. 
This point can be settled as usual by aid of the principle of 
reversal (§ 88). When the electric force and the imposed 



198 MAGNETIC INFLUENCE PURELY ROTATIONAL [SECT. IV 

magnetic field and the time are all reversed, the effect on the 
induced electric polarity must be simple reversal : hence a 
reversal of the magnetic field cannot affect the coefficients in 
F^ (P, Q, R) : hence any changes in these coefiicients must 
depend on the square or other even powers of the imposed 
magnetic force : but the rotational terms depending on the first 
power of this force are known to be very small, therefore any 
terms depending on its second power are wholly negligible**. 
This conclusion has been fully verified in an experimental 
investigation by Mascart, who has found that the mean of 
the velocities of a right-handed and a left-handed circular 
wave-train is equal to the velocity proper to the medium 
when removed from the influence of magnetic force. 

The general result is noteworthy, that even in a crystalline 
medium any dependence, from whatever cause, of electric 
polarization on the time-rate of change of the inducing electric 
force, must consist in the addition of a purely rotational part 
isotropic around an axis. 

128. When this relation between electric polarization and 
electric force is substituted in the electrodynamic circuital 
equations of types 

V dt 47rC7' dt J dy dz* 

_da_dR_dQ 
dt " dy dz* 

the equations of magneto-optic propagation will be obtained. 
When P, Q, R are chosen as independent variables, these 
equations of propagation are of type 

where 

K'^K-h ^irac-^ (d/dt)-' ; 
and the surface conditions in the problem of reflexion of 

*• More precisely, the effect is of the order of the ratio of the forces exerted 
by the imposed magnetic field on the electrons in the moleoale to their own 
mntual forces : this ratio most thus be vexy small and its square negligible. 



CHAP. XIl] EQUATIONS OF PROPAGATION 199 

radiation are that the tangential components of the electric 
force (P, Q, iZ), and of its curl which determines the magnetic 
force, shall be continuous. Let us apply these equations of 
propagation to a wave travelling along the axis of z ; they then 
become 

^ dz» " ^ rft' "» d^ • 

which are practically equivalent, a, being very minute, to the 
form of Maxwell and Verdet, 

^dz*~^ dt*^'^^ dz'dt' 

^dz'--^ df ""^ dz'dt- 

The previous form, which is slightly more convenient, may be 
condensed in the case of a transparent medium by the use of 
a complex variable into the single equation 

showing immediately that all waves of permanent type are 
circularly polarized, right and left-handed ones of period ^ir/p 
travelling with the different velocities o(K±a^p)''^. In 
traversing a thickness I of the medium the one gains on the 
other by la.jp/cK^ in time, or by 4i'n^lcazlK^\^ in phase, \ 
being the wave-length in vacuum. It is thus the quantity 
a^lK^y or a^lfi where /^ is refractive index, that is usually taken 
in chemical physics as the measure of the rotatory power of 
the material medium. 

129. We proceed to examine how far the principles which 
lead to Lorentz's molecular refraction- equivalent for transparent 
media* are applicable to the investigation of a molecular 
rotation-equivalent. If n denote the number of molecules, all 
of them rotationally active, per unit volume, the equations 

♦ Cf. Phil, Trans, 1897 A, p. 232. 



200 SPECIFIC MOLECULAR ROTATION [SECT. IV 

connecting the induced polarization in the molecules with the 
force which induces it must be of type 

where e and 17 are molecular constants, the latter proportional 
to the magnetic field. It is here assumed that the force 
(Pi, Qi, Ri) polarizing each molecule is equal to that near the 
centre of a spherical cavity with the molecule situated inside 
it, so that 

(2, = Q+|7rcV-i(^+2)Q 
approximately, and similarly for Ri. Thus 

where by the definition of the dielectric constant 

if - 1 = 47r/ie»€/(l - |7rwc«€), 

80 that {K—l)/(K-^2) is equal to ^irnc^e and is therefore 
proportional to the density, in accordance with Lorentz s law of 
refraction-equivalents. Hence finally we have for the total 
electric displacement (/", g'\ h") equations of the type 

The specific rotation ?• per unit length of a transparent 
medium is thus (K -h^yntf/i^K^: so that K being /i*, the 
rotation characteristic of each molecule is (/i' + 2)'?7;9/i; and 
on this analysis fir/(fi^-^2yp, where p is the density, not j-jp 
itself, should be an additive physico-chemical constant on the 
analogy of for example specific heat. If we apply Lorentzs 
law of specific refractive power, verified just above, that 
(/i* — l)/(/i* + 2) is proportional to the density, we find that 
for the same pure active medium under different circumstances 
r should be proportional to (m'— l)(/A'H-2)//i*. The experi- 

* For the case of solutions sufficiently dilute, so that the index A'^ is 
practically constant, the specific rotation per active molecule in unit volume is 
of course constant : for dififerent neutral solvents an argument similar to the 
above shows that it should vary as (/&* + 2)//li where /i is this index. 



CHAP. XIl] NOT EXPERIMENTALLY VERIFIED 201 

mental examination of this subject has been effected chiefly 
by H. Becquerel from the physical side and by W. H. Perkin 
from the chemical side : the former has advanced an empirical 
relation, r proportional to (/it* — 1)m', as in a rough way repre- 
senting in many cases the influence of change of density, but 
it would seem that no rational relation has been found. We 
might be tempted to explain the absence of a definite law by 
the hypothesis, whose equivalent has been suggested by Verdet, 
that the relation between electric polarization and electric 
force involves also rotational terms with fluxions of higher odd 
order with respect to the time than the first fluxion to which 
they have been here confined : it is only in problems involving 
dispersion that these terms will make any diflerence in the 
theory, but additional terms of magnitude sufficient to be of 
any use for the present purpose would wholly upset Verdet s 
experimental result that the rotation is roughly as the inverse 
square of the wave-length. 

130. According to our present view a molecule is, or at 
least involves, a collocation of electrons revolving round each 
other in stable orbits: the electric force of the field pulls the 
electrons different ways, thus disturbing the configuration of 
their steady orbits so as to introduce effective electric polarity : 
the influence of the magnetic force of the field is complex, as 
it tends to orientate these orbits as a whole without change 
of their dimensions, thereby introducing paramagnetic polarity, 
while it also tends to alter their forms by contracting the 
projections of their areas in the plane at right angles to its 
direction thus introducing polarity of the opposite or diamag- 
netic kind**. These various actions involve energy terms for 
each individual molecule, and the sum for all the molecules, 
if it could be formed, would represent the total energy of the 
disturbance of the medium. But such a mere aggregate of 



«« 



If the electrons were all of the same sign and subject to a central attrac- 
tion, there would be no orientation but only a permanent rotation of the orbital 
system around the axis of the imposed magnetic field, the effect being on the 
whole paramagnetic or diamagnetio according as the electrons are positive or 
negative. Cf. Phil, Mag, Deo. 1897. 



20f put>i«;al origin or the MAcyrnc botatiox [sect, iv 

terms would l^ of no ose for appIicati«jD> to matter in bulk: 
what we are c»>n«:m<ed with ther« is the mechanical part of 
the energy, «hich must be an analviical function of the speci- 
fication of matter bv volnme. determined as to mathematical 
form bv the character of the molecular actions, but with co- 
efficients whose values are to be obtained only by direct 
experiment. For each molecule the axis of the induced effect 
will usually be different from that of the inducing force; so 
that, when the molecules are all naturally orientated as in 
cn'stals, the relations for the medium which thev constitute 
will show cnstalline as well as rotational quality. 

131. The physical explanation of the magnetic rotational 
property has already been indicated < § 01 ii A circularly polarized 
beam in which the direction of rotation is right-handed will 
have a relation to the revolving electrons of the molecules, 
as orientated by the magnetic field, different from that of a 
left-handed beam, and will therefore pass across the medium 
with different velocity. Each electron, as it is moved bv the 
aethereal displacement belonging to the radiation, resists with 
its own definite inertia: so that the circumstances are of 
similar general type to those of the propagation of circularly 
polarized waves in a material medium endowed with intrinsic 
angular momentum, for which the same form of equations is 
known to apply* Conversely the i-eaction exerted by the 
disturbed aether on the molecule in the magnetic field will be 
different acconling as the disturbance arises from one or the 
other kind of circularly polarized beam : the forced periods of 
the molecule will therefore be different and in consequence 
al8o the absorption, in the two cases. The periods of any 
dynamical system vibrating about a configuration of rest, and 

* Proc. Lond, Math. Soc. zxiiL 1891, p. 127. The comparison in the text 
doe8 not imply that the two problems are analogous in detail: in fact the 
electromagnetic reaction of the revolving electrons to aethereal waves is a wholly 
different thing from the reaction of their inertia to waves of material displace- 
ment. The magnetic axis of a molecule is not to be identified with an axis of 
resultant material angular momentum : if the electrons contained in it were all 
of the same sign this would be more or less the case, but as things are, positive 
and negative electrons goiug the same way round give the same sign for material 
angular momentum while they give different signs for magnetic moment. 



CHAP. XIl] IS IT THE CONVERSE OF THE ZEEMAN EFFECT ? 203 

also of one in which gyrostatic influence is wholly dominant, 
are stationary so that ordinary slight disturbance of the 
structure of the system itself does not alter them except to 
the second order of small quantities-f- : it is the extraneous 
character of the disturbance that is here effective as regards 
its first power. Ekich absorption line, say of sodium vapour 
in a magnetic field, will thus be more or less widened, and 
its mean position also slightly shifted but only to a higher 
order of small quantities : and the same will apply to each 
line in the emission spectrum*. It might be in part alteration 
of the capacity of the molecule for electric polarization arising 
from structural change due to the magnetic field, and in part 
this change in its free periods acting in the usual dispersive 
manner, that alters the velocity of propagation of circularly 
polarized light and so produces the Faraday effect. The con- 
nexion has been illustrated by G. F. FitzGerald§ by a special 
calculation for solitary electrons describing circular paths 
under central attraction, in which the Faraday efltect is ascribed 
wholly to the alteration of molecular periods represented by 
that of Zeeman. This finds the origin of the rotational term 
that exists in the relation connecting induced polarization 
and electric force, when the medium is under the influence of 
an extraneous magnetic field, wholly in the Zeeman change of 
molecular periods, which is in keeping with the circumstance 
that the rotational term involves time-differentiation. Even in 
a general type of molecule changes of the orientations and 
configurations of the orbits of the electrons arising from the 
magnetic field could hardly have an influence as well as changes 
of their periods** : for such an influence would be structural, 
and therefore by Lord Kelvin's application of the perpetual 
motion axiom (§ 127) it could not be rotational. 

t Rayleigh, •Theory of Sound,' § 90. 

* The expeiiments of Zeeman and others, announced since this was first 
written, have shown that the actual relations are more extensive and definite, 
and more complex, than those above foreshadowed. 

§ Roy. Soc, Proc. 1898. 

** The subject can be treated on a more definite basis : cf. a commnnication 
to Camb. Phil. Soc. Mar. 6, 1899, in 'Nature,' April 20, in connexion with Phil. 
Mag, Dec. 1897 : also Appendix F. 



204 LONGITUDINAL VIBRATION ABSENT [SECT. IV 

132. The conditions to be satisfied at the interface separating 
two media do not on the present theory require the introduction 
of an electromotive pressure into the equations of magneto- 
optic reflexion : for the continuity of the tangential magnetic 
force secures that of the normal electric flux, and vice versd, 
by the nature of the fundamental circuital relations. The 
intrinsic reason why such a pressure is avoided is that each 
molecule is taken to affect the aethereal vibrations individually, 
either wholly statically, or in addition (when dispersion is 
included) by synchronous vibration of the dynamical system 
forming the single molecule by itself, but not of a system 
formed by the plexus of molecules bound together to an 
appreciable extent by mutual constraints: thus an electro- 
motive pressure could have no meaning. If the molecules 
were connected in this way, the propagation of the transverse 
optical wave in the aether would be accompanied by that of 
another wave from molecule to molecule, and the whole scheme 
of equations of optical propagation in material media would 
in so far be affected : it is in fact a very minute longitudinal 
wave of this kind going at practically infinite speed that is 
represented by the pressural term in the theory of reflexion 
in a magnetic field, which is necessitated by Maxwell's and 
FitzGerald's mode of formulation of the problem. 

The actual problem of magneto-optic reflexion is concerned 
mainly with the application to metallic media. Assuming the 
above relation between polarization and force, of type 

W/' = (ir-l)P-a,f + a.^f. 

or what is practically the same, 

p_ 47rO' f..,.dg' ,dh' 

where 

a7a = 47rC»/(Z-l)', 

and assuming also a Hall effect (ctx, Og, a,) of type given by 

in the current of conduction (u\ v, w'), we have for the relation 



CHAP. XIl] ANALYTICAL RELATION TO OTHER SCHEMES 205 

between the total current (u, v, w) and the electric force (P, Q, R) 
the scheme 

the substitution of this relation, peculiar to the medium, in the 
fundamental circuital electrodynamic relations leads to the 
equations of propagation. It is to be noticed that for waves of 
high period (much higher however than ordinary light*) the 
constant corresponding to the Hall effect becomes inoperative. 
As already remarked, this scheme is directly applicable to the 
solution of the problem of reflexion without any complication 
arising with respect to interfacial conditions. The analytical 
scheme of equations adopted by Drude§ as a basis can be 
transformed into this shape, his rotatory coeflScient (61, 6a, 6,) 
becoming equal to K'~^(ai, Oa, a,) and (aj, Oa, a,) being absent. 
It appears also that the present scheme is effectively the same 
as an earlier one adopted by Goldhammer, provided his rotatory 
coefficient (/ii, /*-, /LI3) is given by fiiK'cP/d(^ = a^d^ldt^ -{- 4sTrC^a^\ 
so that priority in formulating an adequate system of equations, 
which can satisfy the interfacial conditions by means of the 
ordinary electric variables without the intervention of an 
electromotive pressure, rests with him. The examination 
which is essential to make certain that the rotational term 
in the relation connecting polarization with electric force shall 
not involve perpetual motions, as would be the case with 
an ordinary statical rotational term, was made by Willard 
Gibbs as long ago as ISSSf: he was led to retain the possibility 
of such a rotational scheme in the course of a very general dis- 
cussion of the formal character of the reaction of the matter on 
radiation, but did not carry it into any detail ; the circumstance 
noticed by him, that a medium constituted in that manner 
would also transmit waves of other than the optical type, was 

* Cf. Leathern, Phil, Tram. 1897 A, for a fuU diaoassion of the sabjeot. 
§ Cf. British Association Report, 1893, loc. cit. §§ 15, 20. 
t Cf. loe. cit., § 16. 



206 MOLECULAR RELATIONS OF STRUCTURAL ROTATION [SECT. IV 

an indicatioD that the problem of optical reflexion would be 
liable to complication by difficulties of the kind above mentioned. 

133. The nature of structural optical rotation will now be 
very briefly considered. The rotational terms in the energy 
of polarization must be, in an isotropic medium, of the form^ 

The relation between polarization and electric force is therefore 
by an argument similar to that of § 127, of typef 



/'-i>^^<'{f-^f)- 



dy 

The velocities of the two kinds of circularly polarized waves 
are now found to be 

and the rotational power of the medium as ordinarily measured 
is proportional simply to C. If we assume that the rotation 
in fluids is proportional to the number of active molecules, the 
result will be that for pure substances the rotation per unit 
length is jointly proportional to (/a'+ 2)' and to the density of 
the active substance*. The actual value of this coefficient is 
however found to vary very widely with temperature. The only 



. , . f.dR dQ dP dR dQ . dP\ , 

18 of form (^6^^,-c^,,c-^-«^,,«-,-6^,j. where 



t Cf. Phil. Trans. 1894 A. p. 746. 

t For a crystaUine mediam, by taking the most general possible quadratic fanc- 
tion for the energy, it may be shown similarly that the rotational part of {f\ g\ h') 

d d_ d^ 
dx' ' dy' ' dz' 

represent arbitrary linear functions <>^ ti * j~ • 3~ > ^^^ a, b, c are constants. 

In symmetrical crystals the forms are of course further restricted. 

It is to be noticed that in an isotropic medium there can be no rotational 
effect in statical cases, because the electric force will then have a potential : it is 
only for waves of high frequency that it can arise. 

* For solution in a neutral solvent, so dilute that fi is practically constant, 
the rotation per molecule would of course be constant: while for different 
solvents it should vary as /a' + 2. [According to the experiments of Pottevin, 
Joum. de Phys. July 1899, the rotation actually changes when solvents are 
mixed, in a manner which depends on their relative proportions, but is more 
complex than this law would imply.] 



CHAP. XIl] KINETIC ORIGIN OF OPTICAL CHIRALITY 207 

fundamental relation yet announced seems to be Gernez'sf 
result that on plotting the curve of variation of the rotation 
per molecule with temperature, no discontinuity enters on 
passing from the liquid to the gaseous state, contrary to the 
above which would make the molecular rotation proportional 
to (/i* + 2)^ : this would imply that C is independent of /x. It 
also appears that in the case of newly formed substances the 
rotation goes on sensibly altering for a considerable time. 

The rotatory influence on the reflexion of radiation from 
the surface of a chiral medium is in actual cases inappreciably 
small : on attempting to deduce an expression for it we should 
find that, in problems such as this, in which spacial differentia- 
tions of orders higher than the second occur in the dynamical 
equations, the transition between two media cannot be mathe- 
matically treated as an abrupt interface subject only to displace- 
ment and traction. 

134. In crystals the optical chirality is sometimes inherent 
in the arrangement of the molecules, being destroyed on 
fusion. It appears however that an inference would not be 
warranted that in such a case it is the crystal only, and not the 
individual molecule as well, that is in any way chiral, for 
absolutely non-chiral molecules could hardly spontaneously 
form a chiral structure. Thus there can be chirality of con- 
figuration in a molecule which does not involve chirality in its 
vibratory interaction with radiation. 

The origin of the intrinsic rotational property in organic 
compounds has been identified with the presence, in the 
chemical space-formula of the molecule, of a carbon tetrahedron 
which has different elements at its four corners and has thus a 
configuration chirally different from that of its optical image. 
It would seem that to render this explanation complete, for 
optical rotation as distinct from statical crystalline plagiedry, 
we must make a call on the orbital or cyclic motions in the 
molecule**: for as regards simple vibrational properties a 

t AnndUs de VEcoU Nortnale, Vol. ii: confirmed by Gaye and Aston, 
Comptei Rendun, Nov. 1897. 

** It was noticed long ago by Lord Kelvin that the linear equations of an 
ordinary elastic medium cannot include rotational property. 



208 CHIRAL RELATIONS OF IONS [SECT. IV 

static system without steady cyclic momenta is equivalent to 
its optical image, neither the potential nor the kinetic energy 
being affected by change of direction of all VireeX coordinate 
axes so long as the kinetic energy of vibration is a quadratic 
function of the velocities, the potential energy being always 
a quadratic function of the displacements. Such sjrstems, 
thus optically non-rotational, may be chirally distinguishable 
by their geometrical form, which is determined by the complete 
molecular forces of which only the unbalanced parts affect 
the vibrations of the molecule. In the process of chemical 
synthesis from non-rotational elements, as many right-handed 
as left-handed molecules ought nevertheless in both cases 
(after Pasteur) to appear, unless the reagents are themselves 
rotational ; and there would be no way of separating them 
except by rotational reactions or by crystallization. 

A fundamental case of chirality occurs in electrolysis, an 
atom when a positive ion being the reflected image of the same 
atom when a negative ion. Generally, the change from a 
molecule to its enantiograph involves not merely perversion of 
its orbital configuration but also change of sign of each of its 
electrons: for, independently of any special aether- theory, the 
structure of an electric charge is indicated by the effects of 
disturbing it, which are chirally opposite for positive and nega- 
tive charges. 

The fact that the optical power of newly formed liquids 
continues to alter gradually for a long time after the reaction is 
complete is evidence that the rotational unit is not always a 
single molecule but may be a more or less loosely associated 
molecular complex : this would explain the absence of any 
definite general relation, in the case of a pure substance, 
between rotational power and temperature, as with rise of tem- 
perature the complexes would naturally be partly decomposed : 
were it not for Geruez's definite observation (supra) it might 
also be held to explain the absence of any observed connexion 

t A property may be apparently affected by one perversion, yet if it is not 
altered by three successive pervernions it will not be rotational : for three or any 
other odd number of them are equivalent to a single one together with a change 
of position in space. 



CHAP. XIl] INFLUENCE OF STATE OF AGGREGATION 209 

between the rotational coefficient for a pure substance and its 
density. 

The fact above demonstrated (§ 126) that the natural rota- 
tional coefficient both in crystals and in fluids can only depend 
on the space-gradient of the electric force, and not on that 
force itself, seems also to strengthen the presumption that it is 
ofben molecular aggregates that are involved in the effect, as is 
definitely known to be the case for those crystals which lose the 
property on fusion. If the property resided in the individual 
molecule, and each molecule had one chiral axis, the rotational 
power of the fused substance should be one third* of the 
maximum value for the crystal: while if the molecule were 
equally chiral about all axes, like a regular tetrahedral crystal- 
line form with similar oblique facets on all the comers, the two 
should be equal. 

As regards both kinds of rotation, it is to be remarked that 
the exciting cause is excessively minute compared with the 
causes of other optical phenomena. It is therefore not sur- 
prising that chemical isomers exist which differ only in rotatory 
power and are indistinguishable in their other physical qualities: 
the fact that the rotational coefficients are equal and opposite 
is often the only evidence that such isomers are exact enantio- 
morphs. The smallness of the optical effect in compaiison with 
the obvious difference in crystalline form will not be remarkable 
on the present view, according to which there is no direct 
connexion between them. 

135. As regards general characters, the molecules or 
molecular groups that show intrinsic rotatory power are neces- 
sarily included in the family which dififer from their images by 
reflexion. Now it has been seen that, whatever theory of 
electricity may be adopted, the enantiomorph of a positive 
charge is an equal negative one : it appears then that, on the 
kinetic idea of a molecule, enantiomorphy reverses the signs of 
all its electrons and perverts their relative positions, while 
retaining their orbital characteristics. This consideration 

* This assumes that the undirected axial rotational qaality in the moleoole 
is resolved by mnltipUcation by the square of the cosine. 

L. 14 



210 KINETIC ORIGIN OF OPTICAL ROTATION [SECT. IV 

tends to confirmation of a dynamical explanation that would 
connect chirality with difiference of directions in which the 
orbits of the electrons are described with respect to the mean 
configuration of the molecules. 

The experiments of Bose {Roy. Soc, Proc. 1897), on the 
chirality of spirally twisted fibrous substances with regard to 
short Hertzian waves, are on a different footing. The chiral 
element is here a statical structure of the same order of 
dimensions as a wave-length, instead of a kinetic molecule so 
small in comparison with the wave-length as to act only by 
sympathetic vibration. It is rather an analogue of Reusch's 
artificial chiral optical system, built up of non-chiral crystalline 
plates arranged in spiral fashion. 

According to the view here suggested, optical chirality such 
as exists in quartz could not be introduced by merely statically 
chiral molecular structure : for it has been seen (p. 206, footnote) 
that such structure cannot give rise to the rotational optical 
term. The examples just quoted, in which it is effective, are 
cases in which the degree of coarseness of grain of the medium 
is of the order of the wave-length of the radiation that is 
affected. 



CHAPTER XIII 

INFLUENCE OF THE EARTH'S MOTION ON ROTATIONAL OPTICAL 

PHENOMENA 

136. In an examination of the influence of the Ekirth's 
motion on the rotation of the plane of polarization of light 
by a transparent substance, it is convenient to include both 
structural and magnetic rotation in the same analysis. It 
will suffice for practical purposes, and avoid much complication, 
to restrict the analysis to the simple case of plane waves 
travelling in the direction of the velocity v of translation of 
the material medium through the aether, and to take the 
rotational axis of the active medium in the same direction. 
If this direction is chosen as the axis of x we shall have /,/*', 
P, a, and a null, as also all differential coefficients except 
those with respect to x. The relation between electric polar- 
ization and electric force will thus be 

€ being a differential operator of the form ^i ;?: + €2 t- in which 

€a represents structural rotational quality and €1 magnetic 
rotation. As it is the time-rate of change of the state of 
the convected material medium, not of the stagnant aether, 
that determines the magnetic rotation, it is B/dt, that is 

U—2 



212 EQUATIONS FOR MOVING ROTATIONAL MEDIUM [SECT. IV 

d/dt-^vd/dx, that is involved along with €i when the co- 
ordinate axes are fixed in the aether. It is likely that other 
rotational terms will also occur, involving higher odd powers 
and products of the differential operators : but it will appear 
that those here given are sufficient for the purpose of the 
present argument, the inclusion of higher terms being simply 
equivalent to making €i and €2 themselves functions of the 
period and wave-length. 

137. The dynamical equations of aethereal propagation 
are the circuital relations, which by our general theor}- of 
moving media (§73) assume the form, with reference to axes 
fixed in the aether, 

_dR^_Bb dQ^^Bc 
dx dt * dx dt 



and 



wherein 



d^ . . fdli dh\ 



47rcy = (ir-l)Q + ei2 

49re»A' = (Jir-l)i2-€Q 

and, as the electrod)Tiamic effect of convection is treated as 
magnetism, 

i8 = 4nruh\ 

the magnetic constant fi being here retained** in view of 
possible applications in the domain of long Hertzian waves. 

** It is aasmned here that the relation of the indaced magnetization to (a, 6, c) 
is not modified on account of the oonvected polarization : in the practical case of 
non-magnetic media no assumption is however involved. When there is such 
guon-magnetism present, it seems natural to consider the induced magnetism 
as directly conditioned by the physical vector {a,bye): it is certainly not then 
a function of the (a, /9, 7) defined in § 78 alone. It will appear (§ 140) that this 
view fits in with the general theory. 



CHAP. XIIl] VELOCITY OF PROPAGATION 218 

The second of these systems of circuital equations thus gives 

\fi dx dtj dt dx dt 

i^^-A. ^\b = K — - — -A 
\fi dx dt) " dt dx dt 

Substituting for 6, c from the first circuital relation, the 
equations of propagation of electric force (that is, of electric 
material polarization) are obtained. If we write © for the 
complex variable Q + iR, they combine into the single equation 

d [ ^d d\^ f rjr ^ d h ^\^ 

dxK'dx^^''dtr^[^^d^^^^''d^dt'''^'^ 

For a train of circularly polarized waves, © or Q+tiZ is pro- 

27r 
portional to exp ± t —- (a? — Vt\ the positive sign representing 

A 

right-handed rotation of the electric force as the wave ad- 
vances along the axis of a?, and the negative sign left-handed 
rotation. The substitution of this form leads, after transposition, 
to the equation 

C'^-/ii;2 = ir/i(F- 1;)»-|- 2/iv(F- u) 

which determines the velocity V of propagation of the waves, 
the result differing according as their polarization is right- 
handed or left-handed : in obtaining this equation no approxi- 
mation has been employed. 

138. If there is no rotational quality at all, the equation 
becomes 

F^-2(l-ii^-0vF+(l-ii^-0v'=Fo^ 

where Fo' or C^IKfi is the usual velocity in the medium; 
leading to 

F= Fo + (1 - K"') V - (K-' - K"') i;»/2Fo 

approximately, as in § 36 ; of which the second term is Fresnel's 
expression for the effect of convection, and the third is a 
second-order term which will combine with other effects of that 
order. 



214 STRUCTURAL ROTATION [SECT. IV 

139. If there is rotation of purely structural type €i is 
null : the effect of e^ as regards velocity of propagation is, by 
the equation for the velocity, exactly the same as that of 
increasing -K" by ± ^ire^jX, the upper sign appljdng to a right- 
handed circular wave, the lower to a left-handed one, the one 
case differing from the other only in the sign of the rotatorj' 
coefficient ej. This modification of K does not involve the 
velocity v of translation of the medium at all, and continues 
to be a method of representing the rotatory effect of the 
medium when there is no material convection : the additional 
effect arising from the motion of the rotational medium is 
therefore to modify the velocity of each of the existing circular 
wave-trains exactly as if it were light travelling in an ordinary 
medium, that is, in accordance with Fresnel's law. 

Thus the velocity F/ relative to the moving material medium, 
of a right-handed wave, of length X referred to the resting 
aether, is given, to the first order, by 

where Ki = K + 



27rej 



so that, up to the order ev/c but not including (v/c)-, 
TT / _ ^ It -^€2,3/ TreaV I v ( 27reA 

^^"o^t^~ir"*"2V^>/j"zv "^j 

-'^{>-('-sV)S-l(S)1. 

where F' = Fo — -^. 

The effect of the convection, up to the first order, is thus to 
reduce the rotatory coefficient in the ratio 1 — vjKV\ while it 
at the same time alters the mean velocity relative to the 
medium from F© to F', equal to F© — vjK, in accordance with 
Fresnel's principle. This change in the value of the rotatory 
coefficient agrees with the result of an investigation by 
Lorentz*: but, overlooking the effect of the concomitant change 

* 'VersQch.../ pp. 118—119: the differenoe in sign is probably only apparent. 



CHAP. XIIl] CONVECTIVE EFFECT MERELY SUPERPOSED 215 

of velocity, he inferred that the convection would produce a 
first-order effect on the actual structural rotation, in contradic- 
tion to the experimental result of Mascart (§ 142). 

140. To examine this point, it will be most convenient to 
make direct use of the result just proved, that the convection 
of the rotational medium merely modifies the velocities of each 
of the circular waves of permanent type in the ordinary 
manner. Let Ui and U^ be the velocities of right-handed and 
lefb-handed circular waves in the actual material medium when 
at rest ; then their velocities relative to it when it is in uniform 
motion with velocity v in the direction of the ray are F/ and 
F,' where, retaining second order terms for the sake of possible 
future applications, 

F/ = CTi - mr'v - (mr^ - mr*) 1^/2 U,, 
Yi = f/a - m^v - (?/i,-« - rw,-*) i;»/2 fTj, 
mi and m^ being the respective refractive indices when the 
medium is at rest, so that m^ U^ = m^U^, This follows by Fresnel's 
formula of § 36 ; or from the result of § 137 by substituting m* 
for K±27r€j\ and Un U^ for clm^, c/rn^, and following the 
procedure of § 138. If Xi and X, are the respective wave-lengths 
when the medium is at rest (so that, t being the period, Xj = ITir, 
Xa = f/gT), the wave-lengths in the moving medium relative to 
that medium are Xi' and Xj' where 

with the similar expression for X,', the period of the light 
relative to the moving system being unaltered by the motion 
when the radiating source is terrestrial and thus partakes in 
the motion. In passage across a length I of the rotational 
medium, the one wave has gained on the other by N' periods 
of either, where 

^ X, " x; ■*" ^*^ \\ni^, " X^inJUj '^^ ^ \\nh^U,^'' \rnJUj 
correct to the second order of small quantities. 



216 STLL EFFECT OS ^TRrCTTRAL BOTJLTIOy [SECT. IT 

Since X. X. = C\ C, = n^"^ ■*•"', this biecomes 

3 ' = 3 -. 1 -f- i iii4~^ -h m"*> i,, • , 

where 3" is the oorrespcxiding gmin in perbxb when the medium 
is mt rest, it being now nnnecessanr to retain the sabecripts in m 
and U. Thos op to the lirst order of v C the optical rotation 
is unaltered bv the motion of the mediam. as Mascart found it 
to be*, and as our present general theory (§ 112) requires: so 
that there is no discrepancT as regards these rotational pheno- 
mena. The second-order proportional alteration here obtained, 
arising from the effect of the convection of the medium on the 
wares, depends gdIj on the refractive index : but, as in all such 
cases, it will have to be combined with an unknown alteration 
of the same order arising from the intrinsic change in the 
rotational coeflScient of the medium which is produced br its 
motion through the aether. On the special electron theor}-, 
the anal^-sis of § 112 would make out that these alterations, 
combined with the intrinsic alteration of material dimensions 
arising frt>m the motion of the medium, should exactly com- 
pensate so as to give a null result. 

141. The effect of rotation of magnetic type on the 
velocity of a circularly polarized wave is obtained by making €, 
null in the general formula. The result cannot be expressed so 
simply as in the previous case ; and on account of the actual 
smallness of the magnetic t}'pe of rotation there is not much 
object in pursuing it in detail up to a second approximation. 
To that approximation the value of V given by the general 
equation comes out as 

F=F.4.(i-ir->±(i-|y^^ 



2A'*X«^ ^" '2Fo" 

For the velocity V of waves of length X' relative to the 

* The fact that Mascart's nnll remilt would be aocoimted for by assammg 
that Fresnel's law applied exactly to each circnlar component of the light was 
demonstrated by Ketteler, * Astronomiache Undolationstheorie ' 1878, p. 106. 






CHAP. XIIl] AND ON MAGNETIC ROTATION 217 

medium, we have F' = F — u, where F is given by the above 
expression in which K is equal to m', and X' is written in place 
of X. When the medium is at rest, let the corresponding 
velocity be U\ the length of the wave will then be X, equal to 
UXf/V; and U is the value of F' when in it u is made null 
and X is written for X'. Thus 

= X'e (1 + v/vi^Vo) to the second order ; 

therefore fT = Fo + f 1 ^-^ 

so that 

In this formula m, or K^, is the refractive index when the 
velocity is F© or cjK^i we must express it in terms of twi, 
the index when the velocity is the one, U, belonging to the 
actual type of circular wave when the medium is at rest so 
that iniU=mV^\ this gives 

mr^ = m{-^ (1 T ^irV^elm^^') 
to the first order. Hence finally 

F'= U'-m{-^V'-{m{^''in{'^) ^p^. 

Thus, in the case of magnetic rotation also, the effect of the 
motion of the material medium on the rotational phenomena 
relative to the moving medium can be correctly obtained, up to 
the order which includes the product ve, by applying the Fresnel 
correction to the velocity of each circularly polarized wave 
separately. The argument of § 140 then shows that in this case 
also the value of the rotational coefficient is unaltered up to 
this order eu/c by the convection of the material system. 

142. In the investigation for quartz above referred to, 
Lorentz has contemplated the formal possibility of the inter- 
action between the rotational structure of a naturally active 
medium and the directed quality of its convection introducing 



218 EXPERIMENTAL COXFIRMATIOX [SECT. IV 

a small rotation of the magnetic t^-pe*. The negative result 
of Mascart, in conjunction with the present analysis, leads to 
the conclusion that this does not really exist. 

The experiments of Mascart'f' in fact revealed no influence 
of the Earth s motion on the optical rotation produced by 
quartz, with radiation from a given terrestrial source, although 
an alteration of 5 x 10^ of the actual rotation would have 
been detect^ If there were reallv a first-order influence of 
the Earth s motion on the value of e, it must be of the order 
vfV or 10 X 10~* of the total amount. Thus though there is 
not a great deal to spare in precision, the experiments materially 
support our theoretical conclusion that there is no first-order 
effect. 

The first-order effect on naturally rotational media that has 
here been proved non-existent, is one involving the product of 
€ and vjV, If there were an d priori reason assignable to 
show that the alteration produced in the rotation is unaffiected 
by reversal of the velocity of convection of the matter, we 
might have inferred the absence of this term at once. If how- 
ever we allowed an analog}' between the advance of a structur- 
ally rotational material system through the aether and the 
advance of a spiral screw through a cork, we should on the 
contrary anticipate the presence of such a term ; this indicates 
that limitations must beset the emploj^ment of static or geo- 
metrical spiral models (cf. § 134) in the kinetic departments of 
stereochemical theory. 

143. The general analysis of Ch. XI, resting on the basis 
that the motion of electrons is the cause of all electrodynamic 
and optical phenomena, led to the conclusion that the structure 
of molecules and the form of material bodies is not altered by 
motion through the aether, up to the first order in v/c, and 
thence to the result that no optical observations which depend 
on making an adjustment to cut off the light can be affected 
up to this order in v/c. This general theory involves the 

* This is in fact the first-order inflnenoe of which the possibility was sug- 
gested in the discussion on symmetry, § 92. 
t AnnaUs de V^eole Normale, 1872. 




CHAP. XIIl] CONSISTENT WITH ELECTRON THEORY 219 

negative result of Mascart*s experiments**. As previously 
pointed out (§ 92), there was a lyriori no geometrical or formal 
consideration, as distinct from dynamical, that would exclude 
an intrinsic proportional alteration in the rotatory coefficient, 
of the order of eu/c but of the magnetic type, arising from the 
convection of the material medium, in addition to the direct 
reaction with the radiation that has here been found to be null. 
The experimental evidence, however, independently of this 
analysis, pointed to the conclusion that alteration of e, of either 
type, is non-existent, because the two types could hardly be 
expected to compensate each other exactly over a series of 
observations taken at different times. 

The null result of Mascart is thus important in connexion 
with this view that electrodynamic disturbances arise wholly 
from the motions of electrons, which in fact requires its 
validity. In Lorentz's treatment of the correlation between a 
uniformly moving electrodynamic system and a statiouary one, 
the foundation was apparently considered to be not sufficiently 
wide to cover the case of systems involving rotational property ; 
while a direct investigation seemed to indicate a discrepancy in 
that case. In the present procedure the argument is wholly 
based on the electron theory, and if its result had not been 
experimentally confirmed, it would have been a question 
whether the electric structure of rotational media was con- 
sistent with their being constituted solely of electrons: as 
things are, the agreement with fact, which there was apparently 
nothing in the shape of general argument to foreshadow, 
carries with it an independent presumption of the effective 
validity of that view. And if this presumption were not 
admitted to be a substantial one by itself, it would derive 
cumulative value when put in connexion with the fact that 
the ascertained Amperean mechanical forces between linear 
currents have been theoretically established only on the hypo- 



«• 



It also inclades the null result of § 141 for magnetic rotation, notwith- 
standing that by § 112 convection modifies the magnetic field by adding a term 
involving (/, g, h) ; for here the imposed magnetic field which induces the 
rotation is supposed so great that the magnetic field of the radiation need not 
be added to it in forming the rotational term, so that a modification in it 
depending on the (/, nr, h) of the radiation is also negligible. 



220 CUMULATIVE ARGUMENT [SECT. IV 

thesis that currents of conduction are formed by the convection 
of discrete electric particles*. With a view to strengthen- 
ing this position further, it would perhaps be desirable if 
possible to push the precision of Mascart's null result up to the 
next power of ten, so as to make its application quite certain. 

The theorj' of the null effect of the Michelson interference 
experiment is not so certain as those above considered, for it 
carries us into the region of the second order of v c, and the 
changes of dimensions and physical constants of material 
systems which probably exist to that order. Yet the two effects 
lend each other a certain amount of mutual support. The 
experiment of Fizeau in which he obtained evidence of a 
change in the deviation of the plane of polarization after trans- 
mission through a pile of glass plates, concomitant with a 
change in the direction of the beam with respect to the Earth's 
motion, is of a different order of importance, in that the null 
effect anticipated by theory was there simply not attained owing 
presumably to the acknowledged difficulty of eliminating dis- 
turbing causes. Thus no relation has yet presented itself which 
is not consonant with the present general theory, involving 
mobile electrons in a stagnant aether ; while on the other 
hand there is no competing theory that is at all complete or 
coherent. 

* PhiL Tram. 1895 A, p. 698 ; cf. also Appendix E. 



SECTION V 



CHAPTER XIV 

ON THE MECHANISM OF MOLECULAR RADIATION 

144. The theory of electrical actions which ascribes the 
electrodynamic effects of electric currents solely to the motion 
of electrons is the only djTiamical theory yet suggested whose 
consequences are not in discrepancy with the facts relating to 
electrodynamic attractions**. According to that view, every 
disturbance of the aether, including radiation as one type of 
disturbance, is originated by translatory motion of electrons 
through the aether. This puts us in a position to attempt a 
theory of the mechanism of radiation, if we first obtain complete 
expressions for the aethereal disturbance initiated by and pro- 
pagated from a single moving electron. 

Except at places whose distance from the nucleus of the 
electron is so small as to be comparable with the linear 
dimensions of the nucleus itself, it is sufficient to consider 
the electron as a point-charge ; and the aethereal disturbance 
arising from the motion of the electron is to be obtained by 
simple supei*position of elementary disturbances arising from 
its transit over the successive elements of its pathf. Suppose 
then that an electron e is at the point A and after a time it is 
at B, where AB = vht, v being its velocity ; the effect of its 



•»• 



Cf. Phil, Trans, 1895 A, p. 698. More recently, direct experimental evi- 
dence in favour of such a theory has been accumulating. 

t What foUows is mainly adapted from a paper * On the Magnetic Influence 
on Spectra ; and on the Radiation from moving Ions,' Phil, Mag, Deo. 1897. 



222 EQUATIONS FOR A SYMMETRICAL VIHRATOR [SECT. V 

change of position is the same as that of the creation of an 
electric doublet AB of moment evSt ; thus we have only to find 
the disturbance introduced by the creation of such a doublet, 
and then integrate the result along the paths of all the electrons 
of the vibrating molecule. 

145. Consider therefore such a doublet at the origin, lying 
along the axis of z ; for it, or indeed for any distribution sj^m- 
metrical with respect to that axis, the lines of magnetic force 
will be circles round the axis, and the force will be specified by 
a single variable, its intensity H. The electric current, whether 
in dielectric or in conducting media, will circulate in wedge- 
shaped sheets with their edges on the axis, and may be specified 
by a stream function, as in fact will directly appear. If we 
employ cylindrical coordinates /s, ^, z, and apply the Amperean 
circuital relation (viz. circulation of magnetic force equals 
Av times current) to the faces of the element of volume 
Sp . pS<l> . Sz, we obtain for the components P, R of the electric 
force 

dt pdz ' dt pdp 

so that Hp plays the part of a stream function ; while by the 
circuital relation of Faraday we have also 

dV _dR^_^dH 
dz dp dt 

Thus the characteristic equation for H is 



which is 



dppdp^^"^ dz^ ^^ dt' ' 



where V is Laplace's operator. But a more convenient re- 
duction comes on substituting H = dY/dp, and then neglecting 
an irrelevant operator d/dp along the equation : this gives 




CHAP. XIV] FIELD OF A VIBRATINO DOUBLET 223 

146. We can now express in a general manner the dis- 
turbance emitted by an electric doublet situated along the axis 
of z at the origin, and vibrating so that its moment if is an 
arbitrary function of the time. As regards points near it, at 
which the field is immediately established, the doublet may be 
treated as a linear current-element of strength dMjdt : close up 
to such an element, in its equatoreal plane, the magnetic force 
H due to it is — r'^dM/dt The appropriate solution for Y to 
fit this simplest case is 

Y^r-'fit-rlc), 

so that 

I r> or y 

giving when is Jtt and r is very small, JEr= — 't~\f{t)\ thus 
dMjdt =f{t). That is, if the mode of change of the moment 
of the oscillating doublet is given in the form dMjdt ^f(t)y the 
magnetic force thus originated at the point (r, 0) is 

( r» cr 

dr v^ \ cJ 

The second term in H is negligible near the origin for 
movements not excessively sudden, as it involves the velocity 
of radiation in the denominator : but at a sufficiently great 
distance it is the chief term. 

The components of the magnetic field due to a vibrating 
doublet M at the origin, whose direction vector is (I, m, n), are 
therefore, at points close to the doublet, 

{mz^ny,nx^lzJy'^mx)--^-^f(t^^y 

where ^- =/(0 ; 

and the components of the magnetic field, that is of the dis- 
turbance, emanating from any system of electric oscillators 
vibrating in any given manner, can thence be expressed in a 



TTTK or Um i li.* ^AJAATiOS [SBCT. T 

geaa^l lona^ <.4 izii«£rK3>:cL Ai pn^siaii we odr irant the 
eikcx of SsxiQefi eR*KT«g.r!>g>i :-f ibr dc*iibliei JT, *= ^fii, at the 
orizizL Tlii^ ccojes br izLTezrUvC iT^r ii^ Terr small time of 
e5^abli^LZIrcIil : :ir^7>e if & T*i.r. 5T>bt7icL sLeli of maccnetic force 
pnc-papkieo o-t wiih T^>>rTT c. ibe :%»tAi icvce in it when in- 
tegraied aMcrnsi^ ih-e tiell beiisg tjixsly — Jfr^ sdn <? at all 
dista&oe:^^ TbaT<rVrr Ite iLr iLickifesfr <:-i ihe sheU which wiU of 
oonise de{ArXjd 'I'll i!>e act^&l riiDr laken in the establishment of 
the dvTifclt:: ; ihis :ol2-;.w< c.ecaGse ihe inie^zml of the second 
term in H T&Tij^beg. <f Jf ar being ncll at the beginning and the 
end of the of*er&tion. The aggT>rga"e sinK'Tint of magnetic force 
prr»pagated in the sf^faeiical sheei i< ihns the same as that of 
the steady magnetic forv^e for the time & due to a permanent 
steadv cnmeni-elemeni of iniensitv Jf £f or ft- : it is dear, in 
ftct, that this most be so. if we consider a sadden beginning of 
this permanent current-element and remember that its magnetic 
field establishes itself by spreading out from it ready formed 
with the velocity of radiation. 

m 

147. The magnetic force at a point at distance r due to a 
moving ion thus depends on the state of the ion at a time r c 
preriously ; for near points it is in the plane perpendicular to r. 
at right angles to the projection r of the velocity v of the ion 
on that plane, and equal to ^r r*. For vibrations whose wave- 
length in free aether is very great compared with the dimensions 
of the ionic orbit in the molecule, if we interpret magnetic 
force as velocity of the aether, the vibration-path of a point 
attached to the aether, and close to the vibrator, will be in the 
plane transverse to the radius vector r, and will be similar to 
the projection of the orbit of the electron on that plane when 
turned round through a right angle. 

148. Further away from the ion the law of variation of the 
magnetic force with distance is eu/'r" -h ev'cr instead of ev r^. 
Thus at a distance of a large number of wave-lengths, the 
vibration-curve of the radiation proper, which as we have seen 
is constituted of an alternating shell of radiation for each single 
impulse evit, is similar to the projection of the hodograph of 




CHAP. XIV] LARGENESS OF ACTUAL WAVE-LENGTHS 225 

the orbit of the ion on the wave-front, instead of the projection 
of the orbit itself 

It thus appears that when the orbital motions in a molecule 
are so constituted that the vector sum | Xev \ of the accelera- 
tions of all its electrons, with due regard to their signs, is 
constantly null, there will be no radiation, or very little, abs- 
tracted from it, and therefore this steady motion will be 
permanent. The condition that is thus necessary for absence 
of dissipation by radiation limits the number of types of 
motions otherwise steady in the molecule, that can be per- 
manent : for example, in the orbital motion of two electrons 
of equal inertia and opposite charge, round each other, the 
accelerations reinforce each other instead of cancelling, so that 
this simple type is not a possible permanent molecular confor- 
mation, though it is easy to construct other steady types that 
would be possible. 

As the vibration of a near point in the aether is thus similar 
to the projection on the wave-front of the resultant or aggregate 
of the vibrations of the electrons in the molecule, and the 
vibration at a distant point in the aether is similar to the pro- 
jection on the wave-front of the aggregate of the motions of their 
hodographic points, it is verified that the intrinsic periods of 
the radiation are those of the system of ions that originate it. 

If the condition that wave-length is very large compared with 
magnitude of the molecule were not satisfied, lag of phase would 
sensibly disturb these results so that the vibration though 
periodic would no longer be simple harmonic, and in effect each 
spectral line would be accompanied, more or less, by its system 
of harmonics. 

149. This expression for the radiation from a system of 
moving electrons may be verified by applying it to the simple 
case treated by Hertz in his mathematical discussion of electric 
oscillators, namely that of a stationary rectilinear electric 
vibrator in which the electric moment oscillates harmonically 
between the values +EI and —El, with wave-length V and 
therefore period \'/c: according to his result the radiation per 
half-period is 7r*EH^IS (JX')**. To obtain the radiation per unit 

* * Electric Wayes/ English edition, p. 150 : his X is ^X'. 
L. 15 



226 CASi OF hertz's vibrating doublet [sect. V 

time this must be divided by iXVc, j-ieldiog IGir^E^t^c.'SW If 
now we consider two electric charges + e and — e following each 
other round a circle of diameter 2 so as to be always at opposite 
points, they are equivalent to two such Hertzian oscillators in 
perpendicular planes. For each of these charges the time-rate of 
radiating energy (§ 150) is |**c~*i?, where v =■ ^ (2irC,X)' : when 
we include both of them, since their vibrations are in the same 
phase the energy is quadrupled, instead of merely doubled as it 
would be if their phases varied arbitrarily from time to time ; 
hence it is in all 32c*/V*c*. 3X*, which agrees with the above 
result when it is remembered that e, being specified in electro- 
magnetic units, is equal to E c. 

It is important to bear in mind that though the total 
energy emitt^ by a series of radiators with arbitrarily chang- 
ing phases is on the average by Lord Rayleigh's theory the sum 
of the energies that would be due to them separately, yet this 
principle must not be applied to the electrons of a molecule 
whose phases are during each interval of undisturbed radiation 
in definite relations to each other. 

150. Although the molecule as a whole is thus protected 
from loss of its energy by radiation when the vector sum of the 
accelerations of its electrons is pcnnanently null, we have still 
to examine to what extent the motion of an isolated electron 
will have its energy drained away from this cause. 

In consequence of the stream -function property of Hp, the 
components of the time-gradient of the electric force, taken along 
8r and along rhO, are respectively 

p rdd p dr * 

p being r sin ^ ; thus they are 

and the value of the electric force is obtained by integrating 
these expressions with respect to t 




CHAP. XIV] RADIATION FROM SINGLE ELECTRON 227 

At a very great distance this electric force (as well as the 
magnetic force) is thus perpendicular to r, and is equal to 
— r"^ sin 6f {t — rid) ; and the flow of energy arising from the 
disturbance is thus radial. For the case of an ion e moving 
with velocity v, /(O is equal to ev\ and in /{t — rjc) the 
value of the function / for any point belongs to the position 
of the source at a time rjc previous, where r is its distance at 
that time from the point at which the field is being specified. 
The rate of loss of energy by radiation may be computed by 
Poynting's formula as (47r)~* times the product of the above 
electric and magnetic forces integrated over an infinite sphere*: 

it is thus (47rr«c)-^ {/' (t - r/c)Y j sin^ 0dS, or ^e'cr'^ i?, where 

i) is the acceleration of the electron at a time rjc previously. 
This expression thus represents the amount of energy per unit 
time that travels away and is lost to the system, the velocity of 
the electron being as usual taken to be of a lower order than 
that of radiation. 

In the process of setting up a velocity v of the electron 
from rest, there is thus a loss of energy by radiation, equal to 

|«*c^~^ I Mt In motion with uniform velocity there is no loss ; 

during uniformly accelerated motion the rate of loss is constant. 

As the electric and magnetic forces at a great distajice are 
each proportional to the acceleration of the electron at a time rjc 
previous, and do not involve its velocity, and as we can combine 
the components of its motion in fixed directions, it follows 
generally that for an isolated electron the rate of loss of energy 
by radiation is |e*C~* multiplied by the square of its acceleration. 

The store of kinetic energy belonging to the electron is of 
the order |e*a~* f* where a represents the linear dimensions of 
its nucleus, the expression being exact for a spherical nucleus. 
Thus the loss of energy by radiation from any steady orbital 
motion, in the interval between two disturbances (§ 161), would 
not in any case be sensible compared with its whole intrinsic 

* The flow of radiation near the electron may be examined in detail, as 
Hertz has done in the similar problem of a linear vibrator. The two cases are 
eqaivalent at regards kinetic effecU^ for a positive electron oscillating around 
the origin becomes a vibrating doublet when an equal stationary negative 

electron is added at the origin. 

16-2 



228 MODE OF TRANSFER OF ENERGY [SBCT. V 

kinetic energy, when the velocities of the electrons are not of 
the order of magnitude of that of radiation : while for higher 
velocities the importance of the radiation is, in part at any rate, 
counteracted by the increase of the inertia coefficient which 
then occurs. 

Absence of Radiation from undisturbed Molecules 

151. The linearity of the aethereal equations allows of the 
superposition of solutions. Hence when an electron has been 
moving in any manner through the aether, the aethereal dis- 
turbance produced by it is made up by the superposition of 
spherical shells of magnetic force due as above to the different 
elements of the path of the moving nucleus. When its velocity 
is extremely great, of an order comparable with that of radia- 
tion, there will tend to be a crowding of these shells of magnetic 
force in front, and an opening up of them behind, which, 
involving a deviation from the distribution of magnetic and 
electric forces that is suitable for propagation onwards, will 
usually cause the throwing off of secondary waves backwards, so 
that each shell of disturbance will diffuse itself as it proceeds, 
instead of remaining of uniform thickness: this effect will 
however at any realizable speeds be of trifling amount and will 
finally in a steady state of motion disappear (§ 97). 

When an electron is started from rest into motion these 
shells of magnetic force travel out from it in succession with 
the speed of radiation. After the motion has become of uniform 
rectilinear type, the energy in any one of the shells diminishes 
as it travels out, being always inversely as the square of its 
radius and so becoming negligible after a time. This can only 
arise, if we adhere for descriptive purposes to the notion of 
continuous transfer of energy, from the energy of the following 
shells being in part (in fact in this case wholly) recruited from 
those ahead instead of being entirely extracted from the moving 
nucleus : for it is to be remembered that quantities of energy, 
involving the squares of velocities, are not simply superposable 
as are the velocities themselves. It follows also that there is 
never any drag on the motion of a uniformly travelling electron 
on account of radiation. 




CHAP. XIV] ENERGY OF AN ISOLATED PULSE CONSERVED 229 

If we had merely to do with the sudden creation of an 
electric doublet or a sudden small displacement of an electron, 
there would be only one isolated shell of magnetic force travel- 
ling out into the medium, and the energy in it would then of 
necessity remain constant. This may be verified as regards the 
kinetic part (and similarly as regards the potential part) if we 
integrate the square of the magnetic force H across the thick- 
ness of the shell. The complete value of H at the surface of a 
sphere of radius r, due to a moving electron that was at the 
centre of the sphere at a time rjc ago, is — sin 6 (ev/r^ -f evjcr) ; 
of this the second term, which comes to nothing in the integra- 
tion for H itself across the thickness of the shell of radiation, 

because it involves as much negative as positive, I vdt being 

null, will be preponderant in the integral of JET' across the shell 

when r is great, yielding the value {crY^ \ c (dM/dty dt or 

^/oi'^ j v^dty which may be expressed as eh-jcr^ multiplied by 

the mean square of the acceleration of the electron during its 
time of motion t. Integrated over the whole spherical shell of 

radiation, the result, ^^jc I v^dt as above, is independent of r so 

that the energy of the expanding shell is conserved as it moves. 
Thus a single electron travelling without acceleration of its 
velocity does not radiate at all on account of its motion, and 
experiences no resistance: while sudden changes of velocity, 
for example the sudden stoppage of a rapidly moving electron, 
will originate shells of intense radiation. 

152. To repeat in other words, when an electron is put 
into motion it sends out a stream of radiation which lasts as 
long as its velocity is being accelerated : when its velocity has 
become constant, there is no more radiant energy sent out from 
it, though the previous sheets of radiation will continue to 
travel on into the more distant stagnant aether, leaving behind 
them ready formed the steady magnetic field of the uniformly 
moving electron: but that field, which thus becomes established 
as a trail or residue of the shell of radiation arising from the 
original initiation of the motion of the electron, does not itself 



230 THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A STEADT FIELD [SECT. Y 

involve any sensible amount of energy except in the immediate 
neighbourhood of the electron.** It is of importance to realize 
this process of formation of the magnetic field arising from 
a local electric disturbance, as it supplies the answer to an 
objection that has been offered to the treatment of a moving 
electron as possessing ordinary inertia, namely that it would 
require an infinite time after its motion has been started before 
all the surrounding aether could attain the steady state apper- 
taining to that motion : the answer is that practically all the 
energy of the steady aethereal field thus belonging to the 
motion is in the immediate neighbourhood of the electron, 
where the field is established immediately, so that there is 
really no time-lag in the reaction of the aethereal disturbance 
on the electron, such as would arise if we had to await the 
adjustment of the distant parts of the field of disturbance after 
each change in its velocity. 

153. The magnetic, or kinetic, part of the aethereal disturb- 
ance sent out by an electron moving in any manner thus con- 
sists of the following parts : a part depending on its velocity v, 
of which the element that is initiated in the time St consists of a 
spherical shell of magnetic force travelling out with the velocity 
of radiation, whose aggi*egate intensity (magnetic force inte- 
grated across the shell) at any point is — evr~^ Bt sin 0, where ff 
is the angle between the direction of v and that of the distance 
r of this point from the position the electron occupied at the 
time of emission of this shell of radiation : another part depend- 
ing on its acceleration v, given similarly by — ev {cr)~^ Bt sin <}>, 
where <^ is the angle between v and r. As already mentioned, 
this result is subject to slight correction, initially of the order 

** In the same way, when a moving electron is stopped, its magnetic field 
is wiped out by the shell of radiation which travels out from it owing to the 
retardation of its velocity. Even if it were stopped dead the kinetic energy of 
its field would not however all go off in radiation. On collision with a material 
wall it will displace the electrons of the wall, and their resihence may deflect it 
or it may be entangled among them ; and much of the energy will be dissipated 
thermally in their irregular motions. But there can be no destruction of 
momentum on the impact. 



CHAP. XIV] GENERAL FORMULA 231 

vjc, but ultimately after a very minute time of the order {v/cy, 
arising from the crowding up of the shells of magnetic force in 
front of the moving electron; for that crowding may disturb 
the balance of the radiation so that some of it is thrown back 
again towards the source. To determine, to this degree of 
approximation, the aethereal disturbance arising from any 
system of electrons whose motion is given, is now merely a 
question of integration : but the movement of the sources of 
radiation themselves makes it a very complex one to handle 
except in special problems: general analytical formulae might 
be constructed, but it is one of those cases in which mathe- 
matical symbolism may darken counsel. 

154. Let us now examine more minutely the aggregate 
contribution to the magnetic force at distance r, originated by 
the disturbances arising from the fl?-components of the motions 
of the various electrons in a molecule, each disturbance being 
of course sent out at a time r/c previous to the instant con- 
sidered. We have, assuming rectilinear simple harmonic 
motion for simplicity, 

V =A cos 27rt/Ty = — 27r J.T""* sin 27rt/T : 

thus the magnetic force at distance r arising from the electron 
e is Hy equal to 

eA , , . 2iri\ r\ eA^ir . , . . 2wf, r\ 

, sm (xr) cos — [t H sm (xr) sm — [t I , 

r* ^ ^ T \ c) cr T ^ ^ T \ cJ 

and at right angles to the plane xr. Suppose now we had a 
doublet oscillating along the axis of ^, consisting of this electron 
and another one at distance a from it in the direction of that 
axis, for which the values of ev, and therefore of ev, are at each 
instant equal and opposite. Their combined magnetic force is 
— adH/dx : thus it involves two parts, one arising from differ- 
entiating the coefficient of the periodic term in H, the other 
from differentiating the periodic term itself. The former part 
has in its coefficient the same inverse power of r as fl^ has, 
multiplied by an additional factor a/i^i^ the latter part has the 
same inverse power multiplied by a factor 27ra/X, where \ is 
the wave-length corresponding to the period t. As regards the 



tH AGGKEGATC RADIATION OF A MOLECULE [SBCT. T 

former {MUt, the toCal kinetic eongr of the radiatioD sent oat 
bejood a distance r, being proportional to the int^ial of H^ 
taken over the region oatside the distance r and onwards to 

infinitj, invokes aV 1 1 r-*dSdr, that is a Vr^, so that there is 

no Idoetic enersTT finallr lost to the srstem on account of 
this term, although there may be oscillation of kinetic energy 
backward and forward within any finite range: as regards 
the latter part, the total radiation sent out involves in its 

sensible term a factor dvae Xfj jr^dSdr, which implies a uni- 

form stream of radiation whose amount is a fraction of the 
order (a \f of the radiation of one of the electrons by itself. 
The product term in J5f*, being fluctuating, gives no flow of 
energy. Similar statements apply to the potential energy, 
which depends on the electric force. This comparison of the 
orders of magnitude of radiant eflects applies in a general way 
to any doublet for which the vector Sev ii^ null, or to a molecule 
involving any number of revolving electrons provided the 
vector 2eu is null for it : it asserts that the radiation of such 
a molecule is less than that of one of its electn>ns bv itself, 
moving \*'ith the same speed, in the order of the square of 
the ratio of the diameter of the molecule to the wave-length 
of the radiation. The radiation actually emitted by mole- 
cules of matter has wave-lengths of, at the verj* least, 10* 
diameters of the actual molecule : thus in such a case the 
result of this mutual interference between the radiating 
electrons is that the actual radiation is less than (on our 
view that the diameters of electrons are ver}' small compared 
with their distances apart in the molecule, enormously less than) 
10~* times what would be the aggregate of the radiations of 
its various electrons all moving independently*. 

155. Thus, assuming merely that an ordinary material 

* This argament may be compared with Sir George Stokes* explanation of 
the interference between the front and rear of the section of a vibrating tele- 
graph wire, which effectually prevents communication of soand from it directly 
to the air. Cf. Bayleigh, * Theory of Sound,' ii, § 324. 




CHAP. XIV] CONDITIONS FOR ABSENCE OF RADIATION 283 

molecule involves in its constitution rapidly moving electrons, 
a hypothesis which is at present very widely if not universally 
entertained, we have ascertained that the condition that must 
hold to avoid the frittering away of the internal or constitutive 
energy of such a molecule by radiation is that the vector sum 
lev shall be permanently null. It has been already noticed 
that this condition is not satisfied by a simple free doublet 
composed of a positive and a negative electron revolving round 
each other : such a doublet is in fact a powerful radiator (§ 149) 
of the same type as a Hertzian oscillator, and so could not 
constitute a molecule. But it is easy to imagine steady systems 
for which the condition is satisfied, for example a ring of three 
or more positive electrons revolving round an inner ring of 
negative ones which is also revolving. The question of stability 
for such illustrative groups would afford extensive and in- 
teresting mathematical developments. The condition for ab- 
sence of radiation is of course satisfied for every motion of 
translation of a chemically saturated molecule, because for such 
a system Xe is null. 

The very striking fact that the wave-lengths of free radiant 
vibrations of molecules are such large multiples of their 
diameters has always invited explanation. On a statical con- 
ception of a molecule, or rather the common one which com- 
pares its vibrations to those of a statical system like a spring, 
this fact would suggest a very slight spring very heavily loaded. 
On the dynamical conception here employed, it involves that the 
orbital velocities of the electrons are of about the same order 
of sraallness (exceeding 10""') compared with the velocity of 
radiation as are the molecular dimensions compared with the 
wave-lengths. The present analysis suggests a reason, in that 
the energy of orbital groups moving with greater speeds would 
be through time sensibly dissipated by radiation, so that such 
groups could not be permanent. This explanation is based on, 
and also required by, the mere hypothesis that molecules carry 
electrons : the further question whether they are wholly con- 
stituted of electrons is not here involved. 

156. It has already been seen that there is no sensible 



234 EKERQT CONCENTRATED AT THE MOLECULE [SBCT. Y 

time-lag in the electric inertia of an electron owing to time 
being required to re-establish the steady field in the surround- 
ing aether when the motion of the electron changes, the reason 
being that the energy, kinetic and potential, of the whole 
of that steady field, whose magnetic and electric vectors both 
vary inversely as the square of the distance, is practically 
within a distance of say 10' diameters of the nucleus of the 
electron, over which the field is established in an excessively 
small time. By an argument similar to that of § 148 it appears 
that for a molecule for which the vector Xev is null (and there- 
fore also the vector Set) null), the energy is far more concen- 
trated even than this. In either case therefore, when we 
consider that the diameter of the nucleus of a single electron 
is a small fraction of the diameter of the molecule, it appears 
that the constitutive part of the energy is to all intents in the 
molecule itself and only very minutely and residually in the 
surrounding field. It has here in various connexions been 
suggested that the electric inertia involved in the kinetic 
part of this energy is the total material inertia of the mole- 
cule : to deny this is in effect to say that the energy of motion 
of the molecule is not all in the electro-optic aether, and to 
raise the question where then it can be. Such an hj^thesis 
does not preclude the possibility of as much structure in the 
molecule as may be required, for example in the wider relations 
of chemistry ; but it asserts that this structure is entirely of 
the nature of aethereal constraint or permanent interlocked 
strain- configuration in the aether, and that it does not involve 
modes of transmission of disturbance from part to part of type 
other than the aethereal one here discussed. 

In connexion with the explanation of § 155, it will suffice 
merely to mention how much is effected towards rendering the 
kinetic theory of gases consistent and intelligible, when we can 
have gaseous molecules which will not be set into violent 
radiation at each mutual encounter. 



CHAPTER XV 

ON THE NATURE OF ORDINARY RADIATION, AND ITS SYNTHESIS 

INTO REGULAR WAVE-TRAINS 

The Rontgen Radiation 

157. The Rontgen radiation has been from the first ascribed 
to violent aethereal disturbances, set up by the impacts of the 
rapidly moving particles of the cathode streams against the 
walls of the vacuum-tube in which they travel. According to 
Sir George Stokes this radiation is composed of thin spherical 
sheets of disturbance sent out into the aether by the sudden 
impacts, in part arising from the shocks imparted to the mole- 
cules forming the walls of the tube, and in part from the 
arrested cathode particles themselves. In so far as these sheets 
of radiation are due to sudden but transient disturbance of the 
electrons in the molecules of the walls of the tube, the magnetic 
force belonging to them alternates in direction in crossing each 
thin shell of pulse so that the average value taken across it is 
null. In 80 far as they are due to the sudden arrest of the 
cathode particles, each of which involves (if it is not altogether 
constituted by) a moving electron, this balanced alternation of 
magnetic force across the thickness of the sheet does not hold : 
the force may be in the same direction all the way across*. 
As during the progress of the impact the accelerations of 
arrested cathode particles and of the disturbed electrons of the 
tube-wall will be presumably of the same order of magnitude, 
we would naturally conclude, from the formula expressing the 
radiation in terms of the acceleration of the electron (§ 150), that 

* This distinction has been pointed out by Godfrey, Proc, Camh, Phil, Soc. 
1S9S. 



236 BosTOcsr radiation not or tibbjltort origin [sect, y 

these are both oonoerDed in the emiasioD of radiaDt eneigy. In 
addition to the thin pulse arising from the sudden shock 
imparted to the molecules of the tube-wall, we would expect 
to find also more continuous radiation due to their state of 
vibration which would ensue: this would be rejffesented by 
the phosphorescent light which accompanies the phenomenon ; 
and in part, it might be thought, if very high free periods are 
sufficiently predominant, by the Rontgen radiation itself, for 
that radiation has no properties that may not be ascribed to 
ordinary continuous trains of radiation, of period high enough 
to be beyond the influence of vibrations of such periods as 
are readily excitable in material atoms. This consideration 
however strikes both ways, and in fact tends to show that the 
rays cannot consist of definite radiation arising from very high 
definite free periods of the atoms, because it would then excite 
those same periods and thus be subject to refraction. We 
have thus to fall back on the view that the Rontgen rays 
consist of irregular non-periodic radiation due to general dis- 
turbance. This indeed would also be the case for ordinary 
non-selective radiation from an incandescent solid or liquid, 
according to the explanations advanced by Lord Rayleigh : 
perhaps the most striking phenomenon in physics, whether in 
its theoretical or experimental aspect, is the way in which a prism 
or grating separates out a formless tumultuous mass of radiation 
advancing on it into a series of trains of regular undulations. 

The very high velocity of the cathode particles, being a 
considerable fraction of that of radiation, must produce dis- 
turbances on impact much more sudden and intense than the 
mutual encounters and decompositions of the atoms of an in- 
candescent body could initiate : hence, bearing in mind the law 
that the intensity of the radiation depends at each instant on 
the square of the acceleration of the radiating electron, and 
the circumstance that its penetrating power depends on the 
abruptness of the disturbance, the actual characteristics of the 
Rontgen rays are such as would be expected. 

If we assume that a cathode particle impinging with velocity 
V is reduced to rest in a distance comparable with the linear 
dimensions i of a molecular orbit, we can compare very roughly 



CHAP. XV] ITS INTENSITY PER MOLECULE 287 

the intensity of the Rontgen radiation from an arrested electron 
with that of the steady radiation of an isolated electron de- 
scribing such an orbit with velocity v : the ratio of the energies 
is of the same order as that of the squares of their accelerations, 
which is {vjvy: so that the Rontgen radiation is much more 
intense, while it lasts, than would be the ordinary radiation of 
such an isolated electron, it being assumed on grounds stated 
above (§ 155) that the latter does not describe its molecular 
orbit with velocity comparable with the speed of radiation. 

158. The question arises how thin a radiant pulse must be 
in order that it may get across a material medium without 
exciting a sensible amount of vibrational energy in the mole- 
cules of the medium, and therefore without being subject to 
scattering sideways, as regular refraction is not to be expected 
in such a case. 

The absence of diffraction of the Rontgen radiation is con- 
nected by Sir G. G. Stokes with the thinness of the pulse, and 
with the additional circumstance that, as presented to his view, 
it is a back and forward pulse containing in its thickness as 
much negative as positive displacement. For the part of the 
radiation that arises from the sudden stoppage of the cathode 
particles we have seen that this back and forward character 
will not hold : and the absence of diffraction will for this part 
be conditioned by a less potent, but still sufficient cause**, the 
thinness of the pulse. The circumstances of the other case, 
contemplated by Sir George Stokes, would be quite analogous 
to those of a train of waves whose wave-length is of the order 
of the thickness of the pulse. 

When a very thin pulse of this kind traverses a material 
medium, the effect it produces on each electron is nearly the 

** In this case the elements of the wave-front would send out disturbances 
of concordant phase, which would all reinforce instead of cancelling each other 
at places inside the geometrical shadow: thus in one sense there is copious 
diffraction. But the aggregate disturbance would not travel into the shadow as 
an abrupt pulse : owing to the different distances of the sources of its constituent 
elements it would be drawn out inside the shadow into a disturbance of gradual 
character, which would not possess the characteristic properties of an abrupt 
pulse but rather those of ordinary light. For a mathematical investigation, 
of. Sommerfeld, PhysikalUche Zeittekrift, Nov. 1S99. 



238 ABSORPTION PROPORTIONAL TO DENSITY [SECT. V 

same as if that electron were isolated from its surroundings: 
the pulse imparts a sudden impulse to each electron and then 
has passed on. The interactions of the electron, maintained 
through the aether, with other electrons in the same molecule, 
being elastic forces depending on strain, will remain finite, 
and so will not be in a position to ease off materially the 
velocity communicated by such an impulsive action. This is in 
contrast with the behaviour of a train of ordinary radiation 
arising from a regularly vibrating molecule: such a wave- 
train gradually establishes by resonance, in the course of a 
large number of periods, a state of molecular vibration in- 
volving all the electrons in the affected molecule in a connected 
manner as a single dynamical system. In the fii*st case there 
is loss of energy by communication from the pulse to the 
electron, involving absorption of the radiation, which is simply 
proportional to the number of electrons per unit volume, irre- 
spective of their molecular arrangement*. But here a real 
distinction arises according to whether the pulse is a back and 
forward one, or one preponderating in a given direction such 
as would result from the sudden stoppage of a cathode particle : 
a forward impulse immediately followed by an equal backward 
one will communicate but little energy to an electron which 
lies in its path, as compared with an impulse in which one 
side preponderates : thus the kind of Rontgen radiation that 
comes directly from the sudden stoppage of cathode particles 
should be less penetrating than the kind which comes from the 
shock to the electrons that belong to the molecules of the 
walls of the tube. In the case of a regular wave-train, on 
the other hand, absorption arises owing in part to molecular 
decompositions, and in part — in gases perhaps principally — to 
change of molecular orientations arising from mutual encounters. 
It was found by Rontgen himself, and has been verified by 
subsequent observers, that the order of opacity of substances 
for Rontgen rays is roughly the order of their densities. 
Various considerations impart some plausibility to a theory 
that the inertia of matter is simply the electric inertia of 

* Considerations in some respects similar to the above were advanced by 
Sir Qeorge Stoked in his Wilde Lecture, Proc. Manchester Lit. and Phil, Soc, 
1897. Cf. also § 163 in/ra. 



CHAP. XV] THB FOURIER ANALYSIS NOT OBJECTIVE 289 

the electrons which are involved in its constitution : this law 
of absorption seems to furnish an experimental consideration 
tending in the same direction. 

On the nature of the analysis of ordinary Radiation 

159. For simplicity and definiteness, let us begin with an 
illustration furnished by plane waves of sound excited in an 
infinite straight pipe of uniform section. Suppose the wave- 
train to be originated from a condition of constrained equi- 
librium in which a length of the air in the pipe is held in a 
state of uniform compression, while the remainder is in its 
natural state: when this constraint is released two simple 
pulses of compression start from the compressed region, one 
carrying half the compression forward and the other carrying 
the remaining half backward, each with the velocity of sound 
in air. Now consider one of these travelling pulses by itself. 
At any instant the Fourier analysis will resolve the com- 
pression into an infinite series of simple harmonic compressions, 
of all possible wave-lengths, and each filling the whole tube 
to infinite distance in both directions. Each of these com- 
ponents travels onward as a simple wave-train of unlimited 
length, and if it existed by itself would be recognized as such 
by an ear or other suitable acoustic receiver. But this comes 
near to saying that a single pulse of limited dimensions 
travelling through the quiescent air involves an infinite series 
of regular waves travelling both in front of it and behind it, 
although in neither of these positions is there really any dis- 
turbance of the air at all. Yet in the perception of tone (and 
of colour in optics) an objective validity is assigned to this 
kind of Fourier resolution. The explanation arises from the 
circumstance that, for purposes of perception, it is the sequence 
of disturbance at the place occupied by the receiver that is 
analyzed into time-periodic constituents in the Fourier manner, 
of each of which the receiver takes separate account. The 
analysis into simple wave-trains in space is not an objective 
one, and possibly serves no useful purpose so long as the trans- 
mitting medium is uniform : in the theory of refraction, or 
rather that of dispersion, such an analysis however constitutes 



240 ANALTSIS BY A SIMPLE DAMPED RECEIVER [SECT. V 

an essential part of the machinery of mathematical discussion. 
But its character is only formal: in order to obtain the ob- 
jective result of the dispersion, a receiver is stationed at some 
definite place in the medium and takes account of the course 
of the total disturbance which goes past that place as time 
proceeds. 

159**. To illustrate the difference between the theoretical 
analysis of a disturbance by Fourier's theorem and its objective 
analysis by a receiver on which it falls, when the disturbance 
has no periodic features, the case above described may be 
further considered. The receiver may be there constituted by 
a piston enclosing a cushion of air in a cylinder: a complex 
receiver such as might roughly illustrate the action of an ear 
or eye, may be considered as formed by an aggregation of 
such independent elements, with different free periods. The 
equation of vibration of one of these receiving elements will be 

where U represents the force which the piston experiences and 
is a function of the time. The solution for any form of U may 
be derived symbolically, D representing djciU as follows, n'* 
denoting n^ — k^ so that 27r/n' is the free period : 

w = (i>»+2A:i) + nVC^ 
= (2m'r' [{D + A - m')~i - (2) + A: + in')-'] U 



= n'-' f e-* «-«'' sin n' (t - 1') U'dt\ 

J —00 



on writing i for t under the sign of integration. If the time 
of action of the force U extend sufficiently far backwards, the 
effect of the initial circumstances will have faded out. Thus 



u 



= n'-'e-^ jsin n'tl^ e**' cos n^U'dt' 



— cos 71 



'^jV'sinnrf/'wl. 



This expresses the motion as two simple harmonic vibrations, 
of the period and damping belonging to the receiver, but with 
changing amplitudes. To determine the amplitudes at any 



CHAP. XV] RESPONSE TO A DISCONTINUOUS PULSE 241 

instant, we may take that instant as the time ^ = : thus they 
are obtained by a process, of the Fourier type, of sifting out the 
constituent elements of that period in U throughout past time, 
but modified by the presence of a damping coefficient which 
renders remote times inoperative. 

In the present example U is constant during the time to 
T taken by the compression to pass over the piston, supposed 
initially at rest. Thus at any instant after the compression has 
passed over, we have if tan a = kjn', 

w =-, re-*(«-n sin n' (t - if) Udt' 
n Jo 

= — Un'-^ cos a {e~** cos (n't — a) - g-*<*-^) cos (n't — n V — a)}. 

Hence in this case there is an unlimited uniform damped train 
of vibrations of the natural period of the receiver, followed 
after time t by an equal train with the disturbance reversed. 
When there is no damping in the receiver so that k is null, 

u = 2n"^ Uain ^nr sin n(t— ^t), 

which represents the interference of these two trains of vibrations. 
Thus each constituent of the complex receiver executes 
simple trains of vibrations of its own period, endless or gradually 
damped as the case may be, but those constituents whose free 
periods range near certain values respond most strongly. If 
the damping were very slight, the constituents whose free 
period is equal to t or a submultiple of it would be undisturbed, 
and those of intermediate periods t equal to the roots of the 

equation tan— 7- = ^— 7 would be most excited. 

T T 

On the other hand when the incident disturbance is a train 
of waves, as it becomes longer and more regular the response to 
it approximates more and more to a regular forced vibration 
of the period of the disturbance, but most intense in those 
constituent receivers whose free period is nearest unison with it. 

This point may be further illustrated by the solution cor- 
responding to a damped train of existing radiation represented 
hy U= UoerP^ cos qt lasting from its sudden beginning when 
^ = until it decays to insensible amount: then the solution 
corresponding to an initial state of equilibrium is 

L. 16 



242 RESPONSE TO A DAMPED WAVE-TEAIN [SECT. V 

u = U,n-' f V*<«-<'> er^^ sin n' (t-t')cos qifdt' 
Jo 

=i £^(^'-' [[(k -py + (n'- g)»}-* {e-^ 008(5^ - a) - «-« cos(n'i - a)} 
+ K* - p)« + (n' + 5)«}-* {e-J^ cos (je + i8) - e-** cos (n't - i8); ]. 

where tan a = —. — - , tan B = — — - ; 

n — g '^ n + 9 

or say 

u = -46r-P< cos (g< - 7) + -B«"** cos (n't - S), 

as might have been obtained by more direct methods. Hence 
in this case two regular trains of vibrations are started 
instantaneously in the receiver, one of the period of the exciting 
wave-train, and the other of its own free period. The first 
decays according to the same law as the exciting train, the 
second according to the same law as a train of free vibrations of 
the receiver. Both trains of vibration are of the same order of 
magnitude at starting, as regards amplitude. The important 
case is that in which the period of the influencing train is 
nearly the same as that of the receiver : then if the damping 
coefficients are both small, or else nearly equal, the initial 
amplitudes of both trains of vibrations are large. 

It appeal's from this solution, which corresponds to a fair 
representation of actual conditions of resonance, especially in 
optical applications, that when the natural vibrations of the 
receiver are damped more quickly than those of the exciting 
wave-train, the receiver vibrates mainly in the period of the 
latter: but when the exciting train is the more rapidly damped, 
the vibrations of the receiver are mainly of its own period. 

Considerations of this kind have scope in the analysis by 
resonators of the long-period radiation from a Hertzian electric 
oscillator. If we imagine a conductor on which an electric 
charge is held in a disturbed condition by constraints, this 
involves a state of disturbance of the intrinsic aethereal strain 
all round the conductor: when the constraint is released this 
strain subsides into its equilibrium state corresponding to the 
charge on the conductor, gradually when the removal of con- 




CHAP. XV] CASE OF HEBTZIAN VIBRATIONS 243 

straint is slow, but in part by wave-propagation when it is 
sudden. The case is then analogous to that of a load suddenly 
removed from a portion of an infinite elastic solid, or to the 
sudden elevation of a solid dipping in a large expanse of 
liquid: a pulse of waves travels out from it which is devoid 
of periodic character, and the period of a receiver that most 
strongly responds to it depends on the constitution of the 
receiver as well as on the character of the incident pulse. 
It is possible to have definite period in the radiation from 
an electric vibrator only when it involves an outer reflecting 
envelope to entirely prevent loss by radiation, or when the 
supply of potential energy is partially protected by adiabatic 
boundaries from immediate dissipation, as for example is the 
case in a charged condenser, or when its vibrations are main- 
tained by external agency. 

In an ordinary Hertzian oscillator the disturbance emitted 
cannot be of this dead-beat character, otherwise a resonator 
would not respond in any definite manner. But it is very 
rapidly damped out ; yet if the damping is regular, the analysis 
above given shows that the resonator is in general most 
eflective when it is most nearly in unison with the incident 
wave-train. 

160. The radiation from an incandescent solid or liquid, 
though not from a gas, presents as a whole nothing of a periodic 
character,, for it arises from the independent and irregular 
disturbances of countless molecules; it thus has the appear- 
ance of a formless tumultuous mass of radiant disturbance, 
advancing with the velocity of light. Yet this need not imply 
that periodic qualities are wholly absent in it. 

The theory of optical dispersion elaborated by Cauchy made 
that phenomenon depend on simple statical discreteness of the 
transmitting medium : such discreteness exists, is a vera causa, 
in the form of the molecular structure of matter; but it has 
been pointed out by various writers that this molecular struc- 
ture is too fine-grained to produce more than a very minute 
fraction of the dispersion actually occurring. It is thus 
necessary to base dispersion on sympathetic oscillation of the 

16—2 



244 CHARACTER OF RADIATION FROM OASES [SECT. V 

material molecules, instead of their mere inertia : nor is this 
mode of explanation an afterthought, for to the acute mind 
of Young, who was the very first to attempt physical theories 
of these actions, it presented itself as the natural way in 
which the material molecules would influence the waves of 
radiation. But if sjrmpathetic vibration in the molecules is 
to be effective, there must be regular periodicity somewhere 
in order to excite it: and in order to excite it in the very 
exact and definite way that is put in evidence by the extreme 
refinement of the analysis of light by prisms, this periodicity 
must last without discontinuity over a large number of vibra- 
tions. What then is its source ? 

The absorption spectra of pai-tially transparent solid and 
liquid materials indicate more or less roughly a preference of 
their molecules for vibrations around certain periods: and it 
might at first appear that we must assume in the case of 
solids as well as gases that each of their molecules is in the 
main in a state of true steady vibration continued over a 
fairly large number of periods, during the intervals between 
the successive disruptions or disturbances of chemical (or 
electric) bonds that are the exciting cause of its radiation. 
The aggregate of the i*adiation sent out by all the molecules, 
being devoid of any relation between the phases or durations 
of these free trains of vibration, would be of sensibly periodic 
character, but gradually changing in form as the contributions 
from individual molecules change. In a theoretical treatment 
of the question of dispersion the continuous wave-train which 
is the subject of the mathematical analysis may in fact be taken 
as the w^ave-train emanating from a single molecule of the 
radiating source : from the solution of the problem of propaga- 
tion which holds for it we would pass to the general solution 
by simple addition or superposition of disturbances. In the 
result there would at any instant be a definite amplitude and 
phase, but these would be gradually changing, so that in a 
time infinitesimal compared with the duration of a visual 
impression they would be totally different. Although, therefore, 
there would then be nothing observable of the nature of absolute 
phase in the aggregate, even in a plane-polarized train of light 



CHAP. XV] DEFINITION OF EFFECTIVE PHASE 246 

of definite wave-length, yet we could make observations as to 
change of phase in such a train, on reflexion, for example, from 
a metallic medium : each of the independent periodic trains, 
from the individual molecules, of which the radiation is composed 
would then undergo the same change of phase; and as the 
observable result is the same for all these subtrains it will 
persist on their superposition, and may be detected by the 
elliptic polarization that can be derived from it in the well- 
known ways. In any other sense than this the phase of the 
vibration of an actual beam of light would be illusory. In all 
such cases of random phases the energy carried in any sensible 
time by the aggregate of the radiation is the sum of the energies 
carried by the simple wave-trains of which it is constituted. 

But an explanation of this kind is vitiated for the case of 
the superficial radiation from incandescent solid and liquid 
bodies, by the circumstance that if there were any underlying 
periodicities in the radiation, they would reveal themselves in 
bright lines, more or less distinct, when it is analyzed by a 
prism or grating. We must infer that the radiation from 
an incandescent solid or liquid is wholly devoid of periodicity, 
that the interval between successive disturbances of each 
radiating molecule is too short compared with its free periods 
to allow any regular train of vibrations to come into existence. 
It is dififerent in the case of rarefied gases, and to some extent 
in the case of other bodies radiating from their interiors. 

161. The dynamics of refraction and dispersion of oniinary 
white light must therefore be developed on other lines. The 
solution of the apparent paradox that is involved is best 
brought out by considering a simpler question. How is it 
that, if white light is wholly devoid of even latent periodicity, 
a small nearly homogeneous portion separated out from it by 
prismatic dispersion shows regularity reaching over a large 
number of waves, as is evidenced by the fact that with it a 
succession of interference bands may be produced, whose 
number can be made quite large when the light is sufficiently 
homogeneous in refractive index ? 

As a preliminary question, not involving the intervention 



246 EXPLANATION OF INTERFERENCE [SECT. V 

of dispersion, how is it that a split beam of light, belonging 
say to the thallium green line, shows, when the two parts are 
reunited after traversing paths of different lengths, a succession 
of interference bands up to the order 10* in number ?* The train 
of radiation belonging to the thallium line is the aggregate of 
subtrains emitted by the diflFerent molecules of the vapour, 
in this case freely vibrating in the intervals between the 
molecular encounters. Each of these subtrains st^arts more 
or less suddenly, proceeds for a time, and then stops more or 
less suddenly, or is transformed, at the next encounter; and 
there is no relation whatever between the phases of the 
various subtrains. When all these are superposed a resultant 
radiation is obtained, whose graphical representation is a curve 
sensibly periodic for a number of vibrations comparable with 
10*, but in which over a longer range the amplitude and phase 
gradually change in a wholly fortuitous manner. Hence if we 
superpose two lengths of this radiation, close enough together 
and in opposite phases, they will cancel each other as regards 
energy of illumination ; and alternations will thus appear when 
the two portions are made to slide, so to speak, along each 
other**. If however we compare two lengths along the ray 
which are so far apart that none of the regular molecular sub- 
trains that constitute the one have persisted on into the other, 
there cannot possibly be any relation between the characters of 
the disturbance along these portions. It appears to follow there- 

♦ Cf. Mascart, * Traits d'Optique ', i, p. 178. 

** One is liable at the first glance to conolnde that the resultant of a very 
great number of simple wave-trains of equal periods and about the same 
amplitude, but with phases arbitrarily distributed, is of magnitude comparable 
with that of one of them, and so very small : if that were so the addition of a 
single new constituent would entirely alter the vibration, and there would be uo 
regular resultant motion at all. Supposing for simplicity the constituent 
harmonic motions at a point to be all in the same direction, each may be 
represented by a radius vector of length equal to its amplitude and inclination 
equal to its phase : although the vectors are of the same order of length, and 
distributed indifferently all round the origin, all that we can conclude as to 
their resultant is that its amplitude is at any instant small compared with the 
sum of their amplitudes. The means of the energies, proportional to the 
squares of the amplitude, are in such a case additive : hence for the resultant of 
ft equal vibrations of arbitrary phase, the most probable amplitude is of the 
order Jn times that of a constituent. Cf. Bayleigh, Proe. Math, Soc, May 1871 ; 
Phil, Mag, Aug. 1880 ; * Theory of Sound,' ed. 2, § 42ri. 




CHAP. XV] PERIODICITY IN RADIATION FROM OASES 247 

fore that in a case like this, in which no dispersion artificially 
produced by prisms or gratings is taken advantage of, the 
fact that 10" successive interference bands can be counted is 
evidence that a considerable proportion of the molecules have 
gone on vibrating regularly for that number of periods, in 
other words that there is time for about 10' vibrations of the 
light of this thallium line between successive disturbances of 
the vibrating molecule*. The interval between its successive 
encounters, on the theory of gases, is in fact of this order: 
although ordinary gaseous encounters cannot start radiation, 
yet by altering the orientation of the molecule they can intro- 
duce discontinuity. 

162. These considerations however still leave unexplained 
the origin of the periodicity which dispersion introduces into 
the constituents of ordinary light. The answer, as given by 
Gouyt and by Rayleigh J, is that it is constituted by the optical 
apparatus which produces the dispersion. 

When a grating is employed, the radiation which appears in 
any given part of the spectrum is made up of contributions 
from each line or physical element of the grating ; thus in the 
case of the first spectrum it is an average struck over a length 
equal to as many of its wave-lengths in the incident radiation 
as there are lines, say N, in the grating. If then we compare 
two portions of this selected radiation that are less than N 
wave-lengths apart, they will have constituents in common, and 
if they are less than ^JV wave-lengths apart, they will have 
more than half of their constituents in common. We should 
expect then that in such a case the number of successive inter- 
ference bands that could be counted, independently of any 
original periodicity in the light, would be of the order of ^N. 

If the dispersion is produced by prisms instead of a grating, 
the explanation must be on diflFerent lines. The essence of the 

* This is not quite exact: to isolate the thallinm line a grating (or prisma 
mast be used, which will increase the number of possible correspondences by 
about half the total number of its rulings : but this correction will be negligible 
compared with 10" unless the grating is a powerful one. 

t * Sur le mouvement lumineuz,' Journal de Physique, 1886. 

t 'Wave Theory,* Eneyc. BHU, 1888; PhiU Mag, June 1889. [Of. also 
Schuster, Phil, Mag. June 1894, and Camptes Rendus, 1895, for a detailed 
disonssion.] 



248 PERIODICITY INDUCED BY ANALYZING SYSTEM [SECT. V 

action of a prism is that the light which has traversed it 
towards the thicker side is delayed; in this case (not in the 
previous one) when all the parts are brought finally to a focus 
they arrive there at the same time, by Fermat's principle, 
and they thus all belong to the radiation emitted at the same 
instant from the source. The explanation must therefore now 
lie in the dynamics of refraction. As already explained, refrac- 
tion must arise from the interaction of sympathetic vibrations 
induced in the molecules by the radiation passing across them : 
this requires periodicity, and the difficulty was as to whence 
that periodicity came in the case of white light. In the mathe- 
matical analysis of dispersion the radiation is supposed to be 
sifted into regular harmonic components by Fourier's theorem ; 
each of these components is transmitted independently, in- 
ducing its own sympathetic vibrations in the molecules. It is 
then the nature of the Fourier analysis that should indicate the 
source of the periodicity of the dispersed light ; when this 
analysis is expressed in the following form the characteristics 
that are being sought for will appear. 

Any function f{t) however complex, provided it has only a 
finite number of singularities within the range considered, can 
be resolved, in the interval between the values — t and + t of 
the variable, into a series of simple harmonic functions of 
multiples of tt^/t, there being two of these functions for each 
multiple r, diflFering in phase by a quarter period, namely 
cos Trri/r and sin irrtjr. The amplitude of each is found by 
a process which amounts to taking an average, over the range 
considered, of the amplitudes of all partial series of harmonic 
sequences of that type that exist in it. The nature of the 
process, so far as we are concenied with it in physical problems 
of vibration, in which damping agencies are always present, 
will appear when we pass towards the limit of t very great 
when there would be a continuous distribution of components 
of all periods in the result. We have now f{t) given for a 
long time past and future : we may suppose for definite illus- 
tration that it represents the aggregate, at a given point of 
space, of the radiation from a system of molecules say of a gas, 
and that each of these molecules contributes, owing to its free 



CHAP. XV] PRACTICAL ASPECT OF THE FOURIETl ANALYSIS 249 

vibrations, uniform subtrains of period 2tq, a submultiple of 2t, 
each beginning and ending abruptly. Let one of these incom- 
plete subtrains be ar cos irrt/ro + br sin irrt/To, lasting for n^ 
periods: then in the Fourier representation there will be a 
complete train A cos irrt/ro -h B sin irrt/T^, extending through 
all the time, say N periods, where A = Xrirar/N, B = ^nJbrjN, 
together with trains usually much less important of the other 
harmonic periods. This indicates the character of the process 
of mathematical resolution into harmonic components : in the 
general case when/(i) is not made up of such periodic subtrains 
the process retains the same character, but cannot be expressed 
so simply. Now to carry out this process with mathematical 
strictness we require to know the form oi f{t) for all time1"t, 
and to average over all time : but in a physical application all 
time merely means a time suflSciently long to cover all the 
eflFective factors of the phenomenon. The Fourier analysis pre- 
paratory to the dynamics of refraction of compound radiation 
thus consists of the culling of contributions from a long series of 
equal lengths before and after, to make one wave-length : and 
the periodicity is thereby theoretically manufactured just in the 
same manner as it would be practically made by a grating. 
Of course the object of the theoretical Fourier analysis is only 
to facilitate the representation of the dynamical action of the 
prism : it is the prism that actually separates out, by the 
agency of the sympathetic molecular vibrations causing its 
dispersion**, the formless incident stream of radiation into har- 
monic wave-trains. In this case it is not so easy to assign an 
upper limit JJ to the number of consecutive interference bands to 
be expected for very small breadth of slit as it is when a grating 
is used : the Fourier resolution involves no limit of that kind : 

tfln passing to this limit, where there is a continuous distribution of 
Fourier periods, the origin of the aggregate of Fourier elements whose periods 
are included within small assigned limits is what is to be traced : to do this 
rigorously would be a long affair : but the very indefinite indications above 
given may perhaps suffice for the present purpose in which there is no practical 
possibility of exact formulation. 

** This may be illustrated more directly from the general solution on p. 240. 

Xt Namely, the limit, depending on the material of the prism, beyond which 
increase of resolving power, estimated geometrically, is no longer effective. 



250 HIGH PERIODS INVOLVED IK r5NTGEN RADIATION [SBCT. V 

the limit should rather be connected with the average undis- 
turbed duration of a train of sympathetic vibrations in the 
molecule (or a molecular complex) f of the refracting medium, 
as well as possibly in part with the degree of coarseness of its 
molecular structure. 



163. The radiation from an incandescent solid or liquid 
source is thus different in kind from the selective radiation of a 
gas. Its most striking feature is that the range of periods in 
its continuous spectrum spreads in a definite manner towards 
the upper end of the spectrum as the temperature rises. This 
perhaps is related to the fact that the superficial molecular dis- 
turbances, which in the main emit the radiation, increase in 
abruptness with rise of temperature. 

The carriers which constitute the cathode rays in a Crookes* 
vacuum tube are known to travel at speeds not far short of the 
order of that of radiation. Their collision with an obstacle is 
therefore of excessive abruptness; and we should thus, even 
a priori^ anticipate a large admixture of very high periods in 
the Fourier analysis of the Rontgen radiation thereby originated. 
It is conceivable that a very fine diffraction grating, of an ideal 
substance sufficiently opaque to the Rontgen radiation, might 
do something towards its resolution into spectra: but the 
opacity would have to be very great on account of the short 
wave-length. 

Suppose there is a system of free single independent elec- 
trons (like electrolytic ions) existing in the course of a train of 
regular radiation of definite period : the transverse electric force 
in the waves would set them vibrating in unison and so would 
convert each of them into a radiator : the positive and negative 
ones would have their vibrations in opposite phase and so 
would both be radiating in the same phase which would be a 
quarter of a period behind the exciting radiation : thus positive 
and negative solitary electrons would not interfere with each 
other in the direction of diminishing the total radiation of 
energy, but the contrary. Contrast this with the case in which 

+ This resonance has been strikingly compared by Sir George Stokes {loc. eit,) 
to that of the sounding-board of a pianoforte. 



CHAP. XV] ABSOBPTION PROPORTIONAL TO DENSITY 261 

it is groups of combined electrons that lie in the path of the 
radiation. The strength of their mutual connexions is in- 
dicated by the high frequency of the free periods of the mole- 
cules which they constitute: if the period of the incident 
radiation is comparable with these periods, its electric force can 
do practically nothing in the way of pulling the positive and 
negative electrons of the molecule independently in different 
ways, but will merely induce a state of connected vibration, 
which if it can simultaneously radiate to an appreciable extent, 
will involve a drain of the energy of the exciting radiation 
after the ordinary manner of selective absorption. But now 
consider the incidence of radiation of a period much higher 
than any of the main free periods of the molecule : this will 
affect each electron of the molecule more or less independently 
because the elasticity of the molecule has not now time to get 
all the electrons under control on account of the rapidity of the 
alternations: thus each electron will practically be an inde- 
pendent vibrator just as if they were all free. The absorption 
will now depend on the aggregate number of electrons per unit 
volume, but hardly at all on their molecular aggregation : if we 
adopt the view that the electric inertia of the electrons is the 
Avhole of the inertia of matter it will follow that the absorption 
of radiation of very high period tends to become proportional 
to the density of the matter present and to nothing else, which 
is in a general way the state of affairs with regard to the 
Rontgen rays. 



APPENDIX A 

ON TBE PRINCIPLES OF THE THEORY OF MAGNETIC AND 
ELECTRIC POLARITY: AND ON THE MECHANICAL SIGNI- 
FICANCE OF DIVERGENT INTEGRALS. 

1. The physical phenomenon of polarity is most simply 
illustrated by magnets ; in them the polar character has long 
been known to be present in their smallest parts, so that the 
physical element is bipolar instead of being a single attracting 
pole. Accordingly the first mathematical development of this 
subject was contained in Poissou's theory of magnetization 
by influence. All the main theoretical relations of polarized 
media were there deduced from a hypothesis of mobile mag- 
netic matter acting directly across a distance, which though 
physically unreal supplied a picture of the relations of the 
actual phenomena which was sufficient for the purpose in view. 
The subject however hai-dly got a start as a physical theory 
until the appearance of Lord Kelvin's memoirs on *A Mathe- 
matical Theory of Magnetism ' J in 1849 : the treatment 
there given added little to Poisson's results, but it cleared 
away the artificial hypotheses and aimed at evolving the theory 
solely in terms of phenomena that could be observed and 
quantities that could be measured, making use of the principle 
of negation of perpetual motions and of the methods of the 
conservation of energy : it is in the physical conceptions, re- 
femng not to molecules but to media treated as continuous, 

X Of. Reprint of Papers on Electrostatics and Magnetism, pp. 844 sqq. 



a] the idea of polarity 263 

which are there defined and developed in their mutual relations, 
that the physical theory of polarity took its rise. 

Shortly before this time Faraday had rediscovered the fact, 
already known to Cavendish in the previous century, that the 
nature of the dielectric medium plays a prominent part in the 
transmission of electric influence between one charged body 
and another, a fact which at first much puzzled the school of 
mathematical theorists who were more familiar with astronom- 
ical attractions at a distance than with intermolecular 
actions. In the memoirs above referred to, Lord Kelvin, re- 
ferring back to his paper ' On the Elementary Laws of Statical 
Electricity ' J where he had explained for the first time the 
nature of this dielectric action on the analogy of Poisson's 
theory, emphasizes the fact that " however diflFerent physically, 
the positive laws of the phenomena of magnetic polarity and 
dielectric polarity are the same, and belong to a very important 
branch of physical mathematics which might be called *A 
Mathematical Theory of Polar Forces'." This view of di- 
electric action was also treated at length not much later by 
Mossotti and others. 

2. The next great step in advance in electrical science was 
Maxwell's ascription of electrodynamic properties to changing 
dielectric polarization. In order however to fit the phenomena 
of static electric discharge into the scheme which he had 
fashioned from a general survey of electrodynamic phenomena, 
which almost required on grounds both of theoretical simplicity 
and physical probability that all electric currents should flow in 
streams round complete circuits, it was necessary to assume 
that dielectric polarization was itself a stream vector. On the 
theory of Poisson and Kelvin the polarity induced in the 
material medium does not however possess this property : so 
Maxwell virtually ignored that theory and postulated some 
new kind of effect which he called dielectric displacement, 
which in isotropic media is equal to the electric force multiplied 
by K/4i7rC^, with such generalization as is natural for the case 
of crystalline media, and which is defined solely by its circuital 

X Camb, and Dub, Math, Journal, Dec, 1845 ; Reprintt § 447. 



254 maxwell's dielectric displacement [a . 

or stream property. Thus, (P, Q, R) being the electric force, in 
an isotropic medium 

d ( K p\ d^ ( K ^\ d_ / K jA 
dxKMrC' ^) "*" dy Wc ^) "^ dz \^c^ ^J 

is postulated to be null, except however at singular points in the 
medium from or towards which there is a convergence of the 
electric displacement whose total amount, when it is integrated 
all round the point, is called an electric charge — a true charge, 
as distinguished from the apparent charge which is only an 
aspect of polarization : these electric charges are postulated to be 
permanent singularities in the aether, involving intrinsic strain- 
configurations which can move about freely in that medium 
but cannot by any natural processes be created or destroyed. 

This view of dielectric action was perfectly definite and 
precise, and exactly what was needed for general electric theory : 
but it was not a theory of polarity in the only known form, 
that of Poisson and Kelvin. The question naturally arose as to 
what it could really represent. MaxAvell in his later methodical 
expositions tacitly declined to theorize on this subject : he had 
discarded the notion of action at a distance, whereas the theory 
of polarity as previously developed made use of direct attraction 
between the poles. When von Helmholtz took up the study of 
Maxwell's theory, this question became prominent : he naturally 
resolved to try what the known theory of polarity would lead 
to, and in consequence he had to deal with the effects of 
currents or displacements of electricity that did not flow in 
complete circuits : to form a basis for their treatment he 
generalized Neumann's expression for an electrodynamic poten- 
tial energy between current-elements as far (or nearly) as it 
would bear without altering the laws for permanent currents 
flowing in closed circuits which were known to be correct. 
The result was his so-called extension of Maxwell's theor\\ 
which however, being based on distance actions, is in con- 
ception entirely foreign to Maxwell's view of transmission by a 
medium. He showed how by suitably adapting his constants, 
a scheme of equations formally equivalent, over a considerable 
range of theory, to Maxwell's could be obtained ; while attempts, 



a] its belation to dielectric polarization 255 

continued through many years, to find out by experiment 
whether there were any phenomena that demanded a wider 
scheme than Maxwell's, culminated in Hertz s brilliant verifica- 
tion of the Maxwellian scheme in its simplicity. 

3. The question however still remained as to the nature of 
Maxwell's dielectric displacement. The account of it that has 
been offered in the present discussion, — which agrees in its 
essential features with one elaborated on a different basis by 
Lorentz — ib that it is of complex type : that it is in part a true 
polarization of the molecules of the medium, whose constituent 
electrons act on each other not by forces at a distance but by 
transmission of effect through the intervening aether, this pai-t 
not being circuital or in any other way restricted as to form : 
that there is another part to be added which consists of true 
aethereal displacement, namely the aethereal strain that would 
remain if there were no matter present, this part not being 
electric flow at all : and that the sum of these two parts, of very 
different origins, forms a total displacement which is always 
circuital, and by virtue of the dynamical constitution of the 
aether (Chapter vi) has all the electrodynamic properties re- 
quired in Maxwell's scheme. The only reservations that are to 
be made belong to the phenomena of radiation through moving 
material media, which have here been theoretically developed. 
This method, being to some extent the final synthesis of a 
theory which involves the laws and properties revealed by the 
analytical procedure of Maxwell, — and previously on the purely 
optical side by that of MacCullagh, who worked on a similar 
inductive plan, — builds directly on the dynamics of the aether 
whose constitution is effectively known, taking cognizance of 
the modifications involved in the presence of the electrons 
which form the mechanism of connexion between matter and 
aether. 

4. The relations between the various vector quantities that 
occur in the general theory of polarity, which is thus funda- 
mental in physical inquiry relating to continuous media, may 
be directly developed, with logical precaution and validity, in 



256 SPECIFICATION OF POLARITY [A 

the manner typified by the following synthesis of the relations 
connecting the magnetic force |^ or (a, /8, 7), the magnetic 
induction 23 or (a, 6, c), and the magnetization i or (A, £, C), 
in the case of a body magnetically polarized. 

Under static circumstances the usual argument, founded on 
the negation of perpetual motions, points to the magnetic force 
in regions outside the magnet being derivable from a potential. 
An expression for this potential may be obtained by integration 
from its value for a polarized diflFerential element of volume. 
The ideally simplest type of a polar element is a doublet con- 
sisting of a positive point-pole m and an equal negative one 
separated from it by a minute distance I : such a doublet may 
formally be considered as produced by * separation * of the 
positive and negative poles, which originally cancelled each 
others* eflFects by superposition, to the distance I apart in a 
definite direction : the potential arising from the doublet, at a 
distance r from it which is very large compared with I, is 
Mr~^ cos € : this only involves My equal to ml, called the 
mom^it of the doublet, and the angle e which the distance 
r makes with the direction of this moment. It is verified at 
once that this moment is a vector quantity, because its potential 
is equal to the sum of those of its components when it is treated 
as a vector. When polarity is formally considered as intro- 
duced into an element of volume by the occurrence of any series 
of such separations of complementary point-poles, the total 
potential arising from it is, by addition, that due to a single 
vector which is the resultant of the moments of these com- 
ponent magnetic separations in the element. For an element 
of volume St this resultant moment may be denoted by 5St or 
(-4, By C) St where the vector 5 represents the intensity of 
magnetization, that is of magnetic separation, at the place. In 
a similar manner, in the theory of dielectrics the notion of 
displacement or separation of electric poles, that is of electric 
polarization, is introduced and defined. The physical origin of 
the polarity may of course be quite different from the ideal 
separation of poles by which it is thus formally represented. 

5. At a point (^, 9;, ^) outside the magnetic mass the 



a] equivalent distribution of density 267 

aggregate potential V arising from it is given by the in- 
tegral 

where {I, m, n) is the direction vector of the distance r of the 
point (f, rif f ) from the element of volume St at the point 
(a?, y, 2) at which the intensity of the polarization is {A, B, C). 
Thus 

r^j(A^ + B^+Cpir-^dT. 
J\ dx ay dzj 

The point (f , rj, f ) being outside the polarized mass, the subject 
of this integration cannot become infinite; therefore trans- 
formation by integration by parts is legitimate; thus 

Expressed in words, this means that the potential due to the 
polarized mass is at points outside it formally identical with 
that due to an ordinary volume-density p, equal to 

- {dA/dx + dB/dy + dC/dz), 

and surface-density a, equal to the normal component of the 
polarity at the boundary, measured outwards : and the statical 
theory of polarity is thus reduced to the simpler theory of con- 
tinuous distributions of attracting matter. 

But at a point inside the polarized mass r~^ will be infinite 
for an element of the integral, and this transformation, con- 
sidered as applied to a potential function which expresses the 
force by means of its gradient, is illegitimate. We shall 
still obtain a definite result for the force if we consider 
a point situated inside a cavity in the material, small in 
dimensions, yet very large compared with the scale of the 
physical polar element, that is, with molecular magnitudes; 
but now part of the surface-density a will be on the wall of 
this cavity, and this part will give rise to a finite force (though 
not to a finite potential) at a point inside it, whose value 
depends on the form of the cavity and on the intensity of the 
polarity at the place. If we omit this purely local part of the 
magnetic force in the cavity, the remaining part, which is that 

L. 17 



258 THE FUNDAMENTAL VECTORS 

due to the polarized mass as a whole, will be derived fix)m the 
general volume density p and surface density a just as at an 
outside point. This latter part arising from the system as a 
whole, omitting the local term depending on the molecular 
structure at the point considered, is thus quite definite *, and is 
named the magnetic force f^ or (a, /8, 7) ; it is the gradient 
of a potential V, which is that due to densities p and a as 
in the ordinary theory of the attraction of continuous mass- 
distributions. 

It now follows by the fundamental theorem of Laplace and 
Poisson, relating to the attractions of continuous distributions, 
that, except at an interface of sudden transition, 

da d/3 dy ^ . 
dx dy dz^ ^ 
, (dA dB dC\ 

^»^^^ P-'Kl^^Ty^dz)' 

Hence, by transposition, we have everywhere 

da db dc _ -. 
dx dy dz" ' 

where J8, or (a, 6, c), is equal to 

(a + 47rul, l3 + 4!7rB, y -{• inrC). 

Thus there enters into the theory this other fundamental vector 
23, named the magnetic induction, which has always the pro- 
perty of a stream, and which is connected with |^ and J by the 

vector relation 

J8 = |^ + 47rJ. 

In analytical processes, the fundamental independent variables 
should be the ones about which most is already known ; here 
they would be the magnetic force |^ which is a gradient, and 
the induction 23 which is a stream; from them would be 
derived, by means of the above relation, the polarization vector 
J which is unrestricted as to form. 

The intensity of polarity here denoted by 8 may consist of a 
permanent part J© aiid an induced part Jj. The law of induction 

* Cf. Phil. Trans, 1897 A, p. 233. The effort of Poissou to gain precision in 
this matter, occurring in the admirable summary of his theory in the intro- 
duction to the third memoir * Sur la Th^orie de magn^tisme en mouTement, ' 
1826, is BtiU instructive. 



a] . LAWS OF INDUCED POLARITY 259 

of polarity must be another relation connecting the induced part 
with either 23 or |^, whose actual form is to be determined by 
experiment, say it is I = lo +/(|^) ; as /(|^) is a definite 
function of |^, the case of hysteresis, where there is no definite 
connexion between |^ and J independent of the past history of 
the system, is here excluded. For small intensities of the 
inducing force, the function /(|^) will be simply proportional 
to 1^, so that J = lo + fc^ ; this, when expressed in terms of 
the fundamental vectors 23 and |^, assumes the form 

23=47r5o + (l-f47r/t)|^. 

The mathematical analysis of induced magnetization now 
proceeds in the ordinary manner : in the equation expressing in 
terms of |^ the condition of circuitality of 23 the value of |^ 
in terms of the potential V can be substituted, and a character- 
istic differential equation for V is thus obtained, which must in 
each particular problem be solved subject to the conditions of 
continuity of V and of the flux of 23 across all interfaces. 

It appears from the above that I, the moment per unit 
volume of the displacement of polarity, does not possess the 
stream property required for Maxwell's dielectric current in his 
electrodynamic theory; it is the other vector 28, or rather 
23/47r which is always equal to J + I^/^tt, that is in this re- 
spect the analogue of the total dielectric displacement of that 
theory. 

The electric theor}' is also in one respect more general. In 
magnetism only simple polarity is involved arising from separa- 
tion of complementary poles which is confined to the molecule : 
but in electricity there can also be distributions of single poles, 
infinitesimally smaller in total amount, constituting densities 
oifree electrification. If we imagined a volume density of free 
magnetism /^i, it would add to the ideal volume density p above 
determined, so that we should have finally 

da ^^ , ^ _ J 
dx dy dz^ ^^' 

which is the analogue of the electrostatic equation connecting 
the total electric displacement with the free electrification. 

17—2 



260 TRANSITION TO CONTINUOUS MECHANICAL THEORY [A 

6. Analytically, at a point inside a magnet there is no local 
term in the actual value of the potential of the magnetism; but 
the presence of relatively very great local elements in the 
summation which gives its value at any internal point prevents 
the force being derivable from that potential in the usual 
manner. That potential is in fact an actual physical instance 
of a function which is quantitatively continuous but not 
(practically) diflFerentiable** : whereas the potential of the 
equivalent Poisson distribution of density is (sensibly) quanti- 
tatively equal to it at each point, and is also difFerentiable, — is 
in fact (thus far) an analytical function while the former is not. 

But considerations of this kind are also logically necessary, 
even in the ordinary theory of gravitation. The gravitational 
potential of a system of molecules is a summation extended over 
the individual molecules, which is not an analytical function as 
regards its second differential coefficients; the value of one 



** 



It appears that these terms are not here used in the rigorous mathe- 
matical sense. To avoid infinite values at poles, consider, for definite illustra- 
tion, an assemblage of very small magnetically polarized spheres : when their 
number per unit volume is increased indefinitely and their size correspondingly 
diminished, the intensity of magnetization of each remaining the same, their 
magnetic potential in the spaces between them ultimately becomes an assignable 
continuous function. More precisely, its values along any Hue may be repre> 
sented by the ordinates of a curve, which is a smooth curve on which is super- 
posed an undulation of indefinitely small amplitude and wave-length, each of 
about the order of the distances between the spheres. In its gradient the 
amplitude of this zigzag that is thus superposed on the mean gradient curve 
will be finite, but its wave-length indefinitely small as before. Now we cannot, 
it is true, push on mathematically tc a limit, because molecular magnitudes are 
actually finite : yet if the unknown details of the molecular distribution cannot 
be eliminated, a mechanical theory of the properties of the medium is un- 
attainable. What is done above is to define the function corresponding to 
the smooth curve as the analytical potential, and to define its gradient as the 
magnetic force. What is meant in the text is that in passing towards the limit 
the practically imdeterminable minute local irregularities ultimately disappear 
from the potential, but become only more marked in its gradient. With the 
ideal continuity of an integral defined otherwise than as the limit of a process 
of this kind, and with the definite singularities which make a function non- 
analytical in the sense of exact Pure Mathematics, such as the precise but 
infinitely numerous oscillations of the function x sin x~^ in the neighbourhood 
of the origin, the principles of mathematical physics will possibly not be 
concerned; so that no confusion arises from the less definite use of terms in 
the text. 



a] mechanical potential defined 261 

of these at a point inside the mass depends on the actual 
distribution of the molecules adjacent to the point. But as 
the result of the process of integration, actually performed 
or implied, we replace the actual potential of the mole- 
cular distribution by an entirely analytical function quan- 
titatively equivalent to it, of which therefore the second 
differential coefficients are analytical : and it is this latter 
function V which is the real subject of the theory of the 
potential, and which is defined by the characteristic equation 
d^V/da^ -^ d^V/dy^ + d^Vjdz* = - 47rp, in which p is the averaged 
or smoothed out density of the molecular distribution. If on 
the other hand the distribution of density is entirely continuous, 
so that it has definite differential coefficients of all. orders, 
integrations by parts performed in the usual manner of Green's 
theorem remain legitimate when the point attracted is inside 
the mass, so that the actual potential also has definite differ- 
ential coefficients of all orders. The main problem of the 
transition from molecular to mechanical theory, which has 
presented itself several times in this book, is to determine 
the conditions under which an actual discrete or molecular 
distribution can be legitimately replaced by an analytically 
continuous one, that is the conditions under which the differ- 
ence between them has no mechanical import. 

Considerations of an analogous kind apply to the incomplete- 
ness of certain representations of a function by a Fourier series : 
the result is available quantitatively as regards the function 
itself and possibly its lower differential coefficients, but the 
equivalence does not extend to the higher ones. To turn this 
difficulty in physical problems, the method developed long ago 
by Sir George Stokes in his memoir on * The Critical Values 
of Sums of Periodic Series,* namely to obtain an independent 
Fourier expansion of each differential coefficient, involving 
explicit terms in the coefficients arising from each place of 
discontinuity, must be adopted. 

7. It is to be anticipated that considerations of conver- 
gency of the summations, similar to the above, will also arise 
with regard to the expressions for the electric and aethereal forces 



262 DIVEBGENCT OF MAGNETIC VECTOR POTENTIAL 

dynamically induced in an element of volume situated within a 
magnetic medium. Starting with a linear molecular electric 
current to represent the ultimate discrete element of magnetism, 
as is required by the dynamical theory, the vector potential 
(-F, (?, H), which was determined (§ 65) to be /(u, v, w) r~* dr, 
will have an x component arising from this element of magnet- 
ism, of amount %fr~^dx taken round the circuit of the molecular 
current i, which is by Stokes' theorem of transformation of 

d d^ 

ment and (Z, m, n) the direction vector of a flat barrier surface 
closing the circuit. Thus from the whole of the magnetism 
there arises in F the term 



integrals equal to i Mm -7 — ^j~) ^^^ dS, where dS is an ele- 



2i I — , equal to / ('S.imdS .-j l,tndS, -1 — j , 

that is. /(i^l.o|l)ix, 

which is accordingly as regards outside points the x component 
of the vector potential of the magnetism. But at a point 
inside the magnetism r can vanish in an element of this 
integral : and the summation over the electrons which then 
represents the value of this component F, though itself repre- 
sentable quantitatively by this integral, is yet as regards its 
differential coefficients dependent on the unknown distribution 
of the adjacent electrons. This is of course quite in keeping 
with the fact that the magnetic field inside the magnet, 
considered as due to the aggregate of the molecular magnetic 
elements, by means of which the vector potential is defined 
through the relation curl {F, (?, H) = {^, ^, ?) of § 55, itself 
involves this local distribution. But in the transition (§ 79) 
from a molecular to a mechanical theorv, we have been able 
to discard the local part of the magnetic force, depending on 
the molecular character of the distribution at the point, from 
which alone indefiniteness arises. It may be surmised that we 
should in like manner discard from the vector potential the 
purely local contribution which is the source of its discontinuity. 



a] modified mechanical form 263 

This may be eflfected as usual by aid of integration by parts. 
At a point inside a minute cavity in the material medium, 
F, 0, H and their first gradients can be represented analytically 
by integrals of the above tjrpe which are entirely convergent 
and determinate since r cannot be less than a finite lower 
limit in the integrals. On integration by parts each of these 
gradients is expressible as a volume integral together with an 
integral over interfaces of transition of the magnetism, and also 
an integral over the surface of the cavity : the volume integral 
is convergent and does not depend on the form of the cavity, 
while the integral over the surface of the cavity is finite and thus 
is the sole representative of the influence of the local molecular 
configuration ; in our present procedure it depends on the form 
of the cavity; in actuality, when the cavity is merely the 
interstitial space between the surrounding molecules, it thus 
depends on the local molecular configuration. By the general 
principle, the mechanically eSective functions are the analytical 
integrals obtained by excluding this undetermined local part. 
In the present case their values are found at once by trans- 
formation of the expressions for F, G, H^ by integration by 
parts, so that the local contribution may be isolated and 
omitted. This leads to an expression for the total vector 
potential of the medium treated as continuous, of type 

the molecular currents which constitute the magnetism not 
being now capable of inclusion in the volume-distribution 
(u, V, w). It has already been verified in § 67 that this formula 
gives curl {F, (j, H) = (a, 6, c). This vector potential is every- 
where continuous. So is its gradient except at surfaces of 
transition of the magnetism, at which the component of the 
gradient along the normal is discontinuous on account of the 
surface integral : it is easily deduced that the circumstances of 
the transition at such a surface are expressible by continuity of 
the tangential component of the magnetic force (a, ^, 7) and 
of the normal component of the magnetic induction (a, 6, c) : 
this is in fact the direct method of establishing those funda- 



264 VERIFICATION FOR A SPECIAL CASE [A 

mental relations in the dynamical theory (Ch. vi) of a medium 
constituted of aether and ions and treated as continuous. 

This determination of the value of curl {F, 0, H) forms the 
analytical coniirmation of the considerations in § 59 from which 
it was concluded that it is the magnetic induction that enters 
into the formula for the electric force. In that section it was 
explained that in estimating the mechanical force acting on the 
material medium, the part of the magnetic field which is of 
purely local origin should not be counted as contributing to the 
force on the electrons constituting the current in the element 
of volume, because its contribution will be cancelled by a reaction 
of the current on the magnetism in the element of volume. This 
mutual mechanical compensation of all internal actions in an 
element of volume is a corollary from the general principle of 
Action, which is taken to be fundamental and of universal 
application : it arises from the circumstance that the principle 
is expressible in terms of summation over the volume. Cf. also 
Appendix B, § 6. It is nevertheless desirable, for the sake of 
analytical precision and also for illustration of this principle, to 
point out where the reaction lies, iu each case where it is possible 
to do so. In the present case the local mechanical reaction of the 
current in the element of volume on the magnetism in the same 
element is involved in the formula of § 65* The magnetic field 
does not depend,a8 regards the numerical measure of its intensity, 
on the local distribution of the current : but its gradient, which 
enters into the force acting on the magnetism, does so, the 
integral expressing it in terms of the current not being con- 
vergent. In fact, the part of (a, /8, 7) depending on the current 

i'u 
is given by a = dH'jdy — dG'/dz where F' = I - dr, leading to 

w -^ — V -^] -dr in which the negative sign arises 

because the differentiation is now effected at the element of the 
integral instead of the point at which a' is estimated. Now this 
integral for a', or more strictly the summation over the individual 
discrete electrons for which it stands, is itself determinate 
irrespective of their local distribution, but its gradients, for 
* On p. 104, line 6 from bottom of page should he y {v - g) - p (w - h). 



a] pbincipal values of integrals 265 

example dct'/dxy are not so : each of them involves a part arising 
from purely local influence which will be discarded if we replace 

the expression for a! by the modified form a'=|(-i ^j"^''" 

together with an integral over surfaces of discontinuity of the 
current. It is the part thus removed that is the reaction to 
the influence of the magnetism in the element on the current 
in the element which was itself excluded by the general con- 
siderations in § 59. Thus in the expression for X in § 65, the 
value of (a, /8, 7) so far as it depends on the current must be 
that here given. 

The general conclusion may be expressed, in an adaptation 
of Cauchy's terminology, by the principle that whenever the 
integrals in the formulae for mechanical forces on a material 
medium cease to be convergent, their principal values must be 
substituted ff . 



8**. It has appeared (§ 70) as the result of an analysis in 
which each electron is separately accounted for as a singular 
point in the medium of propagation, namely in the free aether, 

-H* This statement may be considered to be the mathematical expression of 
the principle of the mataal compensation of molecular forcives, for which cf. 
Phil. Trans. 1897 A, p. 260. The principal value of Cauchy, as regards the com- 
pletel}' defined analytical integrals of Pure Mathematics, would be the value at 
the centre of a minute spherical cavity. But the quantities which, to avoid peri- 
phrasis, have here been called integrals, are really summations of contributions 
from finite though very small, and complexly constituted, polarized molecules : 
the distribution of these molecules that occupy our minute cavity is entirely 
unknown and may be continually changing, so that the only possible principal 
value is the one that omits the contribution of neighbouring molecules alto- 
gether. It is an assumption that the function under consideration can be 
expressed as the sum of a purely local term and a definite part arising from the 
system as a whole ; but in the special cases above considered this has been 
directly verified. If in any case it were not true, a dependence would be 
involved between mechanical change and molecular structure, so that 
mechanical causes would alter the constitution of the medium or even under- 
mine its stability ; whereas it is a postulate in ordinary mechanical theory that 
the physical properties of the medium are not affected by small forces. How 
far the impressed forces do actually thus operate can only be ascertained by 
actual trial in each case : even for the simpler cases in which the physical 
constants of the substance are definite functions of the strain, theory can 
hardly be more than a record of experimental fact. 



266 THE POTENTIAL TERM IX THE ELECTRIC FORCE [A 

that the term arising from the potential ^, which occurs in the 
expression for the electric force, is the statical force due to the 
instantaneous positions of the electrons. In fact an electron is 
a singular point in the aethereal displacement (/, gr, h\ such 
that over any region 

but 4.,ey_^--^; 

while j{lF + mG + nH) dS=0 

on account of the circuital property of (F, G, H) ; hence we 
have 

as the equation determining "9. It follows from it that V«S?^ 
vanishes everj'where in free aether, while "9 in approaching an 
electron e becomes infinite of the form 4eircf^elr : thus '9 is the 
electrostatic potential of the distribution of electricity. 

When the system is treated as a material medium in bulk, 
the effective density of the electric distribution is made up of 
p the density of the true charge of unpaired electric poles, 

and the density "-('j^+j+;7~) representing the electric 

polarization. Thus 

As all vectors such as (/, g, h) are now averaged into continuous 
functions as regards the medium in bulk, the left-hand side is 

equal to I (;7^ + 3^ + t" ) ^''" • ^^^ since the equality of the two 

sides is maintained whatever be the region of integration, and 
also/" =/+/', we derive MaxwelFs equation 

df" . dg" dh" _ 



a] it is the static potential of the charges 267 

This relation, for a material medium not in rapid motion, is the 
same as 

dx dy dz 
leading to 

d fr.d^\ d /r.d^\ . d fr^d^X 



dx\ dx) dy\ dy J dz \ dz 



dy\ dy J dz \ dz I 

2 ^ (dKF dKO ^ dKH\ 
"" '"^ '^ dt\ dx dy dz J' 

Thus in a heterogeneous dielectric the ordinary Maxwellian 
characteristic equation of this electric potential ^ is not now 
satisfied. Nor is it satisfied at the interface between two 
homogeneous dielectrics, the surface density a of true electrifi- 
cation being given by 

where N is the normal component of the force, so that 

where Ji is the normal component of {F, 0, H), 

It has in fact been usual to conclude from equations such 
as these that in the Maxwellian electrodynamics ^ is not the 
static potential of the electrification in the field. Whereas it 
here appears that it is merely the characteristic equation for "9 
in terms of the dielectric constants of the medium that has to 
be modified when the polarizing electric force is partly of 
electrodynamic origin. 



APPENDIX B 

ON THE SCOPE OF MECHANICAL EXPLANATION: AND ON 

THE IDEA OF FORCE 

1. The foundation of general mechanics, that is of the 
dynamics of material systems treated as continuous bodies 
instead of as molecular aggregates*, is formed by the following 
principles : 

(i) The principle of equilibrium of mechanical forces, 
giving rise to ordinary statics, which may be summed up, in 
the manner initiated by Galileo and Newton, and ultimately 
fully developed by Lagrange, in the formula of virtual work : 

(ii) The principle of d*Alembert, which asserts that the 
sensible motions of the mechanical system are an equivalent of 
the mechanical forces acting on it and in it ; that is, if we set 
down the effective forces which would directly produce these 
motions in the separate parts or differential elements of volume 
of the system, considered by themselves as individually con- 
tinuous but mutually disconnected, then for each part finite or 
infinitesimal of the system, these effective forces are the statical 
equivalent of the actual forces acting in or on that part either 
from a distance or through the adjacent parts. 

It is convenient to designate a force acting on a part of the 
mechanical system from without as an extraneous or impressed 
force, and the forces arising from mutual stresses acting 
between two material differential elements of it (adjacent or 
not) as internal forces. It is explained in the science of statics 
that internal forces enter into the equation of virtual work only 

* Cf. end of Appendix A; also Section II generally. 



b] generalized law of reaction 269 

when the bodily configuration of the system undergoes change 
in making the virtual displacement to which that equation 
refers : herein lies the physical importance and fundamental 
character of that principle, and also its power in the application 
to systems partially unknown. Thus if we choose to consider a 
material system at rest as divided into two parts, then inasmuch 
as the mechanical forces acting on the whole system are in 
equilibrium, it follows that the forces exerted by the first part 
on the second equilibrate those exerted by the second part on 
the first. This argument applies not only to the complete 
material system, but to any portion of it that is capable of 
separate continuous existence independently of the contiguous 
portions : such a portion may itself be imagined as divided into 
two parts and the same conclusion drawn. Thus we have as a 
corollary to the first principle, 

(i') The mechanical action and reaction between any two 
parts of a material system, which are capable of separate per- 
manent existence, must compensate each other, and therefore 
must have for their statical resultants equal and opposite 
wrenches (screw systems) on the same axial line. 

This is the only form of expression of Newton's Third Law 
of Motion that admits of direct objective interpretation. The 
first and second of Newton's Laws of Motion are from our 
present standpoint descriptions of the course of mechanical 
phenomena which apply to the simpler cases. The scheme of 
laws which sufficed for the purposes of the Prindpia has in 
course of time gradually been broadened and developed by applic- 
ation to problems involving continuous bodies, of ever widening 
generality, until, mainly in Lagrange's hands, the science of 
Mechanics has again been reduced to a condensed and definite 
law of sequence in phenomena, in the form of the principle 
of Least Action. It is customary to deduce this general 
principle of Action from the simple Newtonian laws, by aid of 
an assumption that each of the material bodies is constituted 
of particles which act on each other with definite positional 
forces: but this by itself forms an extremely inadequate 
representation of the actual kinetic molecular structure of 
bodies. 



270 SCOPE AND PRIORITY OF STATICS [B 

2. The subject matter of the science of the statics of 
mechanical systems is thus definitely marked out : it consists 
partly in the mathematical Terification of the equilibrium when 
the mechanical forces acting on and in the system, supposed of 
permanent configuration for the time being, are known; but 
more often it involves the mathematical determination of 
the existence and characteristics of forces of t\*pes not amen- 
able to direct experiment, as derived from the conditions of 
their equilibration with other forces that are known. Inasmuch 
as the latter is the main aim, statics forms a branch of physical 
science, and is not wholly a mere geometrical calculus of forces. 

In the general kinetics of mechanical systems the role is 
more complex. It is an easy matter, — or rather one fr^ee from 
any perplexity — to set down the eftective forces that would be 
competent to produce directly the motions of the separate 
differential mechanical elements* of the system. These have 
to be equated to the actual forces acting on and in the s^'stem, 
of which the specification is a matter of greater nicety. Not to 
mention elastic stresses between strained parts of solid systems, 
whose theoretical development belongs to statics, there are 
cases in which the relative motions of the parts introduce 
passive reactions of frictional type whose nature and measure 
have to be elucidated as a preliminary to more refined applica- 
tions of the dynamical theory. In most such cases it turns out 
that we cannot have a mechanical theory at all, except as a 
first approximation in those problems in which, the viscous 
forces being small, we can take them to be proportional to 
their originating circumstances ; and a similar remark applies 
in fact also to statical elastic theory f. 

Thus in the elementary development of mechanics, we begin 

* It may be well to recaU that by a mechaDical element is meant the matter 
in an element of volame, considered as a permanent aggregate, without 
reference to its constituent molecules. 

t It may not be superfluous to remark that a theory of transmission of stress 
in elastic matter exists in the ordinary sense, which considers the action of the 
surrounding medium on any given element of it as constituted solely of tractions 
over its surface, only because the range of the molecular forces of cohesion is 
very smaU compared with the dimensions of an element of volume which can be 
efleotiyely treated as infinitesimal. 



b] idea of force fundamental 271 

by forming the conception of a force, and formulating the 
principles that govern it in cases sufficiently simple to be 
amenable to exact observation and analysis : then by the appli- 
cation of these principles to more complex problems their scope 
is gradually widened, and it may be that they become less 
definite, while the conception of force is itself extended, until a 
stage arrives when a concise abstract restatement in more 
general terms of the principles of the whole subject is possible. 
All through this process, cases crop up in which the previously 
ascertained types of forces can only account for the observed 
motions by the help of new forces acting in definite ways, and 
these are henceforth to be reckoned with in causal connexion 
with the changes of configuration and motion taking place 
under all similar circumstances: thus there is continual addition 
being made to the types of forces which objectively exist. 
There are also other problems in which, when all known definite 
types are taken into account, additional forces are still needed 
in order to account for the phenomena, which we are unable to 
bring into any uniform causal relation except possibly of the 
roughest character with the bodily state of the system. In 
such cases the limits, for the time being, of exact mechanical 
science have been reached : an infinite intelligence that knew 
all about the constitution of the system (considered as made up 
of dead matter wholly controlled by physical law) might still be 
imagined as able to predict its future course, but to do so com- 
pletely would probably require an amount of knowledge of its 
molecular details which transcends the limits of mechanics as 
here defined. 

3. The foundation on which the whole subject is developed 
lies in the notion of forces. As mechanics took its origin in the 
equilibration of tendencies to motion of the various types that 
can be recognized, its chief concept lay to hand in muscular 
effort, which suggested a common standard of measurement. 
To make use of this concept for scientific purposes, precision in 
the method of measurement is, as usual, all that was required : 
theoretically a pull or a push can be measured to any degree of 
accuracy by the extension of a spring, or by use of the principle 



272 METHOD IN MOLECULAR DYNAMICS [b 

of the lever, and the notion is thos ready for scientific develop- 
menL To say, as is sometiines done, that force is a mere 
figment of the imagination which is usefiil to describe the 
motional changes that are going on around us in Nature, 
is to assume a scientific attitude that is appropriate for an 
intelligence that surveys the totality of things: but a finite 
intellect, engaged in spelling out the large-scale permanences of 
relations in material phenomena, is not cognizant of the bulk of 
these ultimate motions at all, and must supply the defect by 
the best apparatus of representation of the regular part of 
their effects that is in his power. When a person measures the 
steady pull of his arm by the extension of a spring, where or 
what, for example, are the motions of which the pull is only a 
mode of representation ? The only way of gradually acquiring 
knowledge as to what they are, is to develope and make use of 
all the exact concepts that examination of the phenomena 
suggests to the mind. And in any case it is not the motions 
that are the essential factors, so much as the permanent entities 
of which the motions merely produce rearrangement. 

Theoretical mechanics is thus an abstract science engaged 
in the application to natural phenomena of principles which are 
themselves in a state of development, mainly as regards detail, 
arising from the gradual reclamation of an empirical fringe 
surrounding the settled domain of the science. This fringe 
now extends a long way into molecular phenomena as dis- 
tinct from mechanical, chiefly in the regions of the theory of 
gases and of radiant and electrical actions. Here progress has 
been effected mainly by transferring to the molecule, considered 
as itself a material system, dN^namical ideas the same as or 
analogous to those that hold good in the mechanics of sensibly 
continuous bodies. But it is only the broad outlines of mechanic- 
al notions that can really be so applied, such for instance as 
Newton's laws were constructed to cover, involving only inertia 
and forces with reference to particles. And the reason why 
progress is possible at all is that the individual molecule is not 
an isolated thing, like one of Leibnitz s monads, jostling among 
its neighbours, but a nucleus in that universal aethereal plenum 
which is the transmitter of half our impressions, so that we can 



b] confined to large-scale uniformities 278 

learn about the phenomena of the individual molecule from 
the messages which are transmitted from the crowd of similar 
molecules to our senses through the aether. 

This gradual development of mechanical principles is far 
from being terminated : yet no advance in method once gained 
is ever lost, though it will in time be transfigured into more 
perfect shape. There will always be an exact science of 
dynamics that will be rigorous within its own domain, 
in which domain alone — for the very reason that we are 
instructed by the science — we are able to take exact note 
of the more recondite uniformities of the complex of phenomena. 
But the greater part of these uniformities will always be 
beyond our ken : and it would not be legitimate to entertain 
any idea that, because our dynamical procedure has been an 
effectual means of mental coordination of physical events that 
are on a large and regular scale and of cognate types, it is 
therefore possible to lay down a finite scheme of principles by 
which the whole future course of inanimate material phenomena 
can be in any way reduced to rule. 

3**. Nothing has been said here with regard to the frame 
with reference to which the motions of the parts of the system 
are to be specified. Philosophically we are accustomed to the 
standpoint that the motion of a body is unintelligible except in 
reference to some other body : yet in the formulation of dynamics 
the first thing that is done is to specify the motion of a body 
without any explicit reference to this other body, and this 
mode of procedure is not likely to be changed except perhaps 
superficially. If we adopt any aether theory, and so hold that 
material interactions take place in a plenum, it is unreasonable 
to suppose that this medium is disturbed except in the neigh- 
bourhood of the matter, and there is no occasion to try to 
change the dynamical procedure: for the absolute frame of 
reference to which motions are referred {ultimate firame is a 
better term, as it avoids the metaphysical suggestion) is the 
one determined by the distant undisturbed regions of the 
aether. A position of this kind does not in any way avoid a 
metaphysical or psychological analysis of the nature of space 
L. 18 



274 ACTION PRINCIPLE FOR RELATIVE MOTIONS [B 

and motion, but afibrds a reason why dynamical science is 
not required to pause until agreement on such questions 
is attained. 

It is worthy of notice that in certain cases the method of 
reducing the number of coordinates, introduced by Bouth and 
Kelvin, allows the application of the Action principle to the 
direct determination of the motion of a system relative to one 
of its constituent bodies. When we consider the motion relative 
to one of the bodies of the system, the additional coordinates 
entering into the Lagrangian function, which specify the actual 
motion of that body of reference, may be of the kind that can 
be ignored or eliminated by that procedure. Now the intrinsic 
internal forces of the system cannot depend on these coordinates, 
which represent its position in space but not its form : hence 
when they appear only through their velocities in the kinetic 
energy of the system, they can be eliminated. This condition 
is satisfied when the motion of the body of reference is one of 
translation, or is such a motion combined with rotation which 
is restricted to be about an axis fixed in direction* : thus it 
holds good for all two-dimensional problems: but when the 
rotational motion is unrestricted, its kinetic energy involves 
absolute angular coordinates as well as their velocities, and the 
independent determination of the relative motion is no longer 
possible. In the cases specified we can form a modified 
Lagrangian function T' — W for the system, involving only 
the relative coordinates, in terms of which the dynamical 
equations of the relative motion can be expressed in the form 
h\{T - F') d< = : in such a case T and W might be desig- 
nated as the kinetic and potential energies of the system 
relative to the body considered. 

But it is in all cases legitimate to refer the motion of the 
system to a frame, or set of axes, moving in any prescribed 
manner in space : for in the application of the Action principle 
the equations of constraint expressing the configuration in 
terms of the independent coordinates may involve the time 
explicitly. 

"^ For particular examples, of. Roath, * Stability of Motion/ p. 67. 



b] kirchhoff's formulation 275 

4. The science of Mechanics on its dynamical side thus 
treats of the relations of the motions of material bodies to the 
forces which produce them, while on the statical side it treats 
of relations of equivalence and of equilibrium between systems 
of forces. On the other hand it is not unusual to define a force 
in terms of the motion it produces in a material body : so that 
we become liable to the criticism that the development of 
relations between the forces and the motions of material 
systems is only a roundabout way of giving a mere description 
of the courses of the motions themselves. The subject of 
mechanical dynamics would then be reduced to the description 
of the sequence of the motions of material bodies: the notion of 
force would be a definition, and statics would be replaced by a 
theory of relations between mental concepts. On this view of 
Mechanics, which has always been more or less in evidence, but 
which is usually specially associated by continental writers 
with the name of KirchhoflF, the subject of the science is 
expressed in a more ultimate and ambitious manner as the 
formulation of the laws of the natural sequence of the motions 
of inanimate material systems: and the most scientific formula- 
tion of it would be one which deals solely with those motions 
and the simultaneous configumtions of the system. Lagrange, 
in one of his earliest and most important memoirs*, had already 
established an ideally perfect foundation for the science fi*om 
this point of view, in his extension of the principle of Least 
Action to general mechanical systems. That principle in one of 
its forms asserts that, however complex the system may be, — 
provided it is self-contained and conservative in the sense that 
the forces depend only on its actual configuration and therefore, 
by the fuDdamental induction of the conservation of energy, are 
derived from a potential energy function — the natural course of 
its motion from a configuration .4 to a configuration B is one 
which makes the time-integral of the difference between its 
kinetic and potential energies stationary as regards slight 
variations of the path of the system between these configura- 

* ** Essai d'ane Nonvelle Mithode ponr ditermiiier les maxima et les minima 
dee formoles int^grales indSfinies," ** Applioation de la m^thode pr6c6deiite k la 
solution de diil^rens probldmes de Dynamiqae." Mimoiret de Turin, 1760-61. 

18—2 



: it iht eaa- 




of the 

t&aS ifacR BAT iksL W 

ifiigktif <IMaiatt cxweks 4f Twrinf micbj* kcv««A tfte^ 



Tot T^T-^Tiy** is in.T^'Wft the ixBuiIi& ^jf 
kueSD^ tUMsgj m tike iscm tkbS ue f<n& of fik^ kxaecair aad 
yr^*«gy^ €fler2>» roKXK qinfinff t&nKigfeac ck^ ^inzasiock of 
th^ BkTXiQii: dftKS » hov^vigr a <tz&z?BS ^hmf firam JBSBi»tiBi|^ 
dtait is TVflwAF* sbe prindple of dfee CocusenssaaK oi Emsrjy 
or eixnpieie Birgarirtit of popefioaL BK»c»Mft. vfakk 3« alreadj 
fRraoalj i&TolTed in dtie asiatua of (he ezK^ence of a 
p9<«ssxai akeigj fimcdun*^. Hiie «Sa&eBKat of (he priiKxpie 
■ajr kyvener be extended so a» to be iadefieMknt of tbas 
m(nctirAi c*> cooserfatiTe srsceflK. b^ i n riu i Liiy in tbe eqiia- 
tkn of Tanadon the vork of anj o4iier impressed ixces^ either 
cxSfaaeoQ:* or interaaL duu are hoc airsadr involred in the 
poce&tiai eLexgj: it » then the tanatioa of the Priacipal 
FsnetkA for anj Tirtnal dssptacement of the coarse of mocioa, 

CHt aciaf aus ia vnich shcsc ■ a iirmfcir of "kaitte foci' € on|a ^B— to J« 

dtt fj«cBi. Tbea if C :« aa mm mad ir< o uniniiran i iw » wkiek rhm is «» 
focn eaLTSfSte ftus« CB. the Acsaaa siooc XB s fraaaK thaa that alua^ ^C, 
lad CJ;. wii«f« tbeK a» cvc iT*gp»r pASh* sBxtz^ as abj co a%m aaaa C^ 
fvry acAT tc C. Ttaaaao. aad Tail, .ViU. /"%«:. | SM. la tW cmc oC a i^ ma 
•< cfCicml rari dL^fvcpa^ fircn ^. aiki sisbittttij ««**^» WtPwa C aiBii B-^ t^ 
■riBrifrg fazui e^srnikBi; guswcneftl condiiriao ai thtf tbt vaw^^onK as C, 
kcicefXBir to a vrnvc-tnia firora J, iliall W vboQr eoovcx ta^ai J a the aids B of 
iliaanulCB. 

^* Tjui nitiiitMi rcaOy Tini that the p"^***^|J^ of 
f»rm, u apyiif M# only to a qritem 

tti Mq aeae g of copfignraiMP* h i nwiiiTih ky 

be Rstond to OBJ fn««MM Mate ^ pB«^ 

of its 




b] rolling motions not fundamental 277 

together with the virtual work of these additional forces in that 
displacement, that is to vanish. In this form the application 
of the principle is universal, subject to the one restriction that 
the configuration of the system is always completely expressible 
in terms of the system of coordinates that is employed, without 
requiring the introduction of their time-fluxions, and that these 
coordinates are themselves independent: but on the other hand 
the idea of force has been imported into it. The restriction on 
the coordinata**, just mentioned, is a very important one, as it 
excludes from the principle most rolling motions of rigid bodies : 
one of the relations by which the number of coordinates would 
be in such a case reduced to that just sufficient to specify the 
configuration, without the redundance which would be fatal to 
their mathematical independence, is that of equality of the 
tangential velocities of the two rolling bodies at their point of 
contact, and this relation would involve in its expression the 
velocities or time-fluxions aforesaid. In such cases we must 
avoid restricting the motion by relations of this sort; it is 
therefore necessary to introduce new coordinates equal in 
number to the relations so ignored; but we must then introduce 
into the Action formula, along with the other extraneous forces 
if any, undetermined parameters representing the equal and 
opposite forcives which act between the rolling bodies at their 
places of contact, or in connexion with whatever additional 
modes of freedom are thus contemplated. The vanishing of 
the variation in this more general form, when the virtual dis- 
placement of the motion is extended so as to include sliding, 
will then determine the general course of the system, the 
tangential force being determined at the end of the process so 
as to satisfy the kinematic condition of absence of sliding*. 

* Hertz, in his poethnmous *Prinoipien der Mechanik,' saw in this ex- 
clusion of pure rolling a reason for refusing to base general mechanics on the 
Action principle, as being devoid of the requisite generality: and his book is 
chiefly occupied with the quest of another principle to take its place. Against 
this view it may be urged that the notion of rolling is foreign to molecular 
dynamics, on which the laws of mechanical djmamlcs must be ultimately based. 
The criticism has also been made that the principle of Least Action cannot be 
philosophically fundamental, inasmuch as it determines the present course of 
the system by a reference to its future as well as to its past: this objection will 



278 SOURCE OF PHYSICAL CONCEPTS [B 

5. This sketch indicates how far it is possible to eliminate 
force as an independent concept from the treatment of mechanics: 
it shows that we can do so only in the case of non-dissipative 
systems, and then only when there are no rolling motions. 
But, on the other hand, it would be a misfortune to banish the 
idea of force even if we could. Any definition that would 
merely make it a subjective cause of motion is incomplete : the 
concept is required for the expression of properties of permanent 
groupings of natural phenomena, and in that sense is as much 
objective as anything else. When we hang up a given weight 
on a spring balance the extension of the balance is always the 
same, subject to permanence of locality and other assignable 
conditions, and whenever we see the spring so extended we infer 
at once that it is supporting an equal weight or else doing some- 
thing equivalent : we say that it is exerting a certain definite 
force. It would of course be useless to introduce this concep- 
tion of force if the uniformity of the course of Nature did not 
hold to the extent here described. But as it does hold, the 
force is the concept that allows us to eliminate the consideration 
of the complex of changes of molecular states and motions that 
is involved in the extension of the spring, of which we know 
nothing except that they are for our purposes the same in each 
case. In the mechanics of permanent material bodies the idea 
of force is thus essential in order to avoid wholly unknown 
molecular considerations: it results from and is the sufficient 
expression of d}mamical permanence and the extent to which it 
is known from experience to exist in similar cases : in the 
absence of this concept there would exist dynamics of molecular 
systems, but there could be no mechanics of finite bodies. In 
a purely analytical formulation, force would now be defined as 
a coefficient in the variation of the mechanical part of the 
Action. In so far as this point of view is admitted, it will 

be removed if we bear in mind that the complete system is of very complex 
molecular constitntion, and that the principle of Action is reaUy only an 
algorithm constmcted so as to enable us to abstract the molecular details while 
retaining all that relates to the matter in bulk. A similar remark applies to 
the principle of virtual work, which is included as a special case in the wider 
principle of Action. Of. §§ 6 — 8 infra. 



b] their dependence on observation 279 

follow that the notion of any special * relativity of force ' is the 
result of a misapprehension. 

On the other hand, if the idea of force had not been supplied 
to us ready formed, through our muscular sense, we can con- 
ceive that the science of Mechanics must have begun with the 
dynamics of molecular systems, and the forces between per- 
manent finite bodies would have been discovered and defined as 
new physical conceptions simplifying the theoretical discussions 
and related to the degree of permanence of the systems : the 
conception of potential in electrostatics is actually one of this 
kind : so is that of temperature, which also was early developed 
because our sense of heat supplied it ready formed. There is a 
whole series of such conceptions, derived in part from theory 
and in part from experiment, on which the structure of electric- 
al science rests: moreover these are not to be resolved into 
ultimate elements by the easy process of talking about mole- 
cules and the forces acting between them : for they involve the 
aether as well as the molecules, which perhaps would not 
matter but for the fact that they involve it in such a way that 
it makes an important difference to them whether the matter 
is at rest or in rapid motion through the aether. The ideal logical 
method of developing them would be to begin with the com- 
plete system of aether plus discrete molecules, and afterwards 
deduce the concepts and laws which apply to the mechanical 
system of aether plits matter specified by its properties in bulk. 
It is only however by the process of trial and error, in con- 
junction with generalizations derived from the experimental 
scrutiny of matter, that we can safely learn to include in this 
discussion the part of molecular relations that is essential and 
permanent for the field of phenomena in view, and to omit the 
other part that does not bear on them : and it is in this way, 
under the constant guidance of observation and experiment, 
that the dynamical side of abstract physical theory advances. 

6**. Molecular Basis of General Dynamics, — When once 
it is allowed that the seat of the activity, in dynamical phe- 
nomena, is the pervading aether, it readily follows, from the 
equation of Action 8/(7— Tr)d^=0 which determines thesequence 



no IDEAL AEIHEKEAL BASIS FOB DTSAMICS [B 

<4 iiUte6 of that medioni, thst 7+ IT is* equid to i?, m c oi w ta ni 
Bft regards time fi>r ao j region of it doc onder external infloeooes^ 
which is called the enetgy. Br analytical tnuisfiormation this 
aethereal energr may be expresssed a$ in the main attached to 
the molecoks of the material system : and viien it is finally 
tnnsfimned partly into a mechanical specification depending 
on the configaiation and motion of the matter in balk, partly 
into an irre^Ur residue of oooooidinated molecolar modons or 
heat, and partly into internal or chemical and radiant energy of 
these molecules iodividuallv, we arrive at a ratiomale of the 
principle of the conserration of total energy such as has been 
formulated as a result of universal experience. 

Id preparing this general Action equation, thus supposed 
given in its exact and fundamental molecular form, for mechanical 
applications, it is obviously incumbent to introduce all the co- 
ordinates of the system, regarded as matter in bulk, that are 
available: when this has been completely accomplished the 
remaining independent translational coordinates belong^ing to 
the individual atoms will be of rapidly fluctuating sign. The 
variation conducted with regard to the former mechanical 
coordinates should now lead to dynamical equations for the 
mechanical system. In these equations each molecular co- 
ordinate, wherever it appears, may be replaced by its mean value 
zero, as also may its velocity, and acceleration, while the squares 
and products of such quantities may be replaced by mean 
values. But this process ought, in so &r as a mechanical 
analysis is possible, to be performable* equally well in the 

* This will involve a restriction on the form of T. If ^ represent a 
mechanical coordinate and ^ a refiidnal molecular one, the types of terms 
that can come into T are incloded in 

[0^]^, [0^]^, [^]M 
where [0^] represents a mixed function of the two kinds of coordinates. For 
the interchange of order of these operations to be possible, namely of the 

Lagrangian operation — and the process of averaging, it is neoessazr 

dt dip dip 

that the third type of term should be restricted to the form [^] ^^. Under 

the circumstances of Appendix F, the kinetic energy of a molecule is of type 

)£m (i'+y' + i^ where m is a constant for each primordial atom: the energy 

will then be transformable into the type thus restricted, and the condition will 

be satisfied. 



b] separation of the mechanical action 281 

formula for the Action before the variation takes place; and 
the result of it will then be the expression for the mechanical 
Lagrangian function of the system T' — IT', from which the 
mechanical energy-function E' may be derived by a change of 
sign of the terms not involving velocities. The variation of the 
Action with regard to the individual purely molecular coordinates 
would not in any case usually lead to results lying within the 
range of experience, so that our want of knowledge of the form 
of the Lagrangian function in this respect is not material. But 
the mode of execution of the mechanical variation here described 
assumes that the mean squares of the molecular coordinates and 
velocities, for the smallest time that is sensible, are steady 
throughout the motion, or throughout that part of it which is 
for the purpose in hand treated by itself; this implies that the 
system is not undergoing constitutive change and that it is 
in a steady thermal state: the effect of change in either of 
these respects is to produce continual alteration of the co- 
efficients in the mechanical energy-function*. 

This analytical formulation of mechanical dynamics is there- 
fore an ideal limit, applicable to systems which are molecularly 
steady, or conservative, for the kind of motions under consider- 
ation, so that the system can always theoretically be restored to 
any previous state by mechanical means alone : in other systems 
the separation of a mechanical part of the Action is not possible, 
or is a sensibly imperfect process which may be empirically 
amended by the introduction of new forces, of frictional or other 
irreversible type, suggested by observation and experiment. In 
other words, there can be no question of demonstrating the 
principle of Action for any existing system, but rather of 
examining the course of a limited number of particular 
dynamical processes in such a system in order to form a judg- 
ment as to whether, as regards the totality of its mechanical 
relations, it may be included with sufficient approximation in 
this ideal conservative type+. 

* Cf. Lioaville*B problem of the dynamics of a solid body which is cou- 
tracting owing to loss of heat. 

t The manner in which the application of this mechanical principle, once 
admitted, is to be conducted, cannot even now be more perfectly expressed than 



282 THERMODYNAMICS A BRANCH OF STATICS [B 

7 •*. Molecular Basis of Themiodynamics, — The Lagrangian 
dyDamics of mechanical systems is thus involved an its entirety 
in the molecular foundation from which we have started, namely, 
the djmamical equations of the free aether combined with the 
present conception of molecules, provided the molecular state 
of the system is steady : but the principle of Action can effect 
nothing for us in the matter of the sequence of individual 
molecular changes because the number of independent mole- 
cular coordinates transcends all calculation or even conception. 
The foundation of thermodynamics must thus be formulated 
in some other way : and this will be made easier if we first 
realize, in concise abstract statement, what are the principles 
in that subject which are to be explained. 

Beyond any doubt, the fundamental thermodynamic relation 
is the law of equality of temperatures, which asserts that when 
a heterogeneous material system is in a steady condition there 
is a function of the physical state, definite and assignable for 
each kind of matter and each element of the system, called the 
temperature, which has the same value throughout it. When 
this is not constant throughout there will be molecular changes 
of a non-oscillatory character, involving transference of energy 
from a part of the system in which the temperature is higher 
to adjacent parts in which it is lower. This finite transference 
of energy, which is the one tangible result as regards matter in 

in Green's original discussion in the introdaction to his memoir ' On the 
Beflexion and Refraction of Light/ Camb. Trans* Dec. 1837. The fundameDtal 
analysis by Sir Oeorge Stokes ' On the theories of the Internal Friction of Fluids 
in Motion, and of the Equilibrium and Motion of Elastic Solids/ Camb, Trau$. 
April 1845, does not detract from the present argument : the main question 
there is as to the possible physical grounds for the relation imposed by Poisson 
on the two elastic constants in Oreen's potential energy formula : it would 
appear that any settling of the molecules in a strained body towards a new 
configuration, such as that there contemplated in § 19* must involve some 
orderly process in so far as it can play a part towards determining the values of 
the elastic constants which belong to the element of volume of the material. 
There is however one way in which the uncoordinated local molecular motions 
can affect the physical constants of the material, namely, through their 
aggregate which determines the temperature : an example is the effective 
elasticity of the air for sound waves of rapid period : to obtain the complete 
formulation for such cases thermodynamic considerations must be included as 
in the following section. 



b] temperature physically defined 283 

bulk in a permanent state, is known as transfer of heat, and 
heat is in fact objectively measured directly as energy. What 
has here been called the law of equality of temperatures asserts 
that if there are three bodies A, B, C, so that J. is in contact 
with B along an interface and also B with C, each in thermal 
equilibrium, then when B is removed and A and C moved into 
contact without alteration of their molecular states, they will 
remain in thermal equilibrium. A reason must be assignable 
for this law, which is by no means formally necessary. It follows 
however from Maxwell's fundamental remarks on the possibility 
of establishing diflFerences of temperature merely by the aid of 
constraint applied to the individual molecules, that a purely 
dynamical explanation is not possible, that it is really a question 
involving the average state of a large number of molecules. 
Suppose now that our three bodies A,ByC are enclosed in an 
adiabatic envelope : if the law of equality of temperature do not 
hold, we can by a series of alterations of their mutual contacts 
(which may be imagined as set going permanently by an auto- 
matic arrangement) cause a redistribution of their internal 
molecular energy at each operation, and by suitable mechanical 
arrangement we can during each redistribution guide some of 
it off to be added to the mechanical stock of energy outside the 
envelope. These mechanical operations may be conceived to go 
on, involving gradual transformation of the molecular energy of 
the system into mechanical energy outride, until possibly a 
stage arrives at which the law of equality of temperatures holds 
good inside the enclosure : and then the process stops. But we 
have only to enlarge our system by connecting it thermally 
with some other system, to start the process again. Thus 
unless the law of equality of temperature in steady states holds, 
it will be theoretically possible by automatic mechanical arrange- 
ments and with systems in a steady state, to convert a finite 
fraction of the molecular energy within our reach into mechanical 
energy. The negation of this possibility carries with it the law 
under consideration : and this negation can only rest broadly on 
the discrete character of matter which makes the frittering 
away of mechanical motions into irregular molecular ones a 
natural process, but effectually prohibits on any realizable scale 



284 AVAILABLE ENERGY FUNDAMEXTAL [B 

the reverse process. The law of temperature then stands on 
this basis alone. There are it is true cases in which alteration 
of the contacts does involve redistribution of the molecular 
energy, those namely in which the new contacts allow chemical 
or constitutive change to begin : such change must be excluded 
in the statement of the thermal proposition, which relates only 
to the irregular translational and rotational energy of the mole- 
cules that is not bound up with their chemical coustitution'f. 
The law should thus rather be stated in the less definite form 
that wherever a difference of temperature is maintained between 
two portions of matter in contact with each other, a special cause 
for it must be assignable : and this will be in keeping with its 
origin as a physical conception rather than a djmamical principle. 

As regards the physical nature of this quantity temperature, 
it is clearly related to the squares of the molecular velocities, 
which is another reason why it cannot have any direct con- 
nexion with the dynamical coordinates of the system. 

If the foundation of the law of temperature on this basis 
is allowed, the same mode of argument will carry us much 
further. Consider the system as before in its adiabatic en- 
closure : if physical or constitutive changes of state in it ai-e 
possible, they will not occur when their result would be to 
increase the mechanically available part of the energy of the 
system*: the states of mere equilibrium of the system, that 
is of in6nite slowness of incipient change, are therefore the 
ones in which the available energj- is stationary as regards all 
infinitesimal changes: the states of stability are those for 
which the available energy is an actual minimum. The 
available energy belonging to a definite state of a given piece 
of matter is a function of that state alone, determined by the 
amount of mechanical work that can be, theoretically, gained 
in the transition in a mechanically reversible manner to some 
standard state of the same portion of matter. In the state- 

t An enclosed region of free aether might he taken as one of the bodies of 
the Hystem, its temperature heing defined in terms of the (extremely small) 
density of the vibrational energy that pervades it. 

* Bayleigh, ' On the Dissipation of Energy/ Proc, Royal Institution, 1875 : 
* Collected Papers,* i, p. 240. Cf. also Hankine, * Scientific Papers,' p. sn^ 
1863. 



b] mechanical analogies 285 

ment of the principle we may get rid of the adiabatic enclosure, 
and simply say that for stability of the system the mechanic- 
ally available part of the energy must be a minimum for 
given amount of total energy. This available energy is the 
characteristic function of Willard Gibbs : and the statement 
here made is the most complete as well as direct form of the 
second principle of thermodynamics. The main business of 
that science is the gradual determination, by experimental aid, 
of expressions for the amounts of available energy inherent in 
different kinds and states of matter : this is a process which 
will still be progressive, as new modes of availability are con* 
tinually recognized, and in which rigorous finality is not to be 
expected : for instance, if an apparent violation of this second 
principle of thermodynamics is observed, through apparent 
spontaneous increase of availability in one direction, search 
must be made for an unrecognized availability of some other 
kind which is diminished by at least an equal amount*. 

In this view of the origins of thermodynamic doctrine, no 
special rdle has been assigned to steady gyrostatic motions such 
as could be eliminated from analytical dynamical theory by the 
process of Routh and Lord Kelvin. The invocation of con- 
cealed steady motion, or gyrostatic relations, towards the 
dynamical explanation of physical phenomena, has been promin- 
ent all through Lord Kelvin's writings, a notable instance 
being that of magnetic optical rotation, which so strongly im- 
pressed Maxwell's mind. In this and other cases (e.g. the 
explanation of elasticity) it was always a definite dynamical 
action that was to be accounted for. But more recently von 
Helmholtz has made a sustained attempt to elucidate the 
dynamical laws of heat by making heat analogous to the energy 
of concealed motions, treated on this basis of a modified 
Lagrangian function. His analogies in this direction obtained 
an amount of success which has been variously estimated. 
They represent the standpoint of ideal molecules with gyro- 
static quality, linked with each other through a finite number 
of mechanical connexions rather than influencing each other 

* For further development on these lines cf. Phil, Trans, 1897 A, pp. 260 sqq. 



ILLUSTRATION FROM OSMOTIC ENERGY 287 

er dilution by addition of more of the solvent will merely 
ate these molecular aggregates in space without interfering 
the constitution of any of them : thus the change of the 
anical energy which arises from further dilution is then 
tendent of the kind of matter involved, and can depend 
on the number of molecules of the dissolved substance per 
volume, being the same for all systems which agree in this 
ct. One such system is an ideal gas, in which the mole- 
are supposed to be, for practically all the time, outside 
others' sphere of influence, there being now no solvent : it 
ITS that the osmotic pressure of the molecules of the dis- 
d substance against an internal partition, permeable to the 
nt but not to them, is the same as if they existed in the 
of an ideal gas at their actual density and temperature*. 
,n be urged that these considerations amount to demon- 
ion rather than explanation, that they compel assent rather 
satisfy the mind : indeed the nature of the validity of this 
remarkable generalization was in doubt for years after 
rimental facts had compelled its recognition by van 't HofT. 
in fact similar considerations enter in forming the me- 
Lcal energy function of any material system : if the system 
t dissipative, i.e. if it does not gradually run down in the 
le of mechanical transformations, it must have a mechanical 
i^y function : the form of this function cannot be derived 
its molecular constitution, of which we shall possibly 
r obtain sufficient knowledge for such an application, but 
indirect reasoning guided by observed mechanical pro- 
68 of the system. Thus practically, in Newton's words, 
vhole problem of Natural Philosophy is concerned in this, 
k phaenomenis motuum investigemus vires naturae, deinde 
is viribus demonstremus phaenomena reliqua.' 

•**. It would appear (p. 260) that there can be an 
nited amount of molecular structure and function in a 
1 system, which is unconnected with any mechanical effect 
rring in that system treated as continuous matter. This 
3cause, whether we view it as an independent principle 

♦ Of. Proc. Camb. Phil Soc. Jan. 1897 : Phil. Tram. 1897 A, p. 276. 



286 ENERGY NOT AN ULTIMATE CONCEPT [B 

through the aethereal medium : and for such a definite system 
they would explain the thermod)mamic8 of reversible processes 
in which there is absorption but not dissipation of energy. 

8**. One effect of admitting a molecular s^^nthesis of 
dynamical principles such as the one here described is to depoee 
the conception of energy from the fundamental or absolute status 
that is sometimes assigned to it; if a molecular constitution 
of matter is fundamental, energy cannot also be so. It has 
appeared that we can know nothing about the aggregate or 
total energy of the molecules of a material system, except that 
its numerical value is diminished in a definite manner when 
the system does mechanical work or loses heat. The definite 
amount of energy that plays so prominent a part in mechanical 
and physical theory is really the mechanically available energy, 
which is separated out from the aggregate energy by a mathe- 
matical process of averaging, in the course of the transition 
from the de6nite molecular system to the material system con- 
sidered as aggregated matter in bulk. This energy is definite, 
but is not, like matter itself, an entity that is conserved in 
unchanging amount: it merely possesses the statistical, yet 
practically exact, property, based on the partly uncoordinated 
character of molecular aggregation, that it cannot spontaneously 
increase, while it may and usually does diminish, in the course 
of gradual physical changes. 

A simple example of this separation of a mechanical portion 
of the energy is furnished by the phenomena of osmotic pressure. 
In a solution each molecule of the dissolved substance is the 
centre of an aggregate of those molecules of the solvent which 
are within its range of molecular action and so are to some 
extent affected by it. In a concentrated solution these aggre- 
gates run into each other; but when the dilution is great, they 
are independent systems separated by the unaltered solvent. 
There is a part of the mechanical energy which arises from the 
mutual presence of the two kinds of molecules : this part can 
depend, per unit volume, only on the number of the molecules 
of the dissolved substance, the temperature, and possibly the 
kinds of matter involved. But when the solution is very dilute. 



b] illustration from osmotic energy 287 

further dilution by addition of more of the solvent will merely 
separate these molecular aggregates in space without interfering 
with the constitution of any of them : thus the charhge of the 
mechanical energy which arises from further dilution is then 
independent of the kind of matter involved, and can depend 
only on the number of molecules of the dissolved substance per 
unit volume, being the same for all systems which agree in this 
respect. One such system is an ideal gas, in which the mole- 
cules are supposed to be, for practically all the time, outside 
each others* sphere of influence, there being now no solvent : it 
follows that the osmotic pressure of the molecules of the dis- 
solved substance against an internal partition, permeable to the 
solvent but not to them, is the same as if they existed in the 
state of an ideal gas at their actual density and temperature*. 
It can be urged that these considerations amount to demon- 
stration rather than explanation, that they compel assent rather 
than satisfy the mind : indeed the nature of the validity of this 
most remarkable generalization was in doubt for years after 
experimental facts had compelled its recognition by van 't HofT. 
But in fact similar considerations enter in forming the me- 
chanical energy function of any material system : if the system 
is not dissipative, i.e. if it does not gradually run down in the 
course of mechanical transformations, it must have a mechanical 
energy function: the form of this function cannot be derived 
from its molecular constitution, of which we shall possibly 
never obtain sufficient knowledge for such an application, but 
from indirect reasoning guided by observed mechanical pro- 
perties of the system. Thus practically, in Newton's words, 
the whole problem of Natural Philosophy is concerned in this, 
' ut a phaenomenis motuum investigemus vires naturae, deinde 
ab his viribus demonstremus phaenomena reliqua.' 

9**. It would appear (p. 260) that there can be an 
unlimited amount of molecular structure and function in a 
given system, which is unconnected with any mechanical effect 
occurring in that system treated as continuous matter. This 
is because, whether we view it as an independent principle 

* Of. Proc. Comb. PkU. Soc. Jan. 1897 : Phil. Tram. 1897 A, p. 275. 



288 VITAL ACTIVITY NOT MECHAKICAI. [B 

or as a corollary from the doctrine of Action, these mechanical 
relations are from their very nature determined by analytical 
functions of con6guration and their first and second gradients 
alone: if higher gradients also came in, the statement would no 
longer hold. The processes by which our conception of the 
uniformity of Nature is obtained essentially involve averaging 
of effects, and lose their efficacy long before the individual 
molecule is reached. Mechanical determinateness thus need 
not involve molecular determinateness : then why should either 
of them involve determination in the entirely distinct province 
of vital activity ? 

Moreover mechanical science has to do with systems in 
being : it does not avail to trace the circumstances of growth or 
structural change even in inorganic material. What happens 
when two gaseous molecules unite to form a compound mole- 
cule is unknown except from the slight indirect indications of 
spectrum analysis. Now all initiation of organic activity seems 
to involve structural change, not merely mechanical disturbance, 
and is, in so far, outside the domain of mechanical laws. But the 
activities of an organism treated as a permanent system — such 
for example as propagation of nervous impulse — are likely 
enough, when once they are started, to be of the nature of the 
interactions of matter in bulk, so that it is legitimate to seek 
for them a mechanical correlation. Every vital process may 
conceivably thus be correlated with a mechanical process, as to 
its progress, just to that extent to which it is possible experi- 
mentally to follow it, without lending any countenance to a 
theory that would place its initiation under the control of any 
such system of mechanical relations. In other terms, there is 
room for complete mechanical coordination of all the functions 
of an organism, treated as an existing material system, without 
requiring any admission that similar principles are supreme 
in the more remote and infinitely complex phenomena con- 
cerned in growth and decay of structure. 



APPENDIX C 

ON ELECTROLYSIS: AND THE MOLECULAR CHAEtACTER 

OF ELECTRIC CONDUCTION 

1. The fundamental facts to which a theory of electrolysis 
must conform are as follows : 

(i) Faraday's law ; that the number of molecules of the 
anion liberated in any time is the same as the number of 
molecules of the cation, and that corresponding to the libera- 
tion of one molecule of either of them the same quantity of 
electricity passes in the current, a quantity which on comparing 
different anions and cations is proportional to their chemical 
valencies ; a definite quantity of electricity — the fundamental 
unit of charge or the electron — thus corresponding to each 
valency, whatever be the electrolytic substance: 

(ii) Kohlrausch*s law that the conductivity of a very dilute 
electrolytic solution is (for a given solvent) the sum of two 
parts, one characteristic of the anion alone and proportional to 
the strength in which it is present, the other similarly charac- 
teristic of the cation alone. 

The second of these facts has suggested the view that in 
a dilute electrolytic solution the anion and the cation are 
efifectively independent of each other as regards mobility, while 
each carries as an electric charge the number of electrons 
represented by its valency. Now in each element of volume 
the numbers of anions and cations must be the same to an 
extremely close approximation, because — the electron being an 
enormous charge relative to the mass of the molecule — a 
very slight discrepancy between the numbers of positive and 
negative ions would imply a large volume density of electrifi- 
cation. The view would then be that the electric force 
L. 19 



290 ELECTROLYSIS ACCOMPANIED BY CONVECTION [c 

(electromotive force per unit length) in the solution urges 
these ions, in virtue of their charges, in opposite directions and 
thus establishes steady drifting motions of the two ions which 
have different velocities as Kohlrausch's law indicates. But 
here we are in danger of coming into collision with Faraday's 
law; for the supply of molecules of that ion which has the 
greater mobility would be in excess at its electrode, whereas 
the numbers of molecules liberated at the two electrodes are 
really equal. There must thus tend to be an accumulation of 
these ions in excess, around their electrode, that will have to 
be somehow relieved, and the electrolytic current will not 
remain a steady phenomenon : the extent of this unsteadiness 
it is important to ascertain. 

At the very beginning of the conduction in a fresh uniform 
solution, let the averaged velocity of drift of the cation, in 
accordance with the hjrpothesis, be F, say to the right, and 
that of the anion F, to the left. Let us decompose this 
velocity of the cation into i ( Fi -f V^) to the right and J ( F^ — F,) 
to the right: and in the same way let us decompose the 
velocity of the anion into i ( F, + F,) to the left and J ( F"^ — F,) 
to the left. On pairing these components we shall have a 
drift of the two ions right and left with equal speeds each 
J ( Fi + Fa), and a drift of them together in company to the 
right with speed i ( Fj — Fj). The former represents a current 
of conduction obeying Kohlrausch's law, and involving no 
accumulation of ions at either electrode : the latter represents 
a uniform flow of the electrolyte itself without any electric 
separation, and lea^ls to an increase of density in the solution 
up against that electrode — say the cathode — whose ion has the 
greater velocity of drift, with a corresponding decrease of 
density up against the other electrode. This piling up of the 
electrolyte is partly relieved by ordinary diffusion back again ; 
and the initial aggregate changes of concentration in the 
neighbourhood of the electrodes form the well-known pheno- 
menon investigated by Hittorf*. 

* Pogg. Ann. 1863 — 8: cf. Winckelmann's 'Physik* m, i, p. 449. In the 
initial stages the gradient of concentration near the middle is negligible, henoe 
Fj and F, are there proportional to the mobilities of the ions : and whatever be 




C] THE IONS DIFFUSE INDEPENDENTLY 291 

2. The question before us is how far this state of affairs 
can be regarded as permanent ; or whether changes will super- 
vene in the process in the course of time which will among 
other things involve alteration in the mode in which the 
solution conducts the current. The heaping up of the electro- 
lyte towards the cathode and away from the anode will go od, 
at diminishing speed, until the steady stage arises when diflFusion 
backwards through the liquid just balances the drift forward 
under electric force. And here we must decide between two 
hjrpotheses. 

(i) We might assume that the electrolyte diffuses back as 
a sugar solution would do, without separation of the ions : in 
that case the nature of the electric conduction would not be 
affected, and we might calculate the conductivity of the 
solution, of varying density between the electrodes, by the 
same rule as applies to a wire of varying section. 

(ii) We might assume, as is much more in keeping with 
the hypothesis, that the ions of the electrolyte have independent 
mobilities as regards diffusion just as they have as regards drift 
under electric forces: their different speeds of diffusion back- 
wards will now initiate electric separation and consequent 
bodily electrification in the solution, which will react so as to 
affect the electric transfer and may possibly in time funda- 
mentally alter the nature of the conduction. 

In attempting to trace what will happen on the second 
hypothesis, it will be a great simplification to assume that the 
numbers of positive and negative free ions are always the same, 
say n per unit volume, in each part of the solution : this will 
be practically true because n is very large, so that an excessively 
small relative difference in the numbers of positive and negative 
ions would imply a very great electrification. It is equivalent 
to assuming that the electric current / is precisely the same 
across all sections of the electrolyte at each instant of time. 

the shape of the cell, the mass transported across the middle is to the mass 
electrolyzed in the ratio (V^ - F^/( Fi+ K,) : thus the total amoont of the cation 
that is transported is to the amount of it that is electrolyzed in the ratio 
Tj/J (Fi+ r,), which is Hittorfs transport number for that ion. 

19—2 



292 



EQUATIONS OF TBANSFEB OF IONS 



[c 



We assume for the sake of simplicity that the solution is so 
dilute that it is c5ompletely ionized. 



anode 



Nt 'Ni 



cathode 



Let us fix our attention on the cross section at distance x from 
the anode, and suppose that dN^jdt cations cross it in one 
direction (along x increasing) and dNJdt anions in the opposite 
direction per unit area per unit time. These movements are 
due in part to the electric force —dVjdx at the place, and in 
part to diffusion : thus 



dN, 



(ft"=-^'^rfS 



dV , dn 



here v^ is the velocity of drift of the cation under unit electric 
force, as determined indirectly by Kohlrausch and first visually 
exhibited by the experiments of Lodge; and k^ is a constant 
independent of n, which is a coefficient of diffusion of these ions 
of the oi"dinary type. Similarly 



dNj 
dt 



dV 



dn 



"''"^'dw "^^'da' 



The continuity of electric flow gives 

dN, dK,^I 
dt dt ^ e 

whicli is constant along the flow, e being the ionic charge, 
positive for the cation negative for the anion, and / the electric 
current. The continuity of flow of the electrolyte gives 



dx^Kdt dt J'^di' 



These equations represent a complete scheme of the course of 
the phenomena: thus, for example, there are four equations 
involving four independent variables Ni, N^, F, n when the 
current / is maintained constant, or again the electromotive 
force —jdVjdx.dx may be maintained constant, when / will 
vary with the time. 




C] RELATION TO OSMOTIC PRESSURE 293 

3. We can assign theoretically the values of k^ and k^, if, 
after Nemst, we follow out the hypothesis of effectively in- 
dependent mobility of the anion and cation into its natural 
consequences in the domain of osmotic theory. For the sake 
of precision the osmotic argument will be indicated in full. 
Consider an ordinary solution, say of sugar, separated from a 
mass of the pure solvent by a diaphragm: the phenomena of 
osmosis suggest and warrant the theoretical statement, that if 
a diaphragm is postulated of a kind that is freely permeable to 
the solvent but wholly impermeable to the molecules of the 
dissolved substance, then the pure solvent will creep through it 
until there is a definite difference of fluid pressure established 
between the two sides. Experiment has suggested and verified 
the law that when the solution is dilute, so that the dissolved 
molecules are at distances apart comparable on the average to 
those of the molecules of a free gas, this osmotic pressure is the 
same as, and may be represented by, the pressure of these 
dissolved molecules against the diaphragm, considered as if 
they constituted a free gas with their actual distribution and 
temperature. This principle admits of rigorous thermodynamic 
proof, which is immediate from the point of view of available 
energy*. It forms only another way of expressing this law, to 
say that the osmotic pressure is the force per unit area, or the 
* partial pressure,' that must be applied (by the diaphragm or 
otherwise) against the dissolved molecules in bulk, considered 
by themselves, in order to prevent their diffusion. It follows 
again, by way of reaction, that in case of a solution of varying 
concentration, the force opei*ating to cause translation, by 
diffusion, of the molecules in a thin slice of the solution, is the 
reversed difference of the osmotic pressures on the two faces of 
the slice. Now in the case of either set of ions we know by 
experiment the velocity of drift produced by an ascertained 
applied bodily force of electric type, and the same coeflBcient of 
drift will naturally apply when the sifting force is of osmotic 
type : thus A^i and k^ are known in terms of v^ and v^. In fact 
the osmotic law then gives for the pressure the formula 

p = neRT, 

* Cf. PhxL Traru. 1897 a, p. 272 : or p. 287 iupra. 



294 FORMULA FOR DIFFU8IVITY [C 

where R is the constant of perfect gases and is the same for all 
kinds of ions, and T is the absolute temperature : also the effect 
of the osmotic force — dp/dx compares directly with that of the 
electric force —nedVjdx which produces the drift — nVidV/dx^ 

hence the osmotic drift is ■* -j^ or — ViRT -j- so that 

e cLx ax 

k^ = v,RT, k^ = v^RT. 

4. But for the present we shall retain ki and k^ as in- 
dependent constants, and thereby postpone the assumption 
that the anion and cation are permanently dissociated in the 
dilute solution. We might in fact, thus far, base the equations 
on the original theory of mobile association (so to speak) of 
Williamson and Clausius, assuming simply that when the 
anion and cation of a molecule happen to get knocked asunder, 
the greater mobility of one of them carries it further than the 
other, under the influence of electric force or of diffusion, before 
fresh partners are acquired. On either view we must have 
ki/vi = A^a/ff , = /8 say ; it is only the special value RT for /3 that 
the theory of complete dissociation supplies. 

Towards solving this scheme of equations we have, since 

dl/dx is null, 

d^N, d'jy, ^ dn 

dxdt dxdt dt ' 
hence 

dn d { dV\ . d^n 

d^ 

dn d_i dV\ J cPn 

dt~ ^'diV'di)'^'''d:^' 

These are the ditferential equations determining the coui^se 
of the distribution of density of the electrolyte, specified by 
the variable n, and of the distribution of electric potential, as 
time proceeds. 

They give immediately for the former by itself 

dn _ kiVi + kiU2 d^n 
dt v, + Va dx^ ' 

But this is precisely the type of equation of diffusion that 



_ dn _ _ d / dV\ _ , cP] 
dt "" * da? V dx ) ^ da. 



C] ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE OF CONCENTRATION 295 

would hold for an ordinary solution devoid of electrolytic 
action : hence the changes of concentration in the electrolyte 
occur by diffusion in the ordinary manner with a difiiisivity D 
given by 

Vi + Va 

As this relation holds good however slight the electric current 
may be, it may be presumed to hold in the limit where there is 
no current at all: therefore D is the coefficient of ordinary 
diffusion of the solution, and we have thus one physical relation 
involving k^ and A:, with the diffusivity and the electric data of 
ionic mobility. 

On substitution for dn/dt from this equation of diffusion in 
either of the original differential equations, we obtain 

Aj-fcid'n d ( dV\ 

whence on integration 

k^ — kidn dV ^.^. 
Vj -f Vi aa? dx •' ^ ^ 
Now we have 

I , . dV ,j , . dn 

80 that this integral merely reiterates the fact already implied 
in the equations, that the current / is uniform all along the 
solution. To obtain the expression of the law of conduction, 
we integrate the value of dV/dx given by it : thus 

Ai — Aq, n" I f'^' dx 



r-v" = 



V1 + V2 

where V — V" represents the difference of potential, or electro- 
motive force, between the two sections, at a/ and x\ of the 
solution, and n'jn" is the ratio of the concentrations at those 
points. If the first term on the right were absent, this equation 
would represent Ohm's law, the factor by which / is multiplied 
being the expression for the resistance between these sections 
in terms of the ionic mobilities. As things are, to retain Ohm's 
mode of statement the first term must be transferred to the left 
and combined with the electromotive force : in other words, we 



296 NECESSARILY RELATED TO DIFFUSIVTTY [C 

see that change of concentration, along the direction of the 
current, from density p to density p\ originates a backward or 
opposing electromotive force equal to 

^^MogX', 

Vi 4- Va ^' p 

where the subscript 1 refers to the cation. We have here 
another physical relation involving k^ and k^ with the observed 
electromotive forces of concentration. 

These two relations suffice to independently determine k^ 
and ij in terms of quantities directly measurable. As however 
on any view of electrolysis the relation A:,/vi = Ag/v,, =>8, must 
hold, there is thus a necessary relation between the diffusion 
coefficient and the electromotive force of concentration. But it 
was Nemst's great discovery that the actual values of these 
coefficients of migration k^ and k^, for both ions, are the same as 
follow from the hypothesis of independent mobilities of those 
ions, namely that /8 is equal to RT, The existence of this 
relation thus forms a logical demonstration that the anion and 
cation in dilute solutions diffuse under the influence either of 
variation of density or of electric force, approximately as if each 
were quite free of the other. 

5. This argument corroborates, in a more direct manner, 
the one on which the principle of the independent mobilities 
of the anion and cation is usually founded, namely that in 
comparing dilute electrolytic solutions with non-electrolytic 
solutions, the osmotic pressure (or what comes to the same 
thing, the lowering of the vapour pressure or the depression of 
the freezing point) is twice as great for the former kind in 
comparison with the number of dissolved molecules. In arguing 
directly from this fact towards the independent mobility of 
anion and cation we require a theory to explain how it is that 
the osmotic pressure is connected only with the number of 
independent foreign nuclei in the solution, whether they are 
molecules or sub-molecules. The explanations that are usually 
given on this head are analogical and devoid of dynamical 
cogency. A valid theory however exists: but it is based on 
the theoretically rather recondite thermodynamic principle of 



C] METALLIC CONDUCTION NOT BY FREE IONS 297 

available energy, the relations of which to molecular theory 
form a delicate subject*. Thus the inference from the ab- 
normality in the osmotic pressure to the independent mobilities 
of anion and cation is there logically so refined as to entail 
cautious handling: whereas all the considerations with which 
we have here been dealing refer directly to the diflFusion of ions 
and their mobility under electric force, without any recondite 
molecular dynamics. 

6. It is a striking circumstance that, on the hjrpothesis of 
independent mobility of the ions, the part of Faraday's law 
which asserts that electrochemical equivalents are liberated at 
the two electrodes, does not appear as a result of the mechanism 
of the electrolytic conduction, but is rather a constraint forced 
upon it from the outside, which forms the source of all the 
complication. Its cause must thus be sought in the nature of 
the conduction in the metallic part of the circuit : which points 
towards the view that in metals there is no diffusion of ions, 
but that they are passed on in a regular Grotthus'-chain 
fashion. This indication is strikingly at variance with the 
earlier ideas of the nature of metallic conduction. 

As regards the mode of electroljrtic conduction, these results 
can be expressed in words independent of theoretical con- 
ceptions as follows. The electric force produces a drift of the 
anion and cation in opposite directions, with equal speeds in 
accordance with Faraday's law : at the same time it produces a 
uniform drift of the electrolyte across the solution towards the 
cathode, of which the velocity across any section corresponds to 

the passage of — ^ molecules of the electrolyte per unit 

area per unit time: this uniform drift of the dissolved sub- 
stance is continually producing accumulation up against the 
cathode plate and abstraction from against the anode plate, 
which are simultaneously being relieved by spontaneous dif- 
fusion back again. As the ions diffuse at different speeds, 
whether electrolysis is going on or not, such changes of 

* Cf. loc. Hi, ante, Phil, Trans, 1S97 a ; or p. 287 supra. 



298 THE RELATIONS BETWEEN EXPEBIMENTAL DATA [C 

concentration give rise to internal electromotive forces which 
prevent the electric gradient from being uniform across the 
solution : but the conduction always follows the law of Ohm. 
These principles have been demonstrated for the straight flow 
across an electrolyte in an ordinary cell: they clearly remain 
valid with slight modification of statement when the changes of 
concentration are not laminar, and the electric flow is in three 
dimensions. The velocity of convection of the electrolyte may 
be specified in a form independent of ions and their mobilities. 
In the first place, the available energy of the solution, estimated 
in von Helmholtz's manner by measuring its vapour tension, 
will give for the electromotive force arising from concentration 
an expression A \ogp''jp\ where A is an experimental constant: 
then our present result is that an electric current / produces 
a velocity of drift of the electrolyte along with it amounting to 
AI/2RTe molecules per unit time : and the rest involves only 
the laws of electric flow and of diflusion. 

If V varies blb /{T) where T is the temperature, then k 
varies as T/(T), and the coefficient D of diffusion of the electro- 
lyte through the solvent follows the latter law, while electro- 
motive forces of concentration would be proportional to the 
temperature. 

To remove the possibility that the phenomena thus described 
may be open to some other explanation that does not involve 
independent mobility of the ions, the visual method of experi- 
ment introduced by Lodge* was necessary : as applied by himself 
and by Whetham it appears to be decisive. 

7. It is now a problem in the mathematics of diffusion 
(Fourier's linear conduction of heat) to start with a uniform 
solution, and a given electromotive force applied to it or a 
given current forced through it, and trace out the progress of 
the changes of concentration that are set up by the current, 
when the solution is supposed to be free from currents of 
mechanical convection. 

* Brit. Assoo. Report, 1886 : cf. Whetham's * Solution and Electrolysis/ 



C] CONDITIONS FOR ATTAINMENT OF STEADY STATE 299 

The concentration n alters by simple diffusion according to 
the equation 

- = Z>^ where D=?^^^ 
dt da? * Vi + Va ' 

so that D is the same whatever current be passing ; and it only 
remains to specify the terminal conditions which hold at the 
electrodes. These may be obtained from the equations of § 2 : 
thus at the cathode 



so that there 



leading to 



and similarly 



dt ^ e' dt "■ ' 
/ dV , dn 

^ dV , dn 

J- = — 277^ — at the cathode, 
dx 2)9t;i e 

- at the anode. 



do! 2/3Vi e 

When the current / is maintained constant a particular 
integral is 

n = c + bx — aa? — 2Z)a/, 

where by the terminal conditions, the origin being taken at the 
anode and its distance from the cathode being /, 



The general integral is obtained by adding an integral which 
makes / null everywhere and dn/dw null at both electrodes. 
When the effect of the initial conditions has died away, the 
ultimate state is that here given. Thus the concentration 
diminishes uniibrmly with the time all along the solution as 
the electrolysis proceeds : its gradient tends to a definite form 
irrespective of the value of the concentration itself, changing 
uniformly from Ij^e^v^ at the anode to — I/2el3vi at the cathode. 
The difference in the concentrations at the anode and cathode 



300 SPECIAL CASE OF NO CURRENT [C 

is ^ n ~ ^» which is equal to Hittorfs difference produced 

initially per unit time divided by Djl*, 

The gradient of electromotive force is determined by the 
equation for the current (p. 295), and is of complex character. 
The least number of molecules of the electrolyte which this 
steady state can contain is IP/l2^e multiplied by 2f;i"'* — 1»•"^ 
or 2t;9~^ — v,~\ according as Vi is less or greater than v,. 

8. A different special case is that in which the circuit is 
broken, so that the current is null. Then 

dNj__dN^ cPNi dn 

dt dt ' dxdt dt ' 

leading directly to 

dn _kiVi-\- k^Vi d*n 
dt " V2 + V1 da^ 

dV ki — ki d , 

-7- = j-loffn. 

cte Vi + v, cur ° 

The first equation gives for the coefficient of diffusion D the 

same formula as we have already found from the general 

analysis when a current is flowing : the second equation gives 

k "k n" 
the same expression ^ -log—^ for the electromotive force 

V\ "T" V2 '^ 

arising from concentration that has been already found from 
the general analysis. 

This special case in fact formed the basis of Nemst's 
demonstration of his formulae. It may be noticed that here 
the state of concentration is not steady, the only possible steady 
state being one of uniform density: but the formula for the 
electromotive force is quite independent of what may be the 
law of concentration between the terminals when no current is 
flowing. It has been seen already that this remains true when 
a current is present. 

9. An interesting application of these principles arises 
when an extraneous magnetic field H is established transverse 

* When it is the applied electromotive force, instead of the onrrent, that if 
kept constant, the quantities will vary exponentially with the time« 



C] HALL EFFECT IN ELECTROLYTES 301 

to the electric flow*. The individual ions will then be urged 
sideways with forces e.v^F .H and e . v^F , H both acting in the 
same direction, where F is the electric force driving the current. 
The aggregate of these forces will make up the Amperean 
transverse mechanical force acting on the electrol3rte. But 
they have also an electromotive aspect: for they will tend to 
heap up the two ions sideways at different rates and thus 
produce electric separation leading by its statical action to a 
transverse electric force F', With notation analogous to § 3, 
we have now, z denoting transverse measurement, 

where however dN^jdi and dNJdt are here the drifts both 
measured along z positive. As before, n^ and n, are so large 
that we can take them to be equal, say to n. Also ki = fivi and 
A'a = ^Vj, where /8 = RT, In the steady state dNJdt and dN^jdt 
are both null : hence 

^^^F'^v,FH^--F'-¥v^FH 
n cLz 

80 that F' = ^ (va - Vi) FH 

This transverse electric force F^ is uniform and independent of 
the concentration: thus it arises from a purely superficial 
electrification on the sides of the electrolyte. It is the force 
whose existence was suspected by Hall from considerations of 
the same nature as the above, though indefinite, and which was 
detected by him as a minute effect in metals. As the intensity 
of the current / is given by 

we have t ^' = ^_^i:i!i^. 

Vj + Vi 2ne 

* An inyestigation covering the more general ease of partial ionisation is 
given by F. G. Donnan, Phil, Mag. Nov. 1898. 
t Cf. Phil Trans. 1894 a, p. 816. 



302 INFLUENCE OF MOTION THROUGH THE AETHER [C 

Thus the coefficient of the Hall effect in a very dilute electro- 
lytic solution should be (Va — t;i)/(t;j-f ^1)17, where 17 is the total 
electrochemical equivalent of the electrolyte per unit volume: 
it is gjfifi, where the electromotive force due to change of 
concentration between densities p' and p is g^ogp^/p'. 

The change of concentration across the solution, given by 
the above value of d log njdz, might possibly be experimentally 
detected : it will not affect the resistance of the cell when the 
electric flow is in parallel lines ; but if the lines of flow are not 
straight, for example if the electrodes are points instead of 
plates, the resistance between them will be minutely altered by 
a magnetic field. The alteration of the resistance of metallic 
bismuth by a transverse magnetic field does not appear to be of 
this nature, as it occurs in a thin wire. 

10. This leads us on to consider whether an imposed 
magnetic field at right angles to the direction of the Elarth's 
motion might not produce effects of electric separation in an 
electrolytic substance, whether carrying a current or not. Here 
the transverse electric force arising fix)m the magnetism is vH, 
where v is the velocity of the electrolyte arising from, the 
Earth's motion, the force being equal and opposite for the two 
ions : hence the equations are, when there is no current, 

dN^ rr/ ry\ 1 d,n 

dt dz 

In the steady state dNijdt and dN^jdt are null : so that 

^iog« = |(r+uF)=|^(-F'-u^). 

As VijJc^ must be equal to v^jk^ on any theory of electrolysis, 
whether we adopt the hypothesis of independent ionic mobili- 
ties or not, it follows that F* + vH is null. Thus as we might 
have anticipated, the total electric force inside an electrolytic 
substance partaking in the Earth's motion is strictly null 
whatever magnetic field be present, just as in a metallic 



C] GENERAL EQUATIONS FOR MIXED ELECTROLTTES 303 

conductor : in other words there is a Hall eflFect F* which cancels 
the induced electrostatic field of force arising frctoi the convec- 
tion. When a current is present, the Hall eflFect will be 
diminished by this electrostatic field : but there will be no 
alteration in its galvanometnc indications, because this field 
contributes no electromotive force round a circuit. 

11. The problem for a solution of more than one electrolyte 
is much more complex. If we adopted the Williamson- 
Clausius hypothesis of mobile association of the ions, then 
in so far as each anion could adopt as a new partner only a 
cation of its own kind, the phenomena of the dififerent electro- 
lytes would be simply superposed; though even on that view 
there seems to be no reason why an anion may not recombine 
just as readily with one of the other cations, — such a reason if 
it existed must be presumably of the Grotthus'-chain type, but 
the links of the chain would become extremely weak when the 
solution is very dilute and therefore the molecules of the 
electrolyte very far apart. If we keep to the dissociation 
hypothesis, the ions will in a suflSciently dilute solution all be 
independently mobile, and it will at first sight no longer be 
necessary that the numbers of anions and of cations of the same 
electrolyte shall be the same in each element of volume : this 
will only be necessarily true of the aggregate, each ion counting 
proportionally to its valency. Here a complication enters, 
because in its electric aspect a j9-valent ion is the same as 
p univalent ones superposed, while in its osmotic aspect it is 
only one : let us then simplify the conditions by treating it 
as p univalent ions, at the same time dividing the diflfusion 
coeflBcient by p for each of them. Suppose there are 
members ni, rig, n,, ... per unit volume, of cations of various 
kinds, and rii', Wj', n,', ... of anions of various kinds; we shall 
have equations of types 

dt dx dx 

, di\r/ , ,dV J ,dni' 

and ._ = _„,„, _ + A;._. 



304 BELAT10N8 IN STEADY STATE [C 

the force causing diffusion of each ion ansing from its partial 
osmotic pressure ; where 

p being suppressed as above ; while 

" dt'*'" dt e' 
which is constant along the electrolyte. 

Thus for the ions with subscript r, we have 

dNrdV 



\dt ""dai'}^'^'- dx dx' 
\dt *-' dc^j ^' - - *- 



dx dx ' 
where ^v = — ^r, kr ——, v/- 

Pr Pr 

On substitution for Nr from this equation in the expression for 
/, there results a differential equation for F, of great com- 
plexity : the form of V being considered to be determined from 
that equation, the one just expressed will give the law of 
concentration of n^. In a uniform solution of mixed electrolytes 
the current is found to be carried by them in the ratio of their 
conductivities, so that there is no preferential selection at the 
electrodes. Even for the case of only three ions the general 
results will be complex. 

At each instant during the process of diffusion the current 
is given by 

^ + ~ (S^7^ - 2^•'n') = - (Ivn -f SvV) ^ : 

this can be expressed in terms of Ohm's law by the statement 
that the variable concentration produces a back electric force of 
intensity* 

* On the whole subject see Planck, Wied. Ann. 39, 40, and 44. 



C] DRIFT OF THE SOLVENT 306 

the coefficient of —dV/dos, namely e(Zvn-\'l,r/n% being the 
conductivity. 

For a given law of tall of potential, supposed independent of 
the time, the value of iV" is of the type 

where F and are functional symbols, which will be the same 
for all values of r and r' respectively for which the valency is 
the same, because for all such kr/Vr is the same. In the steady 
state that is ultimately attained by the system, dNr/dt must be 
independent of x, so that Nr « f(x) + Aft ; thus as n^ = — dNr/dx 
the laws of concentration of all ions that are of the same valency 
will be the same in the steady state. If all the ions present 
have the same valency, the steady state of the system will 
therefore be obtained by superposing the steady states for 
the separate electrolytes. 

12. The account given above of the changes of concentra- 
tion produced by a current in different parts of an electrolyte 
supposes that the electrolyte is contained in a mass of solvent 
which is itself prevented from drifting on along with the 
dissolved substance : this condition holds good in all ordinary 
cases. But in electrolytic conduction through a narrow tube, 
opening into large masses of the solution at both ends, the 
drift of the molecules of the electrolyte through the tube will 
carry along the solvent as well, by the usual ftictional agencies : 
and the current will thus be accompanied by an electric 
transpiration of the fluid through the tube. The question 
thus arises whether this agency is sufficiently powerful to 
produce effects comparable with the electric transpiration 
experimentally investigated by Quincke: it is however not 
reversible, being entirely frictional, so that an extraneous pres- 
sure driving the fluid through the tube cannot thus produce an 
electric current. Such phenomena of diffusion and transpiration 
will be much more definite in narrow tubes or pores than in 
wide spaces, because they will not then be very sensibly masked 
by mixing up of the liquid in mass owing to gravitational and 
thermal disturbances. 

L. 20 



306 MECHANICAL PRESSURE [C 

The easiest thing to determine is the osmotic pressure-head 
set up between the two ends of the tube when the transpiration 
is prevented. The gradient of pressure must be due to the 
extraneous forces acting on the contents of the tube, that is 
to the electric force —dVjdx acting on the ions. Now the 
numbers of positive and negative ions are relatively practically 
the same, but there must be a very slight difference otherwise 
the force would be uniform all along : there is in fact a minute 
bodily electrification of density p given by 47rp=! — iTV'F", and 
the extraneous mechanical force acting on the fluid is thus 

— p -,- or - -j—^^^' We may take it that the electric force 

is practically constant across the area of each section of the 

tube, so that this extraneous force is ^ ;t- ( -f- ) , which 

amounts for the whole length I of the tube to a pressure- 
difference 

87r|Vdi/2 [cUcJy 
where the force — dVjdx is in electrostatic units. 

The mechanical forces thus indicated exist only in solutions 
variable as regards composition or cross-section, and are exces- 
sively minute compared with the observed electrolytic transpir- 
ation pressures* : such forces would be sensible in a highly 
charged condenser with leaking dielectric; the air currents 
produced by them in an air-condenser traversed by Rontgen 
radiation have been utilized by Zeleny f to trace the features of 
the ionization. 

13. Certain thermo-electric phenomena in metallic circuits 
are also related to the present subject. Clausius was the 
first to theoretically connect the thermo-electric difference 
of potentials at the junction between different substances with 
the Peltier effect there situated. It was pointed out however 
by Lord Kelvin that the formula obtained by him, on the basis 
of Camot's principle, was too simple for the facts, as it did not 

* For von Helmholtz's theory, inyolving a layer of free ions near the wall of 
the tube as in frictional electrification, cf. Collected Papers, i, p. 876. 
t Proc, Camb, Phil, Soc. 1898. 



C] OBJECTION TO THERMODYNAMICS OF PELTIEE EFFECT 307 

involve Cumming's phenomenon of thermo-electric reversal. 
This might arise firom either of two causes, or from both : the 
whole thermodynamic procedure may be invalid because it is 
applied to a case in which degradation is continually going on, 
in the form of conduction of heat, along the same circuit which 
conducts the current, and of amount depending on the first 
power of the temperature-differences : or other thermo-electric 
effects may exist of which Clausius did not take account. It 
does not appear that the fundamental objection to the procedure 
can be safely ignored, considering that conductivity for heat is 
closely connected with conductivity for electricity* ; but, waiving 
that, Lord Kelvin has assigned, as a cause of the discrepancy, 
what amounts to a convection of heat by the ions of the current, 
and such an action has been experimentally detected. 

Suppose that in travelling from a place where the tempera- 
ture is T to a place where it is T -I- SjT, the positive ions of the 
current absorb heat equal to sST per unit electric charge, which 
is required to raise their mean kinetic energies by the amount 
corresponding to the rise of temperature BT, and that similarly 
the oppositely travelling negative ions give out sBT : then the 
total absorption per unit quantity of electricity by a current 
travelling up the gradient of temperature is ^(« — «') BT, or say 
a-BT, where a has been named the * specific heat of electricity * 
for the conductor and may be either positive or negative. 

Let us then — ignoring the finite degradation by heat- 
conduction, but realizing that the electric flow may be made 
so slow that the electric degradation, proportional to the 
square of the current, is negligible, and that therefore the 
operations are certainly electrically reversible in Camot's 
sense — apply the principle of energy and Camot's principle 
to a circuit, formed of two metals and including as part 
of itself the dielectric of a condenser having these metals 
for its coatings, the temperature T varying from point to point 

* It will be removed if the heat-conduotion proceeds in entire independence 
of the electric current, except as regards the transfer of the ions the influence 
of which is reversible and is separately taken into account by the Kelvin 
coefficient. The electric cycle can moreover be completed in so short a time that 
the thermal transfer by ordinary conduction may possibly be neglected. 

20—2 



308 THEBMAL CONVECTIOX BT IONS [c 

along the circuit. When the plates of the condenser are moTed 
closer together without alteration of temperature its charge 
increases, as the difference of potential E between the plates 
remains constant; so that there is an electric flow round the 
circuit, and there is at the same time a gain of mechaoicil 
work and of available electric energy each equal to ^E!ZQ^ or m 
all E per unit total flow. Thus the plates of the condenser 
being at the same temperature T^, we have, by the energy 
principle and Camot's principle, considering unit electric flow 
round the circuit, 

where IT, is the Peltier effect at the temperature Ti of the 
junction of the metals, and cr, a are the ' specific heats of 
electricity ' in them. Thus 

'^ ~ "' ^^ '^' stXyj • 

Hence for a temperature T of the junction, everything can be 

expressed in terms of the cui-ve connecting the electromotive 

force E of the circuit with Ty by the well-known simple 

relations 

n_dE cr-a _ d^& 

T" dT' ~T "dT*' 

The Peltier effect appears, in the expression for E^ in the form 

of an electromotive force at the junction*. The chemical mutual 

attractions of the molecules of the two metals across the inter- 

* This folIowH on takiuj; the temperature to be uniform. If however «« 
adopted von Helmholtz's idea that ench substance has a speoific affinity for 
* electricity ' which varies with the temperature, and that the energies and 
entropies of the conductors in the system therefore involve terms proportional 
to their electric charges, but no other electric terms, we should arrive (cf. Parker, 
•Thermodynamics' 1884 p. 260) at the result n = TdUldT, where CT is the 
potential-difference at the junction, and there would be no gradient of potential 
along an unequally heated homogeneous wire. Doubtless there is intrinik 
mutual available energy of the bodies and their charges, to be thus taken into 
account as a source of potential-difference; but it will depend on both the 
conductor and the surrounding medium because the charge is situated at jh m 




C] SOURCE OP CONVECTIVE POTENTIAL GRADIENT 309 

fiice produce in fact a polar electric orientation of these 
molecules which gives rise to an abrupt potential-difference of 
contact equal to IT, and each electron e passing across the 
junction thus introduces an energy-effect ell which involves 
absorption or evolution of heat at that place in the Peltier 
manner. What then is the source of the other term in E, 
namely /(o- - </) dT ? Thermodynamically it is involved in a 
convection of heat by the ions passing from a warmer to a 
colder part of the wire; and the mode in which it can thus 
arise may be put in evidence. For heat essentially consists 
largely in energy of molecular or atomic translational velocity : 
hence differences of effective ionic mobilities must in some 
degree enter here, and will have to be counteracted as in the 
electrolytic case by a slight bodily electric charge of free ions 
which will cause the back electromotive force necessary to keep 
the current uniform across all sections : this electromotive force 
is in Lord Kelvin's nomenclature jadT. The mere temperature 
gradient could not, it may be held, produce a gradient of true 
contact potential-difference, for the mutual actions of molecules 
of the same kind cannot by orientating each other originate a 
residual polarity, inasmuch as any polarities there may be 
excited in a pair of them by their interaction will be equal and 
opposite : difference of molecular constitution is required to 
produce true contact potential-difference. 

The same principles of ionic mobility point directly to the 
initiation of an electric force by the interaction of a magnetic 
field and a temperature gradient in a conductor, the direction 
of this force being at right angles to both these vectors and its 
magnitude depending on their vector product, as in the Hall 
effect ; for the transfer of heat requires that, in the main, each 
molecule moves with rather greater speed down the gradient of 
temperature than up it. Such a force, and the converse pheno- 
menon, have been actually detected by von Ettingshausen and 
Nernst*. 

interfftce : it will in fact constitute a superficial distribution of energy, being a 
function of the state of the surface of the conductor: it thus indicates an 
additional and independent electromotive force, located at the surface of each 
conductor instead of at their junction, and constituting the main part of the 
voltaic potential-difference. 

* See Riecke, * Exp. Physik * n p. 827. 



APPENDIX D 

ON THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ATOIUC AND 

RADIANT THEORY 

Fennat on Least Time or Action 
'' Synthesis ad Refractiones 

"Proposuit doctissimus Cartesius refractionum rationem 
experientiae, ut aiunt, consentaneam : sed, earn ut demon- 
straret, posfculavit et necesse omnino fuit ipsi concedi, luminis 
motum fecilius et expeditius fieri per media densa quam per 
rara, quod lumini ipsi naturali adversari videtur. 

"Nos itaque, dum a contrario axiomate — motum nempe 
luminis facilius per media rara quam per densa procedere — 
veram refractionum rationem deducere tentamus, in ipsam 
tamen Cartesii propositionem incidimus. An autem contraria 
omnino via eidem veiitati occurri possit dirapaXoyiaTtD^, videant 
et inquirant subtiliores et severiores Geometrae ; nos enim, 
missa mataeotechnia, satius existimamus veritate ipsa indubi- 
tanter potiri, quam superfluis et frustrariis contentionibus et 
jurgiis diutius inhaerere. 

'* DemoDstratio nostra unico nititur postulato: ncUuram 
operari per modos facUiores et expeditiores. Ita enim airrnAa 
concipiendum censemus, non, ut plerique, naturam per tineas 
brevissimas sernper operari. 

" Ut enim Qalilaeus, dum motum naturalem gravium specul- 
atur, rationem ipsius non tam spatio quam tempore metitur, 
pari ratione non brevissima spatia aut lineas, sed quae ex- 
peditius, commodius, et breviori tempore percurri possint, 
consideramus." 

Fermat, letter to M. de la Chambre, 1662: 
in * CEuvres' i, 1891, p. 173. 




d] hutgens on transmission of waves 311 

The Aether-theory of Huygens 

To Huygens is due the credit of not merely originating an 
undulatory theory of light, but of expounding correct ideas of 
the general nature of the elasticity of a medium such as is 
required for the propagation of regular undulations*. He 
supposes that it is the very rapid agitation of the particles of 
luminous bodies, 'which swim in the aether/ that communicate 
the undulations to that medium. " L'agitation au reste des 
particules qui engendrent la lumiere doit estre bien plus 
prompte, et plus rapide que n'est celle des corps qui causent le 
son, puisque nous ne voyons pas que le fremissement d'un corps 
qui Sonne est capable de faire naitre de la lumiere, de mesme 
que le mouvement de la main dans Tair n'est pas capable de 
produire du Son." 

Then follows an explanation of the diflFerent modes of pro- 
pagation of sound and light, which involves a remarkable 
conception of the kinetic origin of aereal pressure, much more 
vivid than anything given by Daniel Bemoullit, as well as a 
correct view of the nature of the elasticity of homogeneous 
media, and the consequent uniformity of velocity of all pulses 
whether intense or weak. " Quant aux differentes manieres dont 
j'ay dit que se communiquent successive ment les mouvemens 
du Sod, et de la lumiere, on pent assez comprendre comment 
cecy se passe en ce qui est du Son, quand on considere que Fair 
est de telle nature qu'il pent estre coraprim6, et reduit k un 
espace beaucoup moindre qu'il n'occupe d'ordinaire; et qu'k 
mesure qu'il est comprimd il fait effort k se remettre au large : 
car cela joint k sa penetrability, qui luy demeure non obstant sa 
compression, femble prouver qu'il est fait de petits corps qui 
nagent et qui sont agitez fort viste dans la matiere ether^e, 
compos^e de parties bien plus petites. De sorte que la cause 
de I'extension des ondes du Son, c'est I'effort que font ces petits 
corps, qui s'entrechoquent, k se remettre au large, lorsqu'ils sont 

* ' Traits de la Lamidre,' written 1678, published 1690, Chapter z ; Newton 
had calculated the velocity of sound and of waves on shallow water in the 
*Principia,' 1686. 

t ' Hydrodynamica,* sectio z, 1788, where Boyle's law was shown to follow 
from the kinetic hypothesis. 



312 HUTOBNS ON THE NATURE OF THE ELASTICITY OF 80LID6 [D 

un peu plus serrez dans ie circuit de ces ondes qu'ailleuT& 
Mais Textreme vitesse de la lumiere, et d*autres proprietes 
quelle a, ne s^auroient admettre une telle propagation de 
mouvement, et je vais monstrer icy de quelle maniere je oonfois 
qu'elle doit estre. II faut expliquer pour cela la propriety que 
gardent les corps durs k transmettre le mouvement les uns aux 
autres." Then he points out how a simple pulse is propagated 
along a row of glass or steel balls, in contact, by mutual 
collisions : that the essence of this action lies in the elasticity 
of the material which opposes resistance to any defornriation and 
ultimately annuls it by resilience. That such deformation is 
the cause of the rebound of an elastic ball is seen by smearing 
it with grease: after rebound a circle of grease has been 
removed bom it, and this circle is the larger the greater the 
velocity. Then follows a speculation as to the kinetic origin of 
the elasticity of the aether, which virtually makes the atom the 
core of a vortex-ring. " Mais quand nous ignorerions la vraye 
cause du ressort, nous voyons tousjours qu'il y a beaucoup de 
corps qui ont cette propriety ; et ainsi il n'y a rien d'^trange de 
la supposer aussi dans des petits corps invisibles comme ceux 
de I'Ether. Que si Ton veut chercher quelqu'autre maniere 
dont le mouvement de la lumiere se communique successive- 
ment, on n'en trouvera point qui conviene mieux que le ressort 
avec la progression dgale, qui semble estre necessaire, paree que 
si ce mouvement se ralentissoit k mesure qu'il se partage entre 
plus de matiere, en s eloignant de la source de la lumiere, elle 
ne pourroit pas conserver cette grande vitesse dans de grandes 
distances. Mais en supposant le ressort dans la matiere ether^, 
ses particules auront la propriety de se restituer ^galement 
viste, soit qu'elles soient fortement ou foiblement poussees ; et 
ainsi le progrez de la lumiere continuera tousjours avec une 
vistesse egale." 

It is explained that, as it is the rapid motions of the 
particles of water that render it more permeable and less 
resistant than sand, so an extremely brisk agitation of the 
particles may be the cause why the aether does not retard the 
planets. The circumstance that the aether can be expelled 
from a Torricellian vacuum by rise of the mercury is claimed as 



d] on the relation op aether to matter 313 

a proof of its being able to pass with perfect facility among the 
molecules of matter : the fact that its undulations can set these 
molecules into vibration suggests their being constituted of 
smaller particles which would individually be more amenable to 
the disturbance. 

The clear aperfu of the principle of wave propagation 
named after him, and his kinematic explanation of the laws of 
ordinary and double refraction, are well known : the extracts 
given above show that Huygens also possessed a remarkable 
intuition of the physical basis of the modem analysis of the 
phenomena of elasticity of solids and other media treated as 
continuous, as well as of the modem kinetic molecular theory 
of gases and liquids. 

It is interesting to compare this prevision by Huygens of 
the nature of modern kinetic theories of matter, and indeed the 
whole tenour of his physical ideas as contained in the * Traits 
de la Lumifere/ with Cotes' polemic against the h)rpothesis of an 
all-pervading medium which is the main theme of the preface 
contributed by him to the second edition of the 'Principia' 
(1713). Huygens' cosmical views had however led him (not- 
withstanding the above extracts) to deny that gravitation could 
be an essential property of matter, though he agreed that 
large masses do in fact gravitate to each other in the Newtonian 
manner: and it was perhaps against his 'Discours de la Cause 
de la Pesanteur ' (1690), which ascribed gravity to the pressure 
of the surrounding vertically moving aether, rather than the 
vaguer metaphysical ideas of Leibnitz, that Cotes' observations 
were mainly directed. The entirely reasonable attitude of 
Newton himself on this subject is illustrated by the extract 
next following, and by the well-known letters to Bentley. The 
somewhat reckless way in which the advocacy of a position can 
be pushed on both sides beyond rational limits, and the obvious 
difficulty in appreciating any merit in a point of view unfamiliar 
and at variance with the accustomed one, exhibited in this and 
similar instances, is a sufficient explanation of Newton's extreme 
reluctance to take part in such controversies. 

Huygens was a thorough-going Cartesian, not in the sense 
which the term came to bear, as a believer in the special system 



314 LIBUTED ACCEPTANCE OF THE LAW OF GRAVITATION [D 

of vortices which Descartes tried to elaborate, but as an ad- 
herent of the dogma that substance cannot act where it is not, 
that all action of one body A on another body jS at a distance 
from it must be capable of being definitely traced all the way 
across from A to B, It was this doctrine that stimulated him 
to the formulation and development of the wave theory of 
light. On the publication of the * Principia * the same mode of 
thought led him to see the cause of gravitation between two 
bodies at a distance in some aethereal connexion extending 
across the intervening space, as to which he attempted an 
explanation of his own : he agreed that the simple law of 
inverse squares was established by the facts for the case of the 
heavenly bodies or other masses far apart: but he could not 
persuade himself that there was any likelihood that the aethereal 
connexion would be equivalent to a law of that degree of sim- 
plicity in the case of bodies very near together or of different 
parts of the same body. In fact the law of gravitation, as 
applying to the action " of every particle of matter on everv 
other particle of matter," was a hypothesis* whose proof was to 
come ultimately from the results involved in it : the quantitative 
evidence then forthcoming being only the corroboration afforded 
by the fair accord between terrestrial gravity at the Earth's 
surface and at the distance of the Moon. Perhaps it is not too 
much to say that to this day the evidence that the law of 
gravitation is the exact law of inverse squares for moderate 
distances is of indirect character, except in so far as it is indi- 
cated by the fair accoi-dance of the measurements of the 
constant of gravitation that have been made under various 
conditions. The most convincing argument is still founded 
on the consideration that the weight of a body does not depend 
on its orientation or position, thus showing that the transmission 
of gravitation cannot be modified by intervening matter : this 
can hardly be explained except on the hypothesis that the matter 
is of a discrete character and that its nuclei occupy very 
little space in the medium that is concerned in the gravitational 
propagation. This explanation again demands and is confirmed 
by the fact that the gravitational forces exerted by neighbouring 

* For Newton*8 own Btatements cf. * Principia,' lib. m, propp. 6, 7. 



d] gravitation uninfluenced by structure 315 

atoms do not sensibly interfere with each other, — as for example 
the disturbances in fluid arising from two pulsating spheres 
would do when their distance is of the order of their radii, — 
but are simply additive. Adjacent atoms do however exert 
mutual aethereal actions on each other, depending on the 
strains and motions involved in their structures; and theii* 
configurations must be themselves slightly disturbed thereby. 
The exactness of the law of conservation of weight implies that 
the mutual proximity does not modify these structures in any 
way that concerns gravitation ; it follows that the separate 
sub-atoms, virtually point-nuclei, which constitute the material 
atom, gravitate independently without being affected by their 
orbital motions or the presence of neighbouring sub-atoms, all 
which is moreover exactly in keeping with the ascertained 
extreme rapidity of propagation of gravitational influence. 
When the phenomenon is thus resolved into attractions trans- 
mitted independently between atoms so small that any sensible 
distance is extremely great compared with their own dimensions, 
the validity of the extension of the simple astronomical law to 
all sensible distances becomes directly involved. 

The notion that a mass is thus constituted of independent 
atoms can hardly in the light of the extracts given above have 
been foreign to Huygens* point of view : otherwise his difficulties 
would have been still more formidable. On the other hand, in 
the Queries at the end of Newton's * Opticks ' the attraction of 
gravitation is assigned to the pressure of an ambient medium* ; 
so that considerations relating to its properties do not seem to 
have formed part of the reasons for Newton's belief f in an 
atomic constitution of matter. 

The Aether-theory of Newton 

Although Sir Isaac Newton was unable to understand that 
light propagated by waves could cast shadows, and for that 
reason felt compelled to fall back on projection rather than 
undulation in order to account for optical transmission, he yet 

♦ 'Opticks' ed. 2, 1717. Query 21, p. 326. 

t Cf. espedaUy 2oc. cit. Query 81, pp. 850— SS2 : for date, of. Brewster's 
'Life* II, p. 868. 



316 FACTS OP GRAVITATION DISTINCT FROM ITS EXPLANATION [D 

made full use of the conception of an aether, active in chemical, 
thermal, and electrical phenomena, which by its undulations 
affected his moving 'corpuscles' so as to adapt them for re- 
flexion and transmission at equidistant intervals. It was 
reserved for Young and Fresnel to explain this property of 
rectilinear propagation, as depending on the shortness of the 
waves, and thus definitely get rid of the extraneous machinery 
of corpuscles which Newton felt unable to avoid. An account of 
Newton's recorded pronouncements on the optical necessity of 
an aether is contained in Young's memoir 'On the Theory of 
Light and Colours'*: his conviction as to the necessity of a 
medium for the transmission of gravitation is emphatically 
expressed in the well-known Letters to Bentley. 

Newton to Leibnitz, Oct 1693, on Huygens' * Discours 
sur la Cause de la Pesanteur ' 

" Quae vir summus Hugenius in mea notavit in^^eniosa sunt 
Parallaxis solis minor videtur quam ipse statueram, et motus 
sonorum forte magis rectilineus est ; at coelos materia aliqua 
subtili nimis implore videtur. Nam cum motus coelestes sint 
magis regulares quam si a vorticibus orirentur, et leges alias 
observent, adeo ut vortices non ad regendos sed ad perturbandos 
Planetarum et Cometanim motus conducant, cumque omnia 
coelorum et maris phaenomena ex gravitate solis secundum 
leges a me descriptas agente accurate quantum sentio sequantur, 
et natura simplicissima sit, ipse causas alias omnes abdicandas 
judicavi et coelos materia omni quantum fieri licet privandos, 
ne motus Planetarum et Cometanim impediantur aut reddantur 
irregulares. At interea si quis gravitatem una cum omnibus 
ejus legibus per actionem materiae alicujus subtilis explicuerit, 
et motus Planetarum et Cometanim ab hac materia non per- 
turbatos iri ostenderit, ego mini me adversabor." 

Edleston's 'Correspondence of Sir Isaac Newton 
and Prof Cotes...' p. 278. 

Newton on tfie Necessity of Atomic Theory 
"...Deinde ex his viribus per propositiones etiam mathe- 
maticas, deducuntur motus planetarum, cometanim, lunse & 
maris. Utinam caetera naturae phenomena ex principiis 

* Phil, Tram, 1801 : * Lectures on Natural Philosophy,* quarto ed. Vol. n. 



D] NEWTON ON THE NECESSITY FOR AN AETHER 817 

mechanicis eodem argumentandi genere derivare liceret. Nam 
multa me movent, ut nonnihil suspicer ea omnia ex viribus 
quibusdam pendere posse, quibus corporum particulse per 
causas nondum cognitas vel in se mutuo impelluntnr & secun- 
dum figuras regulares cohaerent, vel ab invicem fugantur & 
recedunt : quibus viribus ignotis, philosophi hactenus naturam 
frustra tentanint. Spero autem quod vel huic philosophandi modo, 
vel veriori alicui, principia hie posita lucem aliquam praebebunt" 

Preface to * Principia/ 1686. 

Experimental Philosophy deals only with facts : yet an Aether 

is necessary for all physical actions 

"...Rationem vero harum gravitatis proprietatum ex phse- 
nomenis nondum potui deducere, & hypotheses non fingo. Quic- 
quid enim ex phaenomenis non deducitur, hypothesis vocanda 
est; & hypotheses sen metaphysicae, seu physicae, seu quali- 
tatum occultarum, seu mechanicae, in philosophia experinientali 
locum non habent. In hac philosophia propositiones deduc- 
untur ex phaenomenis, & redduntur generales per inductionem. 
Sic impenetrabilitas, mobilitas & impetus corporum & leges 
motuum & gravitatis innotuerunt. Et satis est quod gravitas 
revera existat, & agat secundum leges a nobis expositas, & ad 
corporum caelestium & maris nostri motus omnes sufficiat. 

" Adjicere jam liceret nonnulla de spiritu quodam subtilis- 
simo corpora crassa pervadente, & in iisdem latente ; cujus vi & 
actionibus particulae corporum ad minimas distantias se mutuo 
attrahunt, & contiguae factae cohaerent; & corpora electrica 
agunt ad distantias majores, tam repellendo quam attrahendo 
corpuscula vicina; & lux emittitur, reflectitur, refringitur, in- 
flectitur, & corpora calefacit; & sensatio omnis excitatur, & 
membra animalium ad voluntatem moventur, vibrationibus 
scilicet hujus spiritus per solida nervorum capillamenta ab 
externis sensuum organis ad cerebrum & a cerebro in musculis 
propagatis. Sed haec paucis exponi non possunt ; neque adest 
suflSciens copia experimentorum, quibus leges actionum hujus 
spiritus accurate determinari & monstrari debent." 

* Principia' Ed. 3, 1726 ; end of final scholium* 

* Cf. the detailed views in Query 81 at the end of ' Optioks ' ed. 2, 1717. 



318 DAVr ON THE ELECTRIC BASIS OF CHEMICAL ACTION [D 

Thomas Young on an Electric and Optical Aether 

"That a medium resembling, in many properties, that 
which has been denominated ether, does actually exist, is 
undeniably proved by the phenomena of electricity ; and the 
arguments against the existence of such an ether, throughout 
the universe, have been pretty sufficiently answered by Euler. 
The rapid transmission of the electrical shock shows that the 
electric medium is possessed of an elasticity as great as is 
necessary to be supposed for the propagation of light. Whether 
the electric ether is to be considered as the same with the 
luminous ether, if such a fluid exists, may perhaps at some 
future time be discovered by experiment : hitherto I have not 
been able to observe that the refractive power of a fluid under- 
goes any change by electricity...." 

* Outlines of experiments and inquiries respecting 
Sound and Light,' Phil. Trans. 1800. 



Sir H. Davy on the Identity of Chemical Affinity and 

Electric Attraction 

"The relation of electrical energy to chemical aflfinity is 
however sufficiently evident. May it not be identical with it, 
and an essential property of matter ? " 

First Bakerian Lecture, 1806, section viii. 

•* I drew the conclusion [in 1806] that the combinations and 
decompositions by electricity were referable to the laws of electrical 
attractions and repulsions; and advanced the h3rpothesis *that 
chemical and electrical attrojctions were produced by the same 
cause, acting in one case <m particles, in ike other on masses'; 
and that the same property, under different modifications ^ was 
the cause of all the phenomena exhibited by different voltaic 
combinations." 

Lecture of date 1810, quoted in ' Life ' 1836, 
by John Davy, Vol. I, p. 330. 



d] gauss on the necessity for an electric aether 319 

C. F. Gauss on the Law of Electrodynamic Action 

" I would doubtless have long ago published ray researches, 
mainly of date 1834 — 1836, had there not, up to the time when 
I discontinued them, been wanting what I considered as the 
very keystone. 

Nil actum reputans si quid superesset agendum, 

namely the dedttction of the law of force (which applies to the 
mutual actions of particles of electricity in relative motion as 
well as at rest) from action not instantaneous but propagated in 
time in a similar manner to light. This had not been reached 
by me : but so far as I remember I left the research at that 
time not without hope that it would probably be attained later, 
yet — if I remember right — with the subjective conviction that 
it would previously be requisite to form a working representa- 
tion [construirbare Vorstellung] of the manner in which the 
propagation takes place." 

Letter to W. Weber, Mar. 1845 ; translated 
from Gauss, ' Werke,' v, p. 629*. 

Lord Kelvin on the Nature of Atoms 

" I can now tell the amount of the force [of attraction] 

and calculate how great a proportion of the chemical aflSnity is 
used up electrolytically before two such discs [of zinc and 
copper] come within j^ of an inch of one another, or any less 
distance down to a limit within which molecular heterogeneous- 
ness becomes sensible. This of course gives a definite limit for 
the size of atoms, or rather as I do not believe in atoms, for the 
dimensions of molecular structures." 

Proc. Manchester Lit and Phil, Soc, 1862. 

Th. Graham on the Constitution of Matter 

" To the preceding statements respecting atomic and mole- 
cular mobility, it remains to be added that the hypothesis 
admits of another expression. As in the theory of light we 
have the alternative hypotheses of emission and undulation, so 
in molecular mobility the motion may be assumed to reside 

* Cf. Maxwell, * Treatiee * §§ 851, 861, 866. 



320 GRAHAM ON THE NATURE OF ATOMS [D 

either in separate atoms and molecules, or in a flaid mediam 
caused to undulate. A special rate of vibration or pulsation 
originally imparted to a portion of the fluid medium [Boger 
Bacon's v\r\\ enlivens that portion of matter with an individual 
existence and constitutes it a distinct substance or element." 

' Speculative Ideas respecting the Constitution of Matter/ 
Fhil. Mag, 1864; Chemical and Phjrsical Researches, 
p. 301, — cf. also the Introduction, by R. Angus Smith. 

Fresnel to Arago, on the Influence of the EariJCa Motion 

on Optical Phenomena 

" Par vos belles experiences sur la lumifere des ^toiles, vous 
avez d^montr^ que le mouvement du globe terrestre n'a aucone 
influence sensible sur la refraction des rayons qui ^manent de 
ces astres.... 

" Vous m'avez engag^ k examiner si le r^sultat de ces 
observations pourrait se concilier plus aisdment avee le syst^me 
qui fait consister la lumifere dans les vibrations d'un fluide 
universel. II est d'autant plus n^cessaire d'en donner Texplica- 
tion dans cette th^orie, qu'elle doit s'appliquer 6galement aux 
objets terrestres; car la vitesse avec laquelle se propagent les 
ondes est ind^pendante du mouvement du corps dont elles 
6manent. 

" Si Ton admettait que notre globe imprime son mouvement 
k rather dont il est envelopp^, on concevrait ais^ment pour- 
quoi le mfeme prisme r^fracte toujours la lumi^re de la mSme 
manifere, quelle que soit le cot^ d'oil elle arrive. Mais il parait 
impossible d*expliquer I'aberration des etoiles dans cette hypo- 
thfese : je n'ai pu jusqu'a present du moins concevoir nettement 
ce ph^nomfene qu'en supposant que Tether passe librement au 
travers du globe, et que la vitesse communiqu^e k ce fluide 
subtil n'est qu'une petite partie de celle de la terre ; n'en excede 
pas le centieme, par exemple. 

'*Quelque extraordinaire que paraisse cette hypoth^se au 
premier abord, elle n*est point en contradiction, ce me semble, 
avec rid6e que les plus grands physiciens se sont fiEute de 
Textreme porosity des corps. On pent demander, k la v^rit^. 




d] fresnel's argument for a stagnant aether 321 

comment un corps opaque trfes-raince interceptant la lumi^re, il 
arrive qu'il s'^tablisse un courant d*6ther au travers de notre 
globe. Sans pr^tendre r^pondre completement a Tobjection, je 
ferai remarquer cependant que ces deux sortes de mouvemens 
sont d*une nature trop difiR^rente pour qu'on puisse appliquer h, 
Tun ce qu*on observe relativement k Tautre. Le mouvement 
lumineux n'est point un courant, mais une vibration de Tether. 
L*on con9oit que les petites ondes ^l^mentaires dans lesquelles 
la luraiere se divise en traversant les corps peuvent, dans 
certains cas, se trouver en discordance lorsqu'elles se r^unissent, 
en raison de la difference des chemins parcourus ou des retards 
in^gaux qu'elles ont c5prouv6s dans leur marche ; ce qui emp^he 
la propagation des vibrations, ou les denature de fa9on k leur 
6ter la propriety d'^clairer, ainsi que cela a lieu d'une mani^re 
bien frappante dans les corps noirs; tandis que les mSmes 
circonstances n'empecheraient pas Tetablissement d'un courant 
d'^ther. L*on augmente la transparence de Thydrophane en la 
mouillant, et il est Evident que Tinterposition de Teau entre les 
particules, qui favorise la propagation des vibrations lumineuses, 
doit au contraire ^tre un petit obstacle de plus ^ T^tablissement 
d*un courant d'^ther; ce qui demontre bien la grande difference 
qui existe entre ces deux especes de mouvemens. 

"L'opacit^ de la terre n'est done pas une raison suffisante 
pour nier Texistence d'un courant d'^ther entre ses molecules, 
et Ton pent la supposer assez poreuse pour qu'elle ne com- 
munique k ce fluide qu'une tres-petite partie de son mouve- 
ment. 

" A Taide de cette hypothfese, le phenomfene de Taberration 
est aussi facile a concevoir dans la throne dea ondulations que 
dans celle de remission ; car il r&ulte du d^placement de la 
lunette pendant que la lumifere la parcourt: or, d'aprfes cette 
hypothese, les ondes lumineuses ne participant point sensible- 
ment au mouvement de la lunette, que je suppose dirig^e sur le 
lieu vrai de 1 etoile, Timage de cet astre se trouve en arri^re 
du fil plac6 au foyer de Toculaire d'une quantite egale k celle 
que parcourt la terre pendant que la lumifere parcourt la 
lunette. 

" II s'agit d'expliquer maintenant, dans la mfime hypothfese, 

L. 21 



322 FRESNEL'S representation of optical CGlfVBCnON [d 

comment la refraction apparente ne varie pas avec la directicm 
des rayons lumineux par rapport au mouvement terrestre." 

Letter to Arago, AnnaUa de Chimie, 1818. 

The explanation given is, briefly, that refraction depends 
solely on difference of density of the aether, so that the density 
of the aether is proportional to fi^ : when a transparent body 
filled with this denser aether advances across the stagnant 
aether of free space with velocity v, a stream of aether must 
enter it in front and leave it behind, so that by the equation of 
continuity the aether inside it will advance but with velocity 
reduced by fi~^v* : and the light transmitted by this aether will 
partake of this velocity of advance (1 — /i"^) v. It is then 
verified that the laws of reflexion and refraction will, on this 
supposition, remain unaffected. 

* Fresners explanation is obscure: he speaks of the enoloeed aether being 
in part at rest and in part carried on along with the matter, and says that it 
may easily be seen that the velocity of light is increased by that of the oentze of 
gravity of both parts. The above, which (p. 15) is the interpretation adopted by 
Stokes and by Maxwell, is doubtless his real meaning. 




APPENDIX E 

ON KINEMATIC AND MECHANICAL MODES OF REPRESENTATION 

OF THE ACTIVITY OF THE AETHER 

Mechanical Models and Illustrationa 

"Although the Gaussian aspect of the subject, which 
would simply assert that the primary atoms of matter exert 
actions on each other which are transmitted in time across 
space in accordance with Maxwell's equations, is a formally 
sufficient basis on which to construct physical theory, yet the 
question whether we can form a valid conception of a medium 
which is the seat of this transmission is of fundamental philo- 
sophical interest, quite independently of the fact that in default 
of the analogy at any rate of such a medium this theory would 
be too difficult for development. With a view to further 
assisting a judgment on this question, it is here proposed to 
describe a process by which a dynamical model of this medium 
can be theoretically built up out of ordinary matter, — not 
indeed a permanent model, but one which can be made to 
continue to represent the aether for any assignable finite time, 
though it must ultimately decay. The aether is a perfect fluid 
endowed with rotational elasticity ; so in the first place we 
have — and this is the most difficult part of our undertaking — 
to construct a material model of a perfect fluid, which is a type 
of medium nowhere existing in the material world. Its charac- 
teristics are continuity of motion and absence of viscosity: 
on the other hand in an ordinary fluid, continuity of motion is 
secured by diffusion of momentum by the moving molecules, 

21—2 



324 NO MOLECULARLY CX)NSnTCrTED FLUID IS PERFECT [l 



which is itself viscosity, so that it is only in motions such as 
vibrations and slight undulations where the other finite effects 
of viscosity are negligible, that we can treat an ordinary fluid 
as a perfect one. If we imagine an aggregation of frictionless 
solid spheres, each studded over symmetrically with a small 
number of frictionless spikes (say four) of length considerably 
less than the radius*, so that there are a very large number of 
spheres in the ditferential element of volume, we shall have a 

possible though very crude means 
of representation of an ideal per- 
fect fluid. There is next to be 
imparted to each of these spheres 
the elastic property of resistiog 
absolute rotation; and in this we 
follow the lines of Lord Kelvin's 
gyrpstatic vibratory aether. Con- 
sider a gyrostat consisting of a 
flywheel spinning with angular 
momentum /i, with its axis AB pivoted as a diameter on 
a ring whose perpendicular diameter CD is itself pivoted 
on the sphere, which may for example be a hollow shell 
with the flywheel pivoted in its interior; and examine the 
effect of imparting a small rotational displacement to the 
sphere. The direction of the axis of the gyrostat will be 
displaced only by that component of the rotation which is in 
the plane of the ring ; an angular velocity ddjdt in this plane 
will produce a torque measured by the rate of change of the 
angular momentum, and therefore by the parallelogram law 
equal to fidd/dt turning the ring round the perpendicular axis 
CD, thus involving a rotation of the ring round that axis with 
angular acceleration fi/i,d0/dt, that is with velocity ^li.B, 
where i is the ag^a^regate moment of inertia of the ring and the 
flywheel about a diameter of the wheel. Thus when the 
sphere has turned through a small angle 6, the axis of the 




* The use of these studs is to maintain oontinnity of motion of the medium 
without the aid of viscosity; and also (§ 4) to compel each sphere to participate 
in the rotation of the element of volume of the medium, so that the latter «h^w 
be controlled by the gyrostatio torques of the spheres. 




e] gyrostatic rotational elasticity and its limitations 325 

g3rrostat will be turning out of the plane of with an angular 
velocity fi/i. 0, which will persist uniform so long as the dis- 
placement of the sphere is maintained. This angular velocity 
again involves, by the law of vector composition, a decrease of 
gyrostatic angular momentum round the axis of the ring at the 
rate fi^/i . ; accordingly the displacement imparted to the 
sphere originates a gyrostatic opposing torque, equal to fi^/i . 
so long as iiji.j0dt remains small, and therefore of purely 
elastic type. If then there are mounted on the sphere three 
such rings in mutually perpendicular planes, having equal free 
angular momenta associated with them, the sphere will resist 
absolute rotation in all directions with isotropic elasticity. 
But this result holds only so long as the total displacement of 
the axes of the flywheels is small : it suffices however to confer 
rotatory elasticity, as far as is required for the purpose of the 
transmission of vibrations of small displacement through a 
medium constituted of a flexible fi*amework with such gyrostatic 
spheres attached to its links, which is Lord Kelvin's gyrostatic 
model* of the luminiferous working of the aether. For the 
present purpose we require this quality of perfect rotational 
elasticity to be permanently maintained, whether the disturb- 
ance is vibratory or continuous. Now observe that if the 
above associated free angular momentum ft is taken to be very 
great, it will require a proportionately long time for a given 
torque to produce an assigned small angular displacement, and 
this time we can thus suppose prolonged as much as we please : 
observe further that the motion of our rotational aether in the 
previous papers is irrotational except where electric force 
exists which produces rotation proportional to its intensity, and 
that we have been compelled to assume a high coefficient of 
inertia of the medium, and therefore an extremely high elasticity 
in order to conserve the ascertained velocity of radiation, so 
that the very strongest electric forces correspond to only very 
slight rotational displacements of the medium : and it follows 
that the arrangement here described, though it cannot serve as 
a model of a field of steady electric force lasting for ever, can 

* Lord Kelvin, Comptes Rendus, Sept. 1889: 'Math, and Phys. Papers,' 
ui, p. 466. 



326 MODEL OF AN ELECTRON [B 

yet theoretically represent such a field lasting without sensible 
decay for any length of time that may be assigned. 

" It remains to attempt a model (cfl Part I, § 116) of the 
constitution of an electron, that is of one of the point-singul- 
arities in the uniform aether which are taken to be the basis 
of matter, and at any rate are the basis of its electrical pheno- 
mena. Consider the medium composed of studded gyrostatic 
spheres as above : although the motions of the aether, as 
distinct from the matter which flits across it, are so excessively 
slow on account of its great inertia that viscosity might 
possibly in any case be neglected, yet it will not do to omit the 
studs and thus make the model like a model of a gas, for we 
require rotation of an individual sphere to be associated with 
rotation of the whole element of volume of the medium in 
which it occurs. Let then in the rotationally elastic medium 
a narrow tubular channel be formed, say for siaiplicity a 
straight channel AB of uniform section: suppose the walls 
of this channel to be grasped, and rotated round the axis of the 
tube, the rotation at each point being proportional for the 
straight tube to AP'^-^-PB^*: this rotation will be distri- 
buted through the medium, and as the result there will be 
lines of rotational displacement all starting from A and termin- 
ating at B : and so long as the walls of the channel are held 
in this position by extraneous force, A will be a positive 
electron in the medium, and B will be the complementary 
negative one. They will both disappear together when the 
wails of the channel are released. But now suppose that before 
this release the channel is filled up (except small vacuous 
nuclei at A and B which will assume the spherical form) with 
studded gyrostatic spheres so as to be continuous with the 
surrounding medium ; the eflfort of release in this surrounding 
medium will rotate these spheres slightly until they attain the 
state of equilibrium in which the rotational elasticity of the new 
part of the medium formed by their aggregate provides a 
balancing torque, and the conditions all round A or B will 
finally be symmetrical. We shall thus have created two per- 

[• This is corrected infra.] 



e] electrons destboted only by supebnatubal means 327 

manent conjugate electrons A and B; each of them can be 
moved about through the medium, but they will both persist 
until they are destroyed by an extraneous process the reverse of 
that by which they are formed. Such constraints as may be 
necessary to prevent division of their vacuous nuclei are outside 
our present scope ; and mutual destruction of two comple- 
mentary electrons by direct impact is an occurrence of infinitely 
small probability. The model of an electron thus formed will 
persist for any finite assignable time if the distribution of 
gyrostatic momentum in the medium is sufficiently intense : 
but the constitution of our model of the medium itself of course 
prevents, in this respect also, absolute permanence. It is not 
by any means here suggested that this circumstance forms any 
basis for speculatiou as to whether matter is permanent, or 
will gradually fade away. The position that we are concerned 
in supporting is that the cosmical theory which is used in the 
present memoirs as a descriptive basis for ultimate ph3rsical 
discussions is a consistent and thinkable scheme; one of the 
most convincing ways of testing the possibility of the existence 
of any hypothetical type of mechanism being the scrutiny of a 
specification for the actual construction of a model of it. 

"An idea of the nature and possibility of a self-locked 
intrinsic strain, such as that here described, may be facilitated 
by reference to the cognate example of a material wire welded 
into a ring after twist has been put into it. We can also have 
a closer parallel, as well as a contrast ; if breach of continuity is 
produced across an element of interface in the midst of an 
incompressible medium endowed with ordinary material 
rigidity, for example by the creation of a lens-shaped cavity, 
and the material on one side of the breach is twisted round in 
its plane, and continuity is then restored by cementing the two 
sides together, a model of an electric doublet or polar molecule 
will be produced, the twist in the medium representing the 
electric displacement and being at a distance expressible as due 
to two conjugate poles in the ordinary manner. Such a doublet 
is permanent, as above ; it can be displaced into a different 
position, at any distance, as a strain-form, without the medium 



328 AKALOGOrS COXSTRrcnONS IX ELASTIC MATTER [E 



moving along with it: sach displacement is aooompanied by an 
additional strain* at each point in the medium, namely, that dae 
to the doublet in its new position together with a negati?e 
doublet in the old one. A series of sach donblets arranged 
transversely round a linear circuit will represent the integrated 
effect of an electric polarization-current in that ciroait : they 
will imply irrotational linear dL<;placement of the medium romid 
the circuit after the manner of Tortex motion, but this will now 
involve elastic stress on account of the rigidity. Thus with an 
ordinary elastic solid medium, the phenomena of dielectrics, 
including wave-propagation, may be kinematically illustrated; 
but we can thereby obtain no representation of a sing'Ie isolated 
electric charge or of a current of conduction, and the laws of 
optical reflexion would be different from the actual ones. This 
material illustration will clearly extend to the dynamical laws 
of induction and electromagnetic attraction between alternating 
currents, but only in so far as they are derived from the 
kinetic energy ; the law of static attraction between doublets 
of this kind would be different from the actual electric law." 

Phil. Trans. 1897 A, pp. 209 — 212. 

1. This description of an ideal (supernatural) construction 
for electrons in a rotational aether requires correction as regards 
one point. The line integral of the rotation that has to be 
imparted to the walls of the canal AB is equal at each cross- 
section to the surface integral of the normal component of the 
rotational displacement of the aether over a sur£EU^ abutting 
on it and enclosing either electron : it is therefore constant all 
along the canal, whether the latter is straight or curved, 
instead of proportional to AP~^ -f PB^ as above stated. Thus 
if the canal is of uniform circular section, the rotational dis- 
placement of its walls is uniform all along it. 

This circumstance allows a development of the analogy, 
which will further illustrate the origin of the mechanical 
attraction between two electrons. It is a well-known device 
in mechanical construction, to use a flexible wire of great 
torsional rigidity to transmit rotation from one shaft to another 

[* See footnote, p. 886.] 



e] analysis of attractions between elbctbons 329 

not in line with it, by clamping the ends of the wire to the ends 
of the shafts so that it forms an elastic connexion between 
them. Now instead of filling up our ideal canal in the aether 
by a filament of aether, let us suppose it filled up by such a 
wire, of infinite torsional rigidity, and in continuous connexion 
with the surrounding aether. Each time any cross section C 
of this wire is rotated round its axis by an impressed torque, 
the rotation is transmitted all along the wire, and thence to the 
aether alongside it ; and two complementary electrons are thus 
developed at its ends A and B. On releasing this section C 
the rotation undoes itself, and these terminal electrons dis- 
appear. This arrangement constitutes an elastic system devoid 
of any intrinsic stress such as was previously implanted 
in the system by filling up the canal with aether itself; for it 
becomes free from stress on releasing the wire. We should 
therefore be in a position to point directly to the proximate 
cause of the attraction of one electron on the other. It is to be 
found in the tangential tractions which the surrounding aether 
exerts on the surface of the wire, which form a system of forces 
statically equivalent, by virtue of the principle of virtual work, 
to an attraction between its ends. 

We can in this way imagine the aether with its contained 
electrons as mathematically dissected into an elastic medium 
devoid of intrinsic strain, by connecting each positive electron 
with a complementary negative one by means of such an elastic 
material wire ABm continuous connexion with the aether, to 
which has been imparted at any cross section C the amount of 
rotation proper to maintain the intensities of the electrons. 
When the wire has disappeared and the electrons at A and B 
are permanently constituted by filling up its place with aether, 
the possibility of thus specifying a proximate cause of the 
mechanical attraction between the electrons has also in a sense 
disappeared. But just as the exploration of the relations of a 
cyclic analytical function requires the introduction of cross-cuts 
or barriers in its domain to render account of the cyclic 
character, so the complete elucidation of the dynamics oT a 
medium involving cyclic intrinsic strain requires the introduction 
of ideal canals or tubes connecting the strain-centres, through 



330 DYNAMICAL EXPLANATION RESTS ON ACTION PRINCIPLE [l 

operation on which this strain may be considered as implanted 
in the medium*. We can even consider the tractions exerted 
on the surface of such a tube of strain as statically transmitted 
to the electrons at its ends just as if it included the wire of the 
illustration. Even when the wire is present the amount of the 
attraction is most easily determined by application of the 
principle of Energy : this method remains available when it is 
absent, so long as it is definitely recognized that the Energy 
principle, or more generally the Action principle, is a funda- 
mental dynamical method whose application is not limited to 
the class of cases in which we are able to describe the activity 
of the medium in terms of familiar processes of direct elastic 
transmission. Although the simultaneous representation of 
the two kinds of existing forcive, aethereal stress and material 
attractions, thus transcends the usual elementary notion of 
elastic propagation, they yet appear alongside each other in the 
development of the dynamical formulation of the medium in 
terms of the principle of Action, which is prior to any model 
whatever, and is moreover logically required, unless we are 
content to view the medium as a system of relations in space 
and time represented by differential equations devoid of 
dynamical significance. We thus conclude, along with von 
Helmholtz, that there is no resting place in general dynamical 
theory or explanation, short of the Action foundation. The 
content of this principle, as applied to continuous media, is in 

* When the medium is thus completely specified, the line integratioii in 
Stokes' theorem of curl will contain integrals round the sections of these tubes 
where they cross the sheet. But it is only the ends of the tubes that are 
determinate ; hence to obtain a definite result we must (as in i, p. 90, in which 
the fluxion dots should be deleted) apply the theorem only to the change, 
indicated there by the A, that results from small displacements of the existing 
electrons; each displacement of an electron is formally equivalent to the 
establishment of a tube of strain connecting its old with its new position, and 
whenever this tube crosses the sheet a correcting term is required in the formula. 

A convenient mode of developing the electrodynamics of material media 
would be to replace the translational displacement of each electron by the local 
rotational displacement of the aether itself which is its constitutive equivalent as 
regards that medium ; the problem can then be treated by methods of oontinnoas 
analysis applied to free aether. Cf. Camh, Phil, Trant., Stokes' Jabilee volume, 
1900. 




e] even in case of material media 331 

various ways wider than the conception of simple elastic trans- 
mission, which is the case that is most familiar in the more 
easily analyzed classes of physical phenomena. We might for 
example have an energy function involving second as well as 
first differential coefficients of the displacementsf, in which case 
disturbances would still be transmitted by the medium, but 
not by the agency of simple elastic stress definable in terms of 
surface tractions alone : it is only the extreme shortness of the 
range of molecular action compared with the size of the 
element of mass that is just sensible to our powers of observa- 
tion, that debars this ease from being a practical one. 

In point of history, the dynamics of elastic propagation 
was first developed in a somewhat inexact way by Navier and 
Poisson, and attempts were subsequently made to establish it 
on an incomplete molecular foundation by Cauchy and others. 
But there was no reliable foothold obtainable even for this 
simple case until Green, by one of his strokes of genius, 
summarily included the whole matter under the Action prin- 
ciple. Reference to a transmitting medium was previously 
instructive by way of general illustration, for example in 
physical optics, but before the use of this principle by Green 
and by MacCullagh there was no sufficiently exact and general 
formulation of its possible modes of activity. It is in this way 
that the Action principle is prior even to the exact develop- 
ment of a theory of simple elastic transmission: and it is 
thus not surprising that it forms the most suitable basis when 
the transmitting medium is constituted in a more complex 
manner. 

2. The subjects discussed in this book have in the main 
been treated without any hypothesis as to the structure of the 
nucleus of an electron, in a preliminary stage of the develop- 
ment of this theory, the analogy of an electron to a conductor 
carrying an electric charge suggested that the nucleus of an 
electron might be treated as a miuute spherical region in which 
the aether is effectively devoid of elasticity : but this is not an 
essential or even probable feature. The illustration above given, 

t Cf. pp. 207, 856 footnote. 



332 DETAILED STKUCTURE OF AN ELECTRON NOT INVOLVED [E 

of a Ducleus of iDtrinsic strain in an elastic solid, indicates that 
what is essential is the concentration of ' beknottedness * in the 
small volume of the medium which constitutes the nucleus, 
which would thus correspond to a small volume-electrificatioiL 
Such an intrinsic strain-form is mobile through the medium, 
without thereby originating any new distribution of stress 
around it, because it is only rotation and not deformation of 
the aether that calls out elastic reaction ; and this free mobility 
is an essential element in the theory. But the analysis into 
independent strains and rotations, on which it rests, requires 
that both strain and rotation shall be very small ; thus the 
inertia of the medium must be very great, and each nucleus 
must be so constituted that the intrinsic rotations involved 
in its structure are so small that they C€Ui everywhere be 
treated as differential rotations, which is demanded by the 
linearity of the scheme of equations as well as by the mobility 
of the nucleus. 

The dynamical scheme developed in Chapter vi is however 
based solely on the application of the method of Action to 
a medium uniform throughout all space, specified by the 
Lagrangian function T— TF of p. 84, and involving in its con- 
stitution mobile poles or electrons which by their aggregation 
form a representation of matter, at any rate in those respects in 
which it interacts with the aether. In that scheme the effective 
aethereal displacement represented by (f, 17, f) need not be 
defined : it is not necessary (and it was not there intended) to 
assume it to be a translational displacement. The scheme thus 
stands on a formally definite basis independently of any know- 
ledge of the type of disturbance that (f , 17. f ) represents : and 
it has not as yet been shown to be too narrow to represent the 
field of general physical actions. 

In the model or illustration of the working of the aether 
which has been here described, this disturbance (f , 17, f ) is taken 
to represent translational displacement of the element of aether 
originally situated at the point {x, y, z). The medium is then 
one whose elasticity is purely and solely rotational. One object 
of the gyrostatic mode of representation above explained is to 
render the idea of rotational elasticity more familiar and more 



e] this representation merelt illustrative 833 

easily grasped, by illustrating it from the properties of an actual 
medium which could theoretically be constructed from ordinary 
matter. It is also of use towards allaying scruples that naturally 
arise as to the legitimacy of assuming a set of abstract properties 
of a type not met with in matter under ordinary conditions, 
and therefore liable to the suspicion of being somehow self- 
contradictory or in opposition to formally necessary dynamical 
principles : but though an actual model of such a medium forms 
a valuable and forcible illustration, the argument is logically 
complete without it. Such a gjrostatic model has no claim to 
be more than an illustration of the properties of the aether, for 
an aether of the present type can hardly on any scheme be 
other than a medium, or mental construction if that term is 
preferred, prior to matter and therefore not expressible in terms 
of matter. 

This more special hypothesis that takes the variable (f , 17, f) 
in p. 84 to be proportional to actual translational displacement, 
involves on the other hand a question of direct fact, as to which 
there are physical means of inquiry : its further consideration is 
therefore called for. It has been explained that, whatever be 
the character of the vector (f, 17, f), the facts as regards the 
influence of the Earth's motion on optical phenomena, as well 
as the linear character (p. 96) of the electrodynamic equations, 
require that the aether shall be practically stagnant. On the 
present hypothesis this vector, whose time-gradient represents 
magnetic force, must therefore be equal to the translational 
displacement of the medium multiplied by a very large numerical 
constant. There is in fact no phenomenon known which is in- 
consistent with the ultimate simplification of passing analytically 
towards a limit, by taking the translational displacement to be 
indefinitely small and this multiplier indefinitely great. 

The question suggests itself, as to what inducement there is 
to specify (/, gr, A) as of the type of rotational displacement at 
all, seeing that the theory developes itself without any reference 
to the type of disturbance which this vector represents. The 
only motive is that the number of unconnected hypotheses, 
which dynamically cannot be independent, is thereby reduced : 
the possibility of the intrinsic elastic structure of an electron, 



334 A ROTATIONAL SCHEME CONNECTS THE HTPOTHESBB [E 

and that of its free mobility, will be in the more indeterminate 
theory two new assumptioDS, both of unaccustomed character: 
while on the more special view they are both merged as corol- 
laries in the single interpretation of the relations of the aethereal 
medium, so that the scheme proceeds on that basis alone. But 
in the case of a mind to which this simplification does not 
appeal, either as an elimination of a group of hypotheses that 
cannot from the nature of the case be independent and are so 
liable to the possibility of being inconsistent with each other, 
or else as an assistance to vivid apprehension of the relations*, 
the argument can proceed without any necessity for its adoption. 

3. It is not merely convenient, but is also necessary, for 
the mathematical analysis of a medium involving electrons, 
to transform the independent variable as in Chapter vi from 
(f» V» ^^ (f* 9i ^)» if we are to evade an analytical dissection 
of the medium by means of the strain-tubes of § 1. For the 
former variable can represent only the change of state of the 
medium arising from the displacement of the electrons: the 
primordial creation of these electrons required also displace- 
ments of this type (f, 77, f), which involved discontinuous 
processes, but left no trace after the discontinuities of the 

* It is desirable to further emphasize that these representations are iUustra* 
tive, not essential: it may be held that they are too imperfect to be useful, 
without giving up anything essential in the theoretical formulation of the 
phenomena. In ultimate logic any physical representation is in fact a mental con* 
struction or analogy, designed to relieve the mind from the intangible and elusive 
character of a complex of abstract relations. It thus involves a correlation of a 
range of phenomena with something else that can be constructed either actually 
or mentally. It is however unreasonable to suppose that two things not the 
same can have complete identity of relations : on the other hand the universal 
employment of such ideal pictures constitutes evidence that they are legitimate 
and powerful aids to knowledge. Our mental image, whether abstract or 
illuminated by a model, cannot ever be completely identical with the complex of 
phenomena which it represents, though it is capable of continued approximation 
thereto. The essential problem is to determine in each case how deep the 
correspondence extends : if it is found to extend into unforeseen properties and 
lead to the recognition or prediction of new relations in the field of the actual 
phenomena, its propriety within due restrictions is usually considered to be 
vindicated : it is in fact in this way that most advances of knowledge arise. Ct 
pp. 68-71; also Hertz's *Mechanik,* Introduction. 



e] static attractions transmitted not propagated 335 

medium had been healed except the presence of the rotational 
strain belonging to them. Thus it is only the latter variable 
(/> 9^ ^)) which is proportional to the strain, that can express 
the complete state of the medium, including the positions of 
the electrons as the intrinsic poles of the strain. When the 
Action is expressed in terms of this latter variable, its variation 
analyzes the forcive of the system into torques acting on the 
elements of volume of the aether and forces acting on the 
electrons, which are both supplemented by internal stresses, 
determined only as to type, arising from the Lagrangian 
multipliers of Chapter VI, these stresses being involved in 
maintaining continuity in the internal constitution of the 
system and being determined ultimately by the condition 
that they do so. The mode in which the torque thus acting 
on the medium is propagated by it appears subsequently in 
this procedure from the analysis of the resulting equations: 
but the forces acting on the electrons, though in a sense 
transmitted by the medium, are not propagated across it at all. 
Yet it is these latter forces alone, — of which the aggregates 
give rise to the electric force altering electric distributions 
and the mechanical forces acting on material bodies that are 
electrically excited or transmit electric currents, — that are 
the primary realities as regards our perceptions, the strains 
propagated in the aether itself being wholly inferential. The 
Energy-principle, or more generally, the Action-principle, as 
thus developed, is of wider scope than the idea of simple step- 
by-step propagation which represents the results of applying 
it to a homogeneous elastic medium devoid of singularities. 
This recognition of dynamical action between systems, arising 
otherwise than by direct propagation of elastic stress between 
them, however in no way implies that the aether is not the 
sole medium of transmission: it may for example be recalled 
that the mutual actions of vortex rings in perfect fluid are 
not propagated in time across the fluid, though they take place 
by its intervention*. 

* It is the intrinsio strain-form alone that constitutes the electron; and it is 
a fundamental postulate that the form can move from one portion to another of 
the stagnant aether somewhat after the manner that a knot can slip along a cord. 



336 A CONSTITUTIVE AETHER [E 

4. The essential contrast between thoroughgoing consti- 
tutive theories of the aether, like the vortex-atom theory and 
the one above sketched, and the usual theories of radiation 
which ascribe to the aether an extremely minute density 
compared with matter, is that on the former view the aether 
is fundamental, and its properties must be adapted to be 
consistent, by themselves alone, with the whole range of 
physics, whereas on the latter view we have an independent 
dynamics of matter treated as fundamental, and the aether 
must be arranged so as but slightly to interfere with it. The 
latter view virtually identifies aether with a species of matter. 
Its difficulties become conspicuous as soon as we admit the 
modem theory that the energy of a magnetic field is distri- 
buted in the surrounding region of free space and is constituted 
of aethereal kinetic energy : if we assume very small inertia, 
this must involve either velocities of translation of the aether, 
of altogether impossible magnitudes, or else a cellular structure 
in which the energy exists in some way as energy of gyrostatic 
rotation, so that the magnetic force is some kind of kinematic 
vector which is not translatory. That being assumed, the 

If this form is taken as an entity, so that its position is part of the specification 
of the system, then the dynamical analysis introduces forces acting on it : it is 
possible that the origin of these forces might be farther analyzed by aid of 
a deeper knowledge of the constitution of the system, but at present it suffices 
to consider them as efifectively an ultimate datum. In a rotational aether an 
electron thus mobile has been constructed : its displacement from AioB involves 
rotation of the medium around the successive elements of its path in such 
manner that there is no additional strain produced. Whereas when an intrinsio 
strain-form is implanted in an clastic solid, of the type indicated on p. 327 but 
with its nucleus extended over a minute volume so that the intrinsic deformation 
thus inserted by supernatural processes of rupture and healing is nowhere finitely 
discontinuous, it cannot in general (as there assumed) be removed to another 
position even by imposing additional strains in the medium, because the 
diRContinuities involved in its creation cannot be entirely annulled by imposing 
any continuous strain : thus there cannot be phenomena of freely mobile strain- 
forms connected with a solid medium. In the case of the electron an additional 
hypothesis is involved that the nucleus does not break up : this transcends the 
rotational scheme, which stops short of the constitution of the nuclens. It is to 
be noticed that in the case of a strain-nucleus in a solid, the strain-field may be 
considered as created by tractions applied to a surface surrounding it ; but in the 
case of an electron a strain-tube travelling out from this surface is also required. 



e] contrasted with an accidental one 337 

diflSculty is transferred to conceiving a mechanism by which 
the vibrations of simply material atoms can transfer energy 
into a medium so differently constituted : whereas in the 
former type of theory the whole of the energy of the vibra- 
tions of the atoms belongs to the aether because the atoms 
themselves belong to it. These discussions can however be 
to some extent deferred, if we are willing to admit without 
explanation the scheme of equations derived in Chapter vi 
from the form of energy-function for the aether, supposed 
stagnant, which is there postulated, in combination with the 
principle of Least Action and, as a corollary, with an atomic 
structure of matter, involving electrons in its specification. 



The electron theory required by the electrodynamics of 

steady currents 

" According to the type of theory which considers a current 
system to be built up of physical current-elements of the 
form (w, Vy w) St, the energy associated with an element of 
volume Sr, as existing in the surrounding field and controlled 
by the element, is 

T^{Fu-{-Ov-{-Hw)Bt. 

"The ponderomotive force acting on the element will be 
derived from a potential energy function — T, by varying the 
coordinates of the material framework : it must in Setct consist, 
per unit volume, of a force 

dF dG_^ dH dF ^dG dH 
dx dx dx * dy dy dy * 

dF dO dH\ 

i^ j7 + t;n- + t(; -7-), 
az az az / 

and a couple 

{vH-wG, wF-uH, uO-vF\ 

the former being derived from a translational, the latter fi-om 

a rotational virtual displacement of the element. We may 

simplify these expressions by taking the axis of z parallel to 

L. 22 



338 AK ELECTRODTNAMIC POTENTIAL INSUFFICIENT [E 

the current in the element St, so that u and v become null; 

then we have 

/ dH dH dH\ 
aforce(ti;^, w^, w^) 

and a couple (—wG^, wF, 0). 

"According to the Ampere-Maxwell formula, there should 
be simply a force at right angles to the current, specified by 
the general formula 

(vc — wb, wa^uc, m6 — va), 
which becomes for the present special axes of coordinates 

f fdF dH\ /dH dO\ J) 

" The forcive at which we have here arrived thus differs 
from the Ampere-Maxwell one by 

. [ dF dO dH\ 
aforce^«;^.«;^. u,-^) 

and a couple (— wO, wF, 0) : 

these are equivalent to forces acting on the ends of each 
linear current element, equal at each end numerically to 
{wF, wOy wH) per unit of cross section, positive at the front 
end and negative at the rear end. They are thus of the nature 
of an internal stress in the medium, and are self-equilibrating 
for each circuital current and so do not disturb the resultant 
forcive on the conductor as a whole due to the field in which it 
is situated. From Maxwell's stress standpoint they would 
form an equilibrating addition to the stress-specification in 
the conductor which is the formal equivalent of the electro- 
dynamic forcive. 

"According to the Ampere-Maxwell formula, the forcive on 
an element of a linear conductor carrying a current is at right 
angles to it, so that the tension along the conductor is constant 
so far as that forcive is concerned. The traction in the direction 
of the current arising from the above additional stress, would 
introduce an additional tension, equal to the current multiplied 



e] experibiental tests 339 

by the component of the vector potential in its direction, which 
is not usually constant along the circuit, and so may be made 
the subject of experimental test with liquid conductors, as it 
would introduce differences of fluid pressure. There will also 
be an additional transverse shearing stress which should 
reveal itself in experiments on solid conductors with sliding 
contacts. 

"In particular these additional forces should reveal them- 
selves in the space surrounding a closed magnetic circuit, 
where the ordinary Amperean force vanishes because the 
magnetic field is null ; in that case {F, 0, H) may be inter- 
preted as the total impulsive electric force induced at any 
point by the making of the circuit. Professor G. F. Fitzgerald 
has devised an experiment in which the behaviour of a thread 
of mercury carrying a strong current and linked with a complete 
magnetic circuit was closely observed when the circuit was 
made and broken. No movement was detected, whereas, when 
the magnetic circuit was incomplete, the ordinary Amperean 
forces were very prominent. According to the above analysis, 
the two tjrpes of forcive should be of the same order of magni- 
tude in such a case : the result of the experiment is therefore 
against this theory. A like negative result has also attended 
an experiment by Professor O. J. Lodge, in which he proposed 
to detect minute changes of level along the upper surface of a 
uniform mercury thread by an interference arrangement on the 
principle of Newton's rings: when the current was turned on, 
the section of the thread became more nearly circular owing to 
the mutual attractions of the different filaments of the current, 
but there was no alteration in the direction of its length."* 

Phil Trans. 1895 a, pp. 698—700. 

* Then follows a verification that the same result is dedacible from the 
expression of Neumann and von Helmholtz for the mutual eleotrokinetic energy 
of two current elements, namely 



.^,,^,j55ii^)4^;)f. 



As regards however the phenomena of ordinary electrodynamics, which 
involve velocities and alternations slow compared with tliose of radiation, the 

22-2 



340 MUTUAL KINETIC ENERGY OF ELECTRONS [E 

energy may all be considered as attached to the electrons, and eTerything may 
be deduced from the expression 






for the matual eleotrokinetio energy (cf. PHL TVaiu. 1894 A, p. 812) of two 
electrons ei and e^ moving with velocities vj and «^ in the directions of <^ and 
dt, . This would lead to a different value for the electric force (the force acting 
on an electron) from that given by Weber's formula \€i€^if^ {dr^Jdi)^ \ but it 
must give the same results (cf. Maxwell, * Treatise ' §§ 856 — 860) for the induced 
total electromotive force driving a current around a circuit and for the 
mechanical force on an element of a conductor carrying a current. 




APPENDIX F 

MAGNETIC INFLUENCES ON RADIATION AS A CLUE TO 

MOLECULAR CONSTITUTION 

The Zeeman effect 

1. The most direct and definite experimental indication 
towards the intimate structure of a molecule, hitherto obtained, 
has been the effect of a magnetic field on the character of its 
free periods of vibration, discovered by Zeeman and largely 
anticipated as to its general character from theoretical con- 
siderations by Lorentz and others. 

If we regard the molecule as constituted of a system of 
ions, of various effective masses denoted by m and electric 
charges denoted by e, revolving round each other under their 
mutual electric and other forces, then when a steady magnetic 
field H is impressed in the direction (Z, m, n), their equations 
of motion are modified into the type 

inx^nuc(ny — mi) = X 
my — Mfc {Iz — nx) = F 
m*i — vfiK {mx — ly) = Z, 

where k = eHjm when e is in electromagnetic units ; {X, Y, Z) 
being the force acting on the ion arising from the configuration 
of the molecule or other causes. 

If the system of ions, free from extraneous magnetic force, 
is referred to axes steadily rotating round the direction (Z, m, n) 
with angular velocity cd, the formula for the component 
acceleration is altered from x to 

a? — 2© (ny — mi) — <o^x + mH {Ix + my + nz). 



342 ZEEMAN CHANGE OF PEBIODS FOR SIMPLE MOLECULE [F 

When CD is taken equal to \k^ and therefore «' is negligible, 
the resulting equations referred to the moving axes become 
identical in form with the equations in the magnetic field. 
Hence if k is the same for all the ions the two states of motion 
are identical : in other words if e\m is the same for all the ions, 
the effect of the impressed magnetic field H is simply to 
impose a rotation with angular velocity ^e/m.H, around its 
axis, on some undisturbed motion of the system. This how- 
ever requires that the specification of {X, F, Z) is the same 
with regard to the moving axes as with regard to the fixed 
ones, — in other words, that the field of foi-ce acting on the 
electrons is symmetrical with respect to the axis of the 
impressed magnetic field, in so far as it does not arise from 
mutual forces depending only on the configurations of the 
moving system*. 

The condition thus introduced requires that e shall have the 
same sign for all the moving ions : but it will be approximately 
fulfilled if there are additional ions for which e/m is small in 
comparison with the constant value that obtains for the others. 
We may for example suppose the charges to be the same for 
all the ions, and the effective masses of the positive ones to be 
large compared with those of the negative ones which must be 
themselves equal : then under their mutual forces, the velocities 
of the positive ones will be the smaller, inversely in the order 
of the ratio of their masses, and the value of k for them will 
also be the smaller in the same ratio. We may still refer the 
motion of the system, when the magnetic field is applied, to the 
rotating axes ; but it will now be necessary to impress forces on 
the positive ions in order to keep them in position. These 
forces will be small compared with the forces exerted by the 
magnetic field on the negative ions, and their effect will also 
be smaller on account of the greater masses on which they act. 
Thus we may consider the influence of the magnetic field as 
equivalent to a uniform rotation of the system, if we superpose 
on that rotation a much smaller disturbance due to these 
forces acting on the more massive positive ions. If the positive 

♦ Cf. Phil, Mag, Deo. 1897. 



f] nature of molecular magnetization 343 

ions are not more massive in this manner, this simple repre- 
sentation of the effect of the magnetic field as a rotation 
around its axis will not hold good. In no case can the negative 
ions be treated as moving independently of each other, for 
the electric forces between them are 'among the strongest of 
the forces of chemical affinity.* 

It is to be noticed that in any case this rotation is not 
simply superposed on that orbital configuration which existed 
before the magnetic field was established. As the moving ions 
are supposed to be negative, that would in fact imply that 
all the molecules are polarized paramagnetically by the field. 
Consider however the ideal limiting case in which the field 
is impressed instantaneously : the velocities of the ions will 
remain continuous through that instant : hence the undisturbed 
orbit on which the rotation is imposed will be that correspond- 
ing to the positions of the ions at the instant, but with initial 
velocities reduced by removal of the velocities arising from the 
rotation thus imposed. The change of orbit thus involved will 
also introduce polarization, in the main of a diamagnetic 
character. In actuality the establishment of the magnetic 
field is a very slow process compared with the orbital periods, 
so that the readjustment of the orbits and the establishment of 
their rotation will be comparatively very gradual. 

It appears incidentally that the conception of paramagnetism, 
which considers it to be due to orientation of the molecule as 
a whole by the magnetic field, as if it were a rigid system, is 
not valid except as a very rough illustration. Indeed otherwise 
its magnetic polarization would reach a limit if time enough 
were available, so that the magnetic coefficient per unit mass of 
a gaseous medium would increase very sensibly with diminution 
of density and consequent increase of free path of its mole- 
cules*. Moreover it appears from piezoelectric phenomena that 
each molecule has a mean intrinsic electric moment, so that 
orientation of any regular kind would introduce electric as well 
as magnetic polarization, whereas a process of the nature here 

* The interesting opinion hazarded by MazweU, 'Treatise' ii § 844, as to 
ivhat would constitute experimental demonstration of the existence of Amperean 
currents in the molecule, would on this view be considerably modified. 



344 EXCEPTIONAL CASE OF IRON [F 

described would not do so. The great magnitude of dielectric 
coefiBcients compared with magnetic coefficients is explained by 
the large charges of the ions on which the electric fon^e acts, 
compared with the small effective currents on which the 
magnetic force acts. The exceptionally great magnetic coeffic- 
ients of iron, nickel, and cobalt at ordinary temperatures may 
possibly be explained as an effect of molecular cohesion or 
grouping: the magnetic field may alter the conditions of a 
molecular group, which then adjusts itself to the constrained 
conformation : then the field can act afiresh, to be followed by 
another readjustment of the group: and this cumulative ad- 
justment by a creeping action may proceed a long way. It is 
in fact the case that when a ring even of the softest iron has 
been magnetized longitudinally by a current, the magnetism is 
retained until it is shaken out of the iron by mechanical or 
other disturbance: moreover in the rapid oscillatory field of 
Hertzian waves the magnetization has not time to get estab- 
lished at all, while elastic molecular processes like dielectric 
polarization are fully operative*. 

2. We have now to consider the effect of a magnetic field 
on the radiation emitted by the molecule. 

In the first place, if each ion described a steady closed orbit, 
the radiation sent out fi'om the molecule could be resolved into 
rectangular components each of them exactly periodic, and there- 
fore consisting by Fourier's theorem of a fundamental spectral 
line and its harmonics. As the harmonics of spectral lines do 
not actually occur, it follows either that there are no closed 
steady orbits or that the steady motions of a molecular system 
do not originate sensible radiation: reason in favour of the 
latter alternative has been already given (§ 151), which would 
not be affected by a rotation imposed on the molecule. 

* The great solvent and ionizing powers of water and some other Uquida 
have been commonly connected with their abnormally high dielectric co- 
efficients : as these constants become normal at very low temperatures, or with 
very rapid alternation of the field as in optics, it may not be fanciful to snggest 
that the common cause of both properties may be found in facUity for loose 
molecular aggregation. 



f] deduction fbom polarizations of zeeman lines 345 

When the steady state is disturbed, the effect will be, by 
the general tlieory of small oscillations, to superpose a series of 
elliptic harmonic inequalities, of different periods, on the steady 
motions of each ion, each of which would give rise to the 
radiation constituting a spectral line. The effect of the mag- 
netic field on each such elliptic vibration would be a rotation, 
superposed on the rotation which it would produce in the steady 
orbital system : this will destroy its simple harmonic character. 
The elliptic vibration may however be decomposed into a 
linear component parallel to the axis of rotation, and an elliptic 
one transverse to that axis : the latter is equivalent to a circular 
transverse vibration together with a linear one, while for this 
linear one may be substituted two equal circular ones in opposite 
directions : thus in all we have a linear component parallel to 
the axis, and two circular ones of different amplitudes around it, 
all of the same period. These three components are differently 
affected as to period by the rotation, but in such way that they 
all remain simple harmonic : thus the magnetic field resolves 
each spectral line into a triad, with the features of polarization, 
linear and circular, that are involved in the above statement. 

The observed perfect circular polarization of the outer lines 
of the Zeeman triplets, when viewed along the magnetic field, 
proves that the corresponding permanent types of vibration in 
the molecules are exactly circular. If they were merely elliptic 
with a common direction of rotation they would not compensate 
each other in the various molecules so as to produce an average 
circular effect, because the intensities of the fortuitously dis- 
tributed radiations from the various molecules are additive: 
they would thus produce circularly polarized light accompanied 
by ordinary light of the same order of intensity. If we now 
drop the restriction of k to the same value for all the effective 
ions of the molecule, this feature will give a clue towards a 
more general representation of the facts. This is desirable 
because that restriction requires that the difference of fre- 
quencies of the Zeeman constituents should be the same for all 
those lines in a spectrum which come from the same vibrating 
system, — which is in general far from being the case if the 
molecule constitutes a single vibrating system, although there 



348 CONDITION FOB CIRCULAR PRINCIPAL VIBRATIONS [F 

is a quadratic function : and the theory of g3rrostatic cycloidal 
systems* shows that the periods of these types are all real or 
pure imaginary, being all real when W is essentially positive. 
It follows that an impressed magnetic field does not introduce 
dissipative influences into the motions in the molecule. 

If 2w/(pi,pi, •••) denote the free periods, the general state 
of vibration of the system is represented by sets of equations of 
type 

f = Ai^^i^ -h A^P^ + ... 
i7 = 5i^'*«' +8^^ + ... 
z = C^e^Px^ + C^P^ + ... 

in which A^y A^... are arbitrary complex constants, to each of 
which the others belonging to the same period are proportional, 
in complex ratios, so that ecu^h period represents a definite 
mode or type of vibration. From these equations the values 
of x^ y, z can be expressed : and a real state of motion will be 
derived by separating out the real (or the imaginary) part in 
the result. The component of each principal vibration in the 
plane of xy will usually be of elliptic harmonic character on 
account of the relation between the constants. The condition 
necessary and sufficient to enable these principal vibrations to 
be circular is that the system of equations break up into three 
sets, one of which involves only the f coordinates, another only 
the 17 coordinates, and the third only the z coordinates. Then 
they are of type 

where the constants Ai , Ai ... are independent of ili, A^^ .... 
When the former constants are null the equations represent the 
inter-connected group of right-handed circular vibrations, of 

* Cf. Thomson and Tait, 2^at. Fhii. Ed. 2, §§ 846i--S45xxviii: Bouth, 
* Dynamics' Vol. ii, §§ 310—319, or 'Essny on StabiUty' 1S77, p. 7S. 



f] character of potential energy of the molecule 349 

periods 2w/{pi, p^, ..,): when the other constants are null, 
they represent the inter-connected group of left-handed circular 
vibrations of periods 27r/(pi, pa', ...). These groups are entirely 
independent of each other: an impressed vibratory or other 
stress, of circular type, will excite only the group belonging to 
its own sense of rotation. 

The condition that the equations thus form three independent 
systems is that W is quadratic of the form 

in which the sufiSxes now refer to different ions, and r may be 
the same as 8. On changing back from ^, rj to x, y it will 
appear that this form of W is the most general quadratic 
function that is invariant as regards rotation of the axes of 
coordinates around that of z. Now this axis of z, being that of 
the impressed magnetic field, may be any axis in the molecule : 
hence W must be invariant with respect to all systems of 
rectangular axes, which restricts it to the form 

W = -il,Ar,{(Xr-X,y + (yr'ysf + (Zr'Z,y} 

+ l,BrM (XrXg + yrj/t + ^r^t) 
= - iS^,, {(f, - f ,) (Vr - V.) + (^r - Z.y\ 

We have tacitly been taking (a?, y, z) to be the actual 
linear coordinates of the ion ; the potential energy W is then 
simply the most general quadratic function of these coordinates 
that depends on their mutual configuration alone, so that no 
restriction is really involved. But (x, y, z) may and probably 
will represent linear deviation from some state of steady 
motion*. If then the potential energy relative to the steady 
motion is of the above form, the principal tjrpes of vibration in 
a magnetic field will be circularly polarized in the two directions 
around the axis, and linearly polarized along it, as required, the 
right-handed t}rpes forming by themselves an independent 
system, and also the left-handed. This latter condition is 
necessary to account for the independent propagation of right- 
handed and left-handed circular wave-trains in rotational media. 

♦ Cf. Bouth, » Dynamics' Vol. ii, § 111. 



350 REQUISITE GENERALITY IN ZEEMAN EFFECT OBTAINED [F 

Even in the absence of any conception of the nature of the 
steady motion in the molecule, on which the vibration is super- 
posed, we are perhaps entitled to restrict W to this form : for 
the tot»l potential energy must be a function of configuration 
only ; it, or rather the modified Lagrangian function, is divided 
into a part belonging to the steady motion, which does not 
involve the vibrating coordinates at all, and a quadratic function 
of the latter; and it is to be expected that this latter part 
will, by itself, remain unchanged in form when the axes of 
coordinates are altered. 

The period equation of the right-handed group of vibrations 
will be, if e denote mjk, 

- eip^-CiKip — lAir, Cja, Cu ... =0 

Oji, ^m> ••• ••• 

where Cn = Ctr' that of the left-handed will be derived by 
changing the sign of k, that of the rectilinear group by making 
K null. In the absence of a magnetic field, a system of parallel 
linear vibrations of the ions, in any direction, will constitute an 
independent group, and all such systems will be identical. 

This scheme is more general than the previous one which 
supposed K to be the same for all molecules, in that the 
separation of the Zeeman constituents of the various spectral 
lines can be all different and arbitrarily specified: it is less 
general in that it only applies to the vibration about an 
unknown steady motion, whereas the former applied to the 
total motion of the system. 

If the period equation for p\ in the absence of a magnetic 
field, have equal roots, the magnetic field will usually separate 
them into two pairs of circular Zeeman vibrations and one 
linear vibration : while all three vibrations would be doubled, if 
the magnetic field can sensibly modify the steady motion on 
which they are superposed, so as to alter slightly the coefficients 
in the quadratic expression for W: such modification would 
however also cause displacement of the middle line of a simple 
Zeeman triplet. 



f] isotropy of the molecule 351 

This form of the potential energy of the disturbance makes 
each molecule optically isotropic, the polarization being pro- 
portional and parallel to the electric force whatever be its 
direction* Thus when a wave-train is passing across the 
medium, each molecule is polarized exactly in the direction of 
the electric force. If on the other hand the molecules had 
aeolotropic quality, their orientations being irregular and 
changing from time to time^ it would appear that as regards 
the vibratory polarity thus fortuitously induced in directions 
perpendicular to the inducing field each molecule might act as 
an independent secondary source of radiation, so that the wave- 
train would thus be subject to rapid damping. 

In an electric theory of optical dispersion, the constants 
connecting the induced polarization of the molecule with the 
molecular coordinates f would also in that case be averaged 
constants belonging to a large aggregate of molecules orientated 
in all directions with regard to the inducing force, it being 
assumed that an eflfectively differential element of volume in the 
wave- train can be large enough to contain a very large number 
of molecules : the isotropy of the medium would then arise 
from this process of averaging. On the other hand, if each 
molecule is optically isotropic, the double refraction arising 
from crystalline structure or mechanical strain would be 
due entirely to the arrangement of the molecules in space. 
The intrinsic permanent electric polarity in the molecule, 
which is revealed by piezoelectric phenomena, is not involved 
in optical propagation. It is perhaps questionable whether 
the relations of precise polarization in the light diffracted by 
extremely minute particles or molecular aggregates in the 
atmosphere would be maintained, if the individual molecules 
were sensibly aeolotropic in their dielectric relations. 

* ThuB Kerr finds, Phil, Mag. 1895, that in the double refraction of a liquid 
dieleotrio which is induced by an electric field, it is only the Jight polarized so 
that its electric vibration is along the field that has its velocity affected. 

t e.g,t the constants c^, Cj, ... c/, Cj', ... of Phil, Traru, 1897 a, p. 238. 



352 becqubrbl's law for faradat effect [f 

Relation between the Faraday and Zeenian effects 

4. Under the condition k constant of § 1, it has been seen 
that the effect of an impressed magnetic field ^ on a molecule 
is to force the steady conformation which constitutes it to 
rotate with small uniform angular velocity a> equal to eHj^lm. 
When a wave-ti-ain of circularly polarized light is traversing 
the medium along the direction of the field, the aethereal 
vibration consists, at each cross-section, of bodily rotation of 
the aether, with very minute amplitude that varies harmonically 
along the train, but with very great angular velocity H that is 
uniform all along it. Moreover it has been seen (p. 346) that, the 
wave-length being about lO* molecular diameters, the reaction 
of each molecule on the wave-train depends sensibly only on 
the configuration of its ions. It follows that a wave-train of 
angular velocity II ± a> maintains the same series of configura- 
tions with regard to the molecules when the magnetic field is 
impressed as one with H does when it is absent, the + and 
— signs corresponding to the cases in which H, od are in the 
same or opposite directions. Thus the reaction of the mole- 
cules bears the same proportion to the aethereal stresses main- 
taining the wave-train in both cases: and the velocities of 
propagation are therefore affected to the same extent in both 
cases, 80 that they are equal. Thus the velocity of propagation 
corresponding to circularly polarized light of period 27r/n in 

the magnetic field H will be ^ + ;7q «, where w = eH/2m, and V 

is its velocity in the absence of the field, the sign varying 
according as it is right-handed or left-handed. Now if Fj and 
F, are the velocities of the right-handed and left-handed com- 
ponents of an incident plane-polarized train of period 27r/fl, 
the rotation of the plane of polarization in a length I of the 

medium will be ^H I ^^ — ^ j , the latter factor being the differ- 
ence of times of transit : in the present case it is thus -:=; -— - «, 

so that the rotatory power of the medium is ^^ -jpr ^— . If X 

K' cwl 2m 



F] valid near AfiSORPnON BAND 353 

is the wave-length of the light in a vacuum and n its index 
of refraction in the medium, V^cjn and fl = 27rC'/X, thus 

the rotatory power is ^ ^5\ • ^^ ^^'^ heen shown by 

H. Becquerel*, by whom this formula was brought forward, 
that it is in general a good approximation to the observed 
order of magnitude, while it well represents the relation of the 
rotation to the wave-length for creosote and sulphide of carbon. 
It would however make the coefiScient positive for all media in 
which the dispersion is in the normal direction. If we suppose 
the dispersion of a medium to be controlled by a single 
absorption band representing a single free molecular period, 
or by a number of such bands for all of which the Zeeman 
constant is the same, the formula should apply exactly : other- 
wise it cannot be more than a rough indication. There is one 
important case in which it is always practically exact : for light 
of period close to a free period of the molecules the dispersion 
is anomalous and is controlled by that free period alone : the 
rotatory power in that neighbourhood is therefore proportional 
to Xdn/dX and is thus abnormally great and rapidly varying, 
being in opposite directions on the two sides of the free 
period f. 



The Faraday effect of dispersional type 

5. It appears from this discussion that magneto-optic 
rotation is a kinetic phenomenon related to the free periods 

• Comptes Rendus, Nov. 1897. 

t Proc. Camb, Phil. Soc. Mar. 1899. The disooverers of this abnormal 
rotation, Macaluso and Corbino, have obtained the result {Rend. Lincei, Feb. 
1899) that it varies as X-^dnjdX, by assaming that the magnetic field introdaoes 
a proportionate change in the wave-length instead of in the frequency : for the 
case discussed by them this is practically equivalent to fiecquerers formula, 
though it would not represent the state of affairs all along the spectrum. 

Cf. the converse procedure of Voigt (Ann. der Phy$. 1900, p. 390) which 
introduces the rotational terms into equations of propagation already contain- 
ing simple dispersional terms so that there is an absorption band, the result 
being that this band is tripled : when there is a frictional term in the dispersion 
the tripling is asymmetric. 

L 23 



354 OPTICAL ROTATION NOT 8IHPLT RELATED TO STRUCTURE [F. 

of the molecules, and not at all to their mean polarization in a 
steady electric field : it is therefore of dispersional character. 
Thus any. attempt, such as that made in § 129, to extend to 
magneto-optic rotation the considerations by which Clausius 
and Lorentz established a relation between the mean refractive 
index and the density of the substance, cannot be expected to 
succeed ; for the rotational term in the electric polarization is 
connected with the free periods as well as with the force. 

Cognate considerations apply as regards the similar inquiry 
(§ 133) relating to intrinsic optical rotation. It has there been 
already remarked (cf. footnote) that the only type of rotational 
term that is allowable is one that could not exist in a steady 
electric field : thus that effect also depends on the periods of 
the vibrations, and so must be dispersional, although in that 
case no immediate physical representation of the origin of the 
term has suggested itself. 

Thus we should expect optical rotatory power, intrinsic as 
well as magnetic, to be a function of both the diHpersion and 
the density of the medium. 



Direct determination of Optical Rotation 

6. The general relations of the rotation of the plane of an 
optical vibration may be immediately inferred from the form 
obtained in Chapter xii for the relation connecting the electric 
polarization and the force. The general equations of the electro- 
dynamic field are of form 

ax \dw ay dz J dt 

where (§ 127) for an isotropic medium with magnetic rotatory 
quality, and for periodic disturbances of type e^^y 




F] direct analysis of the FARADAY EFFECT 355 

Thus if the system is referred to new axes rotating around the 
axis of the magnetic field with an angular velocity 

whose square is negligible, we shall have 

and the equations will be those of the same isotropic medium 
but with the magnetic influence absent. The effect of the 
magnetic field on any periodic oscillation or wave-train is there- 

fore to cause rotation with angular velocity i^ (Oi, Oa, a,) 

around its axis. In the case of a plane wave-train inclined to 
the axis, the rotation in the plane of the wave-front, which is 
equal to the rotation of the polarized vibration per unit length 
of the medium multiplied by its velocity of propagation, is 
proportional to the component of the magnetic field at right 
angles to the wave-front; while the other component only 
displaces the wave-front sideways without changing- its direc- 
tion, so that the direction of propagation is not altered. 

This statement will also hold approximately for a crystalline 
medium provided the differences between its principal indices 
of refraction are small. Then the radiant vibration which is 
being propagated in the manner determined by the crystalline 
quality is at the same time gradually turning round in its 
plane with the angular velocity here determined, whose value 
depends on the direction of the wave-front. It is a question of 
simple kinematics to find the velocities and the elliptic polariz- 
ations* of the wave-trains that will be propagated, under 
these superposed influences, without change of type. 

For structural rotation (§ 133) in an isotropic medium 


so that the effect is represented by a rotation of the disturbance 
suitable for a non-rotational medium, with angular velocity equal 

to — ^ ^ -4 (/, m, n) and therefore around the direction of pro- 
pagation. In a crystalline medium K will be replaced by 
{Ki, K^, KjX and when the principal rotational axes coincide 
with those of the double refraction A will be simply replaced 
by (Ai, A^, A^): thus when the differences of the principal 
indices are small, the effect of the rotational terms will be equi- 
valent to an imposed angular velocity — i^ (^i^t A^niy -4,n)* 

For a uniaxial crystal like quartz the vector (Ai, ^,, A^) must 
be directed along the axis: thus the coeiScient of effective 
rotation, that is of the component around the normal to the 
wave-front, is proportional to the square of the cosine of its 
inclination to the axis of the crystal. 

* The determination of the ciroamstances of the wave-trains of permanent 
type, directly from the equations, for the special rotational scheme here given, 
has been effected by Goldhammer, Joum, de Phys, 1892. A solution has also 
been given by him for the problem of refraction into a rotationally active 
medium, by satisfying all the ordinary boundary conditions for the electric 
vectors. This latter question has however been referred to (pp. 207, 829) as an 
instance in which the transition at the boundary may not legitimately be 
treated as abrupt: the Action function now involves spaoial differentiations 
higher than the first, and it is from its variation that the ^pe of the rotational 
quality and the dynamical equations are both ultimately determined : as regards 
the latter, there occur boundary terms involving the independent variations of 
the first gradients as well as those of the variables themselves, and these though 
small are of the order of the rotational effect, and will not be annulled by the 
procedure above mentioned. 

